program starting before age 1 and for a nurse-based home visiting program. 5 Economically speaking, early childhood programs are a good investment, with inflation-adjusted annual rates of return on the funds dedicated to these programs estimated to reach 10 percent or higher. 6 Very few alternative investments can promise that kind of return. Notably, a portion of these economic returns accrues to the children themselves and their families, but studies show that the rest of society enjoys the majority of the benefits, reflecting the many contributions that skilled and productive workers make to the economy. 7 The Federal Reserve has long supported increasing educational opportunity for children, including the youngest. Federal Reserve Banks have published articles and convened community forums on early childhood issues. For school-age children, we sponsor financial literacy and economic education programs. For these programs, we make a special effort to reach schools with high proportions of minorities and lower-income children. Many of you in the audience today are still in school or have recently graduated. Your hard work demonstrates that you understand the value of a good education for yourself. With your efforts and the efforts of others, I hope we will one day achieve the Children's Defense Fund's goal of a level educational playing field for all children. I wish you all the best in your conference and in your work. Thank you. 1. See National Scientific Council on the Developing Child (2005), " Excessive Stress Disrupts the Architecture of the Developing Brain ," Working Paper No. 3 (Cambridge, Mass.: Center on the Developing Child at Harvard University, Summer). Return to text 2. See Arthur Rolnick and Rob Grunewald (2011), "The Economic Case for Targeted Preschool Programs," in Edward Zigler, Walter S. Gilliam, and W. Steven Barnett, eds., The Pre-K Debates: Current Controversies and Issues (Baltimore: Brookes Publishing), pp. 22-26. Return to text 3. See Vivian C. Wong, Thomas D. Cook, W. Steven Barnett, and Kwanghee Jung (2008), "An Effectiveness-Based Evaluation of Five State Pre-kindergarten Programs," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management , vol. 27 (Winter), pp. 122-54. Return to text 4. See Lawrence J. Schweinhart, Jeanne Montie, Zongping Xiang, W. Steven Barnett, Clive R. Belfield, and Milagros Nores (2005), Lifetime Effects: The High/Scope Perry Preschool Study through Age 40 (Ypsilanti, Mich.: HighScope Press). Return to text 5. See, respectively, Leonard N. Masse and W. Steven Barnett (2002), A Benefit-Cost Analysis of the Abecedarian Early Childhood Intervention , report (New Brunswick, N.J.: National Institute for Early Education Research, September); and Lynn A. Karoly, Peter W. Greenwood, Susan S. Everingham, Jill Houbé, M. Rebecca Kilburn, C. Peter Rydell, Matthew Sanders, and James Chiesa (1998), Investing in Our Children: What We Know and Don't Know about the Costs and Benefits of Early Childhood Interventions , report (Santa Monica, Calif.: RAND Corporation). Return to text 6. See James J. Heckman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz (2010), "The Rate of Return to the High/Scope Perry Preschool Program," Journal of Public Economics , vol. 94 (February), pp. 114-28; and James J. Heckman, Rob Grunewald, and Arthur J. Reynolds (2006), "The Dollars and Cents of Investing Early: Cost-Benefit Analysis in Early Care and Education," Zero to Three , vol. 26 (July), pp. 10-17. Return to text 7. See Heckman and others, "Rate of Return"; and Heckman and others, "Dollars and Cents," in note 6. Return to text Last Update: July 24, 2012 Back to Top
