U.S. Monetary Policy: A Global View ASSA Annual Meeting “Navigating the Crosscurrents: The Outlook for the Global Economy” January 3, 2020 Mary C. Daly President & CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The global economic landscape Slower trend growth Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017). Trend growth Lower neutral real rate of interest (r*) Note: Blue-shaded area reflects range of minimum and maximum rates across four countries in sample (U.S., U.K., Japan, and Germany). Source: Jorda and Taylor (2019). Estimates of the neutral real rate of interest: Global and the U.S. Low global inflation Source: OECD. Core CPI inflation, 12-month change Slipping inflation expectations Note: CPI inflation expectations are plotted for the United States, HICP inflation expectations are plotted for the Euro Area. Source: Blue Chip Economic Indicators, OECD. Longer term mean inflation expectations, 5 years ahead 7 What does this mean for policy? 8 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? 9 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? Less room to maneuver in the U.S. Note: Dashed and dotted line segments indicate the median of rate projections from the FOMC's “Summary of Economic Projections” in September 2018 and December 2019. Source: Federal Reserve Board. Federal funds rate (set by FOMC; with projections) And even less room outside the U.S. Source: Bank for International Settlements. Central bank policy rates 12 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? Phillips curve across OECD countries by decade Inflation and unemployment tradeoff more muted Source: Jorda and Nechio (2019). Be humble about where full employment lies Sources: FOMC Summary of Economic Projections, Haver Analytics. SEP Longer Run Unemployment Rate Labor force participation rates And what a good economy can do Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Haver Analytics. 16 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? 17 • Forward guidance & QE were valuable tools in the crisis, but more may be needed • Potential makeup strategies include: price level, nominal income, or average inflation targeting • Most importantly, 2% can’t be a ceiling New framework likely required 18 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? Labor force participation rates Activating the labor force will be critical Source: OECD. 20 But central banks can’t do it alone – Fiscal authorities will need to help
