. We will use our tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. As part of our response, my colleagues and I in the Federal Reserve System are coordinating with our counterparts around the world. Tuesday’s phone call between G7 finance ministers and central bank governors, the subsequent statement, and policy actions by central banks are clear indications of the close alignment at the international level. Financial Markets Turning to the specific responsibilities of the New York Fed, we are tasked with the implementation of monetary policy. Our goals are to keep the federal funds rate within the target range and foster stable conditions in short-term funding markets. We will ensure that the supply of reserves in the banking system remains ample, consistent with the FOMC’s direction. 2 Treasury bill purchases continue to add to the underlying level of reserves, and repo operations are keeping reserve levels ample. We are monitoring conditions in money markets closely. We remain flexible and ready to make adjustments to our operations as needed to ensure that monetary policy is effectively implemented and transmitted to financial markets and the broader economy. Conclusion I’ll conclude with this: The coronavirus poses evolving risks to the U.S. economy. Our policy action this week positions us well to support the economic expansion. We are carefully monitoring the effects of the coronavirus on the U.S. economic outlook and will respond as appropriate. Our focus remains trained on serving the American people by pursuing our dual goals of maximum employment and price stability. Once again, thank you for this evening’s award. 1 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 3, 2020. 2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation , October 11, 2019; Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Treasury Bill Purchases and Repurchase Operations , October 11, 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
