Now, I will turn to our special topic. In an important sense, schools constitute the backbone of our national and regional economy. Yet, this backbone can be vulnerable during recessions. Schools teach our citizens skills, including how to read, write, do math, create art or music and work in teams. Economists call these skills “human capital” because they are an important input that fuels a nation’s or region’s economic growth and development. In this way, schools play a key role in shaping our future. Therefore, it is essential to understand how the Great Recession has affected our ability to educate the next generations of students. Thus, today, we will examine how the recession has affected funding levels for schools in our region. As you know, there is an ongoing vigorous debate about how to most effectively organize public education and provide incentives to teachers, students and administrators. Such inquiry is key to any effort to ensure the best possible education for our citizens, but it is beyond the scope of this briefing. The housing bust and the onset of the recession in 2007 strained state and local government finances. Most local governments rely heavily on property tax revenue to fund their schools and other activities. This was particularly true during the first half of the decade, when the housing boom strongly supported property tax revenues. Then came the bust; steep declines in the housing market led to corresponding drops in local property tax revenue. State governments’ revenues also fell, as rising unemployment cut income tax revenue and reduced consumption shrank sales tax revenues. Since most state and local governments spend at least half of their budgets on education, these developments have constrained funding for our primary and secondary schools. To stave off drastic state and local government spending cuts, the federal government allocated $100 billion to states, including New York and New Jersey, for education through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA). Research done here at the New York Fed reveals that school finances in both New York and New Jersey were impacted by the Great Recession, with New Jersey sustaining particularly severe cuts. 4 ARRA funds helped school finances in both states, yet did not completely compensate for lost state and local revenues. With ARRA funding drying up and our local and state economies still under stress, a question looms before us. How might we expect school finances and student learning to fare in the near future? Given the key role that human capital plays in our nation’s growth, this is an important issue. We at the New York Fed will continue to monitor school finances and other education indicators in our region closely as this will, over time, affect our regional economy. Conclusion In summary, during the second half of 2011, growth slowed in New York, falling well short of the national rate, although New Jersey kept pace. It’s also important to note that the national labor market is showing more consistent signs of improvement, and the regional labor market has continued to make progress. However, at the national level, the pace of recovery remains sluggish by historical standards and is likely to slow somewhat in early 2012. Thus, unemployment, both nationally and locally, is likely to remain unacceptably high for some time. Also, inflation is likely to be below our objective for several years. Clearly, much work remains to achieve the Fed’s dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability. The Great Recession has affected education financing in both New York and New Jersey, but New Jersey was hit harder. Through its impact on the education of the next generation, this situation could have troubling implications for the ability of the next generation to succeed in the demanding jobs of the future. I will now ask Jason Bram to provide additional details on the regional economy. ___________________________________________________ 1 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2012 White Paper, " The U.S. Housing Market: Current Conditions and Policy Considerations " and “ Housing and the Economic Recovery ” by William Dudley. 2 For more information, see Indexes of Coincident Economic Indicators on the New York Fed website. 3 For a more information, see “ An Introduction to the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel ,” New York Fed Staff Report No. 479, November 2010. For the recent releases from the panel, see U.S. Credit Conditions . 4 For more detail, see Chakrabarti, Rajashri and Elizabeth Setren. 2011. “ The Impact of the Great Recession on School District Finances: Evidence from New York ,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 534; Chakrabarti, Rajashri and Sarah Sutherland. 2012. “Precarious Slopes? The Great Recession, Federal Stimulus, and New Jersey Schools ,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 538; and watch for two forthcoming Liberty Street Economics Blog posts on January 30 and February 1, 2012. Quick Links Index of Coincident Economic Indicators U.S. Credit Conditions Empire State Manufacturing Survey By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
