, as always, is highly uncertain. I am describing the outlook that I see as most likely, but based on many years of making economic projections, I can assure you that any specific projection I write down will turn out to be wrong, perhaps markedly so. For many reasons, output and job growth over the next few years could prove to be stronger, and inflation higher, than I expect; correspondingly, employment could grow more slowly, and inflation could remain undesirably low. Implications for Monetary Policy Given this economic outlook and the attendant uncertainty, how is monetary policy likely to evolve over the next few years? Because of the substantial lags in the effects of monetary policy on the economy, we must make policy in a forward-looking manner. Delaying action to tighten monetary policy until employment and inflation are already back to our objectives would risk overheating the economy. For this reason, if the economy continues to improve as I expect, I think it will be appropriate at some point this year to take the initial step to raise the federal funds rate target and begin the process of normalizing monetary policy. To support taking this step, however, I will need to see continued improvement in labor market conditions, and I will need to be reasonably confident that inflation will move back to 2 percent over the medium term. After we begin raising the federal funds rate, I anticipate that the pace of normalization is likely to be gradual. The various headwinds that are still restraining the economy, as I said, will likely take some time to fully abate, and the pace of that improvement is highly uncertain. If conditions develop as my colleagues and I expect, then the FOMC's objectives of maximum employment and price stability would best be achieved by proceeding cautiously, which I expect would mean that it will be several years before the federal funds rate would be back to its normal, longer-run level. Having said that, I should stress that the actual course of policy will be determined by incoming data and what that reveals about the economy. We have no intention of embarking on a preset course of increases in the federal funds rate after the initial increase. Rather, we will adjust monetary policy in response to developments in economic activity and inflation as they occur. If conditions improve more rapidly than expected, it may be appropriate to raise interest rates more quickly; conversely, the pace of normalization may be slower if conditions turn out to be less favorable. Longer-Run Growth Before I conclude, let me put this discussion into a longer-term context. The Federal Reserve's objectives of maximum employment and price stability do not, by themselves, ensure a strong pace of economic growth or an improvement in living standards. The most important factor determining living standards is productivity growth, defined as increases in how much can be produced in an hour of work. Over time, sustained increases in productivity are necessary to support rising incomes. Here the recent data have been disappointing. The growth rate of output per hour worked in the business sector has averaged about 1-1/4 percent per year since the recession began in late 2007. This rate is down from gains averaging 2-3/4 percent over the preceding decade. I have mentioned the tepid pace of wage gains in recent years, and while I do take this as evidence of slack in the labor market, it also may be a reflection of relatively weak productivity growth. Productivity depends on many factors, including our workforce's knowledge and skills and the quantity and quality of the capital, technology, and infrastructure that they have to work with. Economists debate how optimistic to be about our nation's productivity prospects. Some argue that the decade starting in the mid-1990s was exceptional, with unusually large advances in information technologies, and that the more recent period provides a better guide to the future. Others are more optimistic, suggesting that recent technological innovation remains as impressive as ever, and that history shows it may take some years to fully reap the economic benefits of such innovations. 7 I do not know who is right, but I do believe that, as a nation, we should be pursuing policies to support longer-run growth in productivity. Policies to strengthen education, to encourage entrepreneurship and innovation, and to promote capital investment, both public and private, can all be of great benefit. It also is possible that a portion of the relatively weak productivity growth we have seen recently may be the result of the recession itself. 8 Firms slashed their capital expenditures during the recession, and as I noted earlier, the increases in investment during the recovery have been modest. In particular, investment in research and development has been relatively weak. Moreover, a lack of financing may have impaired the ability of people to start new businesses and implement new ideas and technologies. As the economy strengthens further, many of these processes could work in reverse, boosting our productivity prospects. To the extent this is so, Federal Reserve actions to strengthen the recovery may not only help bring our economy back to its productive potential, but it may also support the growth of productivity and living standards over the longer run. 1. For a discussion of recent economic developments in Rhode Island, see Mary A. Burke (2014), " Rhode Island in the Great Recession: Factors Contributing to Its Sharp Downturn and Slow Recovery ," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Current Policy Perspectives 14-9 (Boston: FRB Boston, December). Return to text 2. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics' (BLS) employment cost index--which measures both wages and the cost of employer-provided benefits--hourly compensation in private industry rose 2-3/4 percent over the year ended in March after having averaged gains of about 2 percent per year during most of the recovery. However, some other prominent aggregate wage measures have remained softer. For example, the BLS's average hourly earnings for all employees on nonfarm payrolls have increased 2-1/4 percent over the 12 months through April. Return to text 3. See Atif Mian and Amir Sufi (2014), House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession, and How We Can Prevent It from Happening Again (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). Return to text 4. See Burke, "Rhode Island in the Great Recession," in note 1. Return to text 5. The share varies by source of data. According to Zillow's October 2014 Real Estate Market Overview, the share of mortgages in negative equity positions declined from about 30 percent in 2011 to 17 percent in 2014. According to CoreLogic's 4th quarter 2014 Equity Report, the share declined from about 25 percent to 11 percent over that period. Return to text 6. The gasoline figure is from the U.S. Energy Information Administration (2015), Short-Term Energy Outlook (Washington: EIA, May). Return to text 7. For a relatively pessimistic view of productivity growth because "the low-hanging fruit is picked," see Robert J. Gordon (2012), " Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds ," NBER Working Paper Series 18315 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August); and Tyler Cowen (2011), The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better (New York: Dutton). For a more optimistic perspective, see Joel Mokyr (2014), "Secular Stagnation? Not in Your Life," in Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin, eds., Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes and Cures (London: CEPR Press), pp. 83-89; and Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (New York: W.W. Norton & Company). The greatest return to adopting information technology appears five to seven years after investment, according to Erik Brynjolfsson and Lorin M. Hitt (2003), "Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (November), pp. 793-808. Return to text 8. See Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2015), "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy," IMF Economic Review, advance online publication, March 17, http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/imfer.2015.1. (A previous version of this paper is also available on the Board of Governors website at www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2013/201377/201377abs.html .) Return to text Last Update: May 22, 2015 Back to Top
