organization" will be used interchangeably to refer to both banks and bank holding companies with total consolidated assets of $10 billion or less. Return to text 2. For more information, see the Federal Reserve Board's webpage " Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council ". Return to text 3. See, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), " Interagency Guidance on Allowance Estimation Practices for Junior Lien Loans and Lines of Credit ," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 12-3 (January 31). Return to text 4. For the purposes of the Federal Reserve's supervisory programs, regional banking organizations generally are considered to be those banks and bank holding companies (including savings and loan holding companies) with total consolidated assets between $10 billion and $50 billion. Return to text 5. For archived webinars and publications as well as announcements about future events, see the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's webpage " Consumer Compliance Outlook ." Return to text 6. The use of credit scoring in small business lending is discussed in Allen Berger, Adrian Cowan, and Scott Frame (2011), "The Surprising Use of Credit Scoring in Small Business Lending by Community Banks and the Attendant Effects on Credit Availability, Risk, and Profitability," Journal of Financial Services Research , vol. 39 (April), pp. 1-17; the topic of community banks that lend to small businesses is discussed in Jihye Jeon, Judit Montoriol-Garriga, Robert K. Triest, and J. Christina Wang (2010), " Evidence of a Credit Crunch? Results from the 2010 Survey of First District Community Banks (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Public Policy Briefs, no. 10-3 (September); and the determinants of community bank performance are discussed in Dean F. Amel and Robin A. Prager (2010), "Performance of Community Banks in Good Times and Bad Times," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics, May. Return to text 7. Examinations typically occur annually but may take place more or less frequently depending on the size and condition of the banking organization. The Federal Reserve maintains a full-time, on-site presence at the largest banking organizations. Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), " Federal Reserve Board Proposes Steps to Strengthen Regulation and Supervision of Large Bank Holding Companies and Systemically Important Nonbank Financial Firms ," press release, December 20. Return to text 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), " Federal Reserve, OCC, OTS, FDIC Issue Final Guidance on Incentive Compensation ," joint press release, June 21. Return to text 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2011), " Agencies Issue Statement to Clarify Supervisory and Enforcement Responsibilities for Federal Consumer Financial Laws ," joint press release, November 17. Return to text 11. For more information regarding the appeals process, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1995), " Section 309 of the Riegle Community Development and Regulatory Improvement Act of 1994, Intra-Agency Appeals Process ," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 95-18 (March 28). Return to text 12. For information regarding the role of the ombudsman, see the Federal Reserve Board's webpage " Ombudsman for the Federal Reserve System ". For more information regarding the appeals process, see Board of Governors, "Section 309" (see note 12). Return to text Last Update: February 16, 2012 Back to Top
