is achievable and will greatly enhance the robustness and resilience of our financial system. I have focused here on the reform efforts around LIBOR, which is only one reference rate, albeit one that is widely used and a core part of our financial system. But, the need for stronger governance and more accountability spreads much further within the set of benchmark rates, and further to encompass a wide range of practices within the financial system. For example, accusations have recently surfaced related to business practices within foreign exchange markets. While the concerns are technically very different than the practices uncovered around LIBOR submissions, the common theme is the willingness of a small number of market participants to behave improperly and contribute to a decline in confidence in the integrity of benchmark rates specifically and of major financial institutions more generally. Next Steps I have discussed some of the observed problems in major reference rates that reflect egregious personal behavior. Some individuals responded to poorly-designed incentives and weak controls at some of the largest financial institutions. The regulatory community has already taken important steps to mitigate those concerns and real progress has been made. While this has helped to restore some of the integrity of particular reference rates, such as LIBOR, more work needs to be done before confidence in these rates are put on a firmer foundation. I’ll conclude by emphasizing two of the next steps that I think are most essential for the successful reform of LIBOR. First, the definition of LIBOR should be broadened so that it more accurately reflects the observed funding patterns of large banks and puts the rate on a broader, more stable base of observable transactions. The LIBOR administrator is actively considering ways to do this while remaining true to the spirit of LIBOR and how it is used in financial contracts. Accomplishing this will make markets that need a reference rate that embodies bank credit risk more robust and resilient and will strengthen the financial system. Second, we still face the problem that the reference rate for a large stock of derivatives contracts is based on a relatively small, underlying cash market. This means there still is a powerful incentive for individuals to attempt to manipulate the rate for their own gains. One promising solution, outlined in Governor Powell’s recent speech on reference rates, is to work with market participants to find an alternative reference rate that is based on a deeper underlying cash market and that meets the needs of all market participants. Of course, any rate that serves as a critical financial benchmark must meet the principles for good governance and production outlined by IOSCO. This combination—a more robust and resilient LIBOR for transactions that require a reference rate with a bank credit risk component and the development of an alternative reference rate for transactions like interest rate derivatives that don’t—will strengthen our financial system and help undo some of the damage caused by earlier transgressions. But this is only a necessary and not a sufficient set of conditions. To achieve the outcome desired, financial institutions also need to have in place the appropriate incentives and controls. Thank you for your attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Lorie Logan, William Riordan, Kevin Stiroh, Joseph Tracy and Nathaniel Wuerffel assisted in preparing this speech. 2 Charles Dickens. A Tale of Two Cities 3 See McConnell, “Systemic Operational Risk: The LIBOR Manipulation Scandal.” Journal of Operational Risk, 8(3):59-99. 4 See Darrell Duffie and Jeremy Stein. “Reforming LIBOR and Other Financial-Market Benchmarks.” September 19, 2014. 5 CFTC UBS, 2012 , page 12. 6 CFTC UBS, 2012, page 13. 7 CFTC Barclays, 2012 , page 13. 8 The Wheatley Review of LIBOR: Final Report . 9 Principles for Financial Benchmarks: Consultation Report , International Organization of Securities Commissions. 10 Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks , Financial Stability Board. 11 Reforming U.S. Dollar LIBOR: The Path Forward , Remarks by Jerome H. Powell at the Money Marketeers of New York University, September 4, 2014. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
