and bank supervision, I asked Governors Elizabeth Duke and Sarah Bloom Raskin to serve on this subcommittee. Its primary role is to improve our understanding of community and regional banking conditions and to review policy proposals for their potential effect on the safety and soundness of, and the regulatory costs imposed on, community and regional institutions. 2 Governors Duke and Raskin are also keenly interested in how our policies could affect the availability of credit to sound borrowers. We have other contacts with community banks that have proved valuable. For quite a few years, the Reserve Banks have maintained local training and outreach programs for banks. More recently, several of these programs have been expanded nationally. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis organizes national "Ask the Fed" calls to provide bankers with an opportunity to hear Federal Reserve staff discuss recent policy initiatives and issues that examiners are encountering in the field. In addition, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco hosts consumer compliance webinars, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia publishes a quarterly overview of consumer compliance issues that allows Federal Reserve staff to address questions from banks. 3 We are exploring options for building on these initiatives. It is critical to keep the communications channels open if supervisors and banks are to work together constructively. The Regulation and Supervision of Community Banks Bank supervision requires a delicate balance--particularly now. The weak economy, together with loose lending standards in the past, has put pressure on the entire banking industry, including community banks. To protect banks from new problems down the road, and to safeguard the Deposit Insurance Fund, supervisors must insist on high standards for lending, risk management, and governance. At the same time, it is important for banks, for their communities, and for the national economy that banks lend to creditworthy borrowers. Lending to creditworthy borrowers, after all, is how banks earn profits. We also know that supervision imposes costs on institutions, and we recognize that new regulations and supervisory requirements may impose disproportionate costs on community banks. Thus, we take quite seriously the importance of evaluating the costs and benefits of new rules. Supervision is conducted through the Federal Reserve's decentralized structure of 12 regional Reserve Banks, which helps us tailor our examinations and supervision to the size, complexity, risk profile, and business model of each institution. Community bankers tell us repeatedly that they are concerned about the changing regulatory environment. One particular worry is the implementation of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act). It is important to emphasize that the Congress enacted the Dodd-Frank Act largely in response to the "too big to fail" problem, and that most of its provisions--regarding, for example, capital, liquidity, and risk management--apply only, or principally, to the largest, most complex, and internationally active banks. These new standards are not meant to apply to, and clearly would not be appropriate for, community banks. We will work to maintain a clear distinction between community banks and larger institutions in the application of new regulations. Conclusion To conclude, I would like to reemphasize the importance that my colleagues on the Board and I place on the Federal Reserve's relationship with community banks. The Fed is committed to fair, consistent, and informed examinations that take into account the size, complexity, and individual circumstances of each bank we oversee. We will do all we can to support the banks' safety and soundness and eliminate unnecessary costs. Despite economic uncertainties, the condition of community banks is improving. That's good news not only for banks, but for their communities and the national economy as well. Thanks, and enjoy the rest of your meetings. 1. For more information, see the Federal Reserve Board's webpage " Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council ." Return to text 2. For the purposes of the Federal Reserve's supervisory programs, regional banking organizations generally are considered to be those banks and bank holding companies (including savings and loan holding companies) with total consolidated assets between $10 billion and $50 billion. Return to text 3. For archived webinars and publications as well as announcements about future events, see the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's webpage " Consumer Compliance Outlook ." Return to text Last Update: March 14, 2012 Back to Top
