Message from the President Kashkari discusses his goals for the Minneapolis Fed, highlighting the important and critical challenges facing people throughout the Ninth District. April 18, 2016 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Message from the President Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter In the short time I’ve been at the Minneapolis Fed, I’ve learned a great deal—about the institution itself certainly and the System we’re part of, but even more so about the community we serve, the Ninth District. In particular, I’ve learned about some of the economic challenges our area faces, from hunger and housing shortages to unemployment and unnecessary regulation. These problems are daunting. But by no means are they unbeatable. I’ve learned as well that the people of the Ninth District are bringing incredible resources to address these challenges: running food shelves and homeless shelters; building innovative, job-generating small businesses; growing Fortune 500 companies that employ thousands; working with government agencies to design policies that encourage economic vitality. And perhaps most importantly, educating tomorrow’s citizens to create an even healthier economy, society and culture. It’s my goal here at the Minneapolis Fed to support this effort with strong, bold policy ideas. I’ve been incredibly impressed by the talent and dedication of my colleagues here at the Fed. Through our outreach and research programs, we’re constantly learning more about the district economy. We’re doing our best to serve its needs through our contributions to policy, payments, supervision, knowledge and community development. Our Center for Indian Country Development is a prime example. In the conversation that follows, my intent is to share a little about myself, my goals and, above all, the policy efforts we’re launching, such as our Ending Too Big to Fail initiative. But I also hope to convey some of my thoughts on broader questions about the national and international environment we work in. I welcome more questions from the people of the Ninth District. To this end, I’ll be traveling widely over the coming months to meet with as many of you as possible, to learn and share more—working together to build and strengthen the district’s economic future. 2015 Annual Report Interview with Neel Kashkari 2015 Annual Report Essay Message from the First Vice President Jim Lyon highlights the Minneapolis Fed's community development work as well as the Bank's operational excellence in 2015 2015 Financial Statements The Federal Reserve Board engaged KPMG to audit the 2015 combined and individual financial statements of the Reserve Banks and Maiden Lane LLC 2015 by the Numbers Explore details and processing volumes for some of the Bank's operations Video: Neel Kashkari on changes to policy framework Kashkari: "When the time called for it, the Fed was willing to be bold and creative and to adapt." Video: Neel Kashkari on The Fed's reputation and communication Kashkari: "We need to show the public who we are. This is an amazing institution with wonderful, talented people who care about their communities, who care about the country." Video: Neel Kashkari on the origin of the Too Big to Fail policy initiative Kashkari: "I immediately started talking to the experts here at the bank in research and banking supervision, asking them: What do you think are the big issues that we as a country need to address?" More On Region & Community More On Region & Community Related Content Kolb appointed SVP of Risk and Compliance at the Minneapolis Fed News New members named to Minneapolis Fed advisory council News Minneapolis Fed welcomes 2026–2027 class of Institute visiting scholars News Related Content Kolb appointed SVP of Risk and Compliance at the Minneapolis Fed News Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
