, which implicates a more complicated set of issues around legal authorities and institutional capacities for prudential regulation of markets, as well as firms. But it would be preferable to confront these issues now, before too much of this migration has occurred, than to wait until the problem manifests itself in growing systemic risk. Conclusion The five propositions I have laid out this afternoon are generally intended to outline the contours of a macroprudential approach to the regulation and supervision of large financial institutions, not to identify or elaborate specific policies. But I will close by saying that specific policies to counteract the structural vulnerabilities created by short-term wholesale funding are a priority, not just for the stability of our large prudentially regulated institutions, but for the financial system as a whole. A macroprudential reorientation of our bank regulatory policies will require a range of continuing work on resiliency, on other structural measures, and on the effective blending of macroprudential with traditional microprudential regulatory and supervisory policies. But, even as we make more progress in these areas, our efforts will not be complete without measures addressing what I have termed an accelerant of systemic problems. 1. Thus, for example, fiscal or tax policies would not be generally characterized as macroprudential tools, even though they could have implications for systemic risk in some circumstances. For useful overviews of macroprudential policy issues and debates, see International Monetary Fund (2011), " Macroprudential Policy: An Organizing Framework (PDF) ," (Washington: International Monetary Fund, March 14); Gabriele Galati and Richhild Moessner (2011), " Macroprudential policy--a literature review (PDF) ," BIS Working Paper No. 337 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, February). Return to text 2. For a recent study finding a correlation between the growth of credit aggregates and financial crises, and also suggesting a secular trend making such crises more of a risk, see Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor (2012), " Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008 ," American Economic Review , vol. 102 (2), pp 1029-61. Return to text 3. There is actually quite a rich history of policy measures in the United States that we would today call "macroprudential." See Douglas J. Elliott, Greg Feldberg, and Andreas Lehnert (2013), " The History of Cyclical Macroprudential Policy in the United States ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-29 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May). It is notable that the enactment and use of a number of tools waned as the integration of capital markets with traditional lending functions accelerated in the last quarter of the 20 th century, though even if there is a causal relationship between these two phenomenon, it is not clear which way the causality runs (perhaps in both directions). Return to text 4. The terminology may differ among commentators. For example, "cross-sectional" is sometimes used in place of interconnectedness, a term that may have some appeal to the extent it moves away from the traditional domino image of one failing firm knocking down another, and also embraces dynamics such as contagion across the financial system arising from correlated asset holdings and sources of funding. Return to text 5. Piet Clement (2010), " The term 'macroprudential': origins and evolution (PDF) ," BIS Quarterly Review (March), pp. 2-3. Return to text 6. The establishment of federal deposit insurance and the separation of commercial banking from investment banking--two key elements of New Deal financial reforms--were very much directed at what would today be characterized as systemic risks. Return to text 7. Andrew D. Crockett, General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements and Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum (2000), " Marrying the Micro- and Macro-Prudential Dimensions of Financial Stability (PDF) ," speech delivered at the Eleventh International Conference of Banking Supervisors in Basel, Switzerland, September 21. Return to text 8. Reading between the lines, one wonders whether Sir Andrew anticipated that his call for action might not be taken up by banking regulators. He styled his remarks as "provocative" and concluded by suggesting they were but "a small awareness-raising step in what, if pursued, is likely to be a long road." Return to text 9. Crockett, 2000 speech: "A review of the instances of financial instability would reveal some shared stylised elements. There is first an over-extension phase during which financial imbalances build up, accompanied by benign economic conditions. In this phase, asset prices are buoyant and their surge tends to feed, and be fed by, rapid credit expansion, domestically or internationally. Leverage, in overt or hidden forms, accumulates in balance sheets, masked in part by the favourable asset price developments. The trigger for a reversal is essentially unpredictable. It can originate either in the financial sphere (e.g., an asset price correction) or in the real economy (e.g., a spontaneous unwinding of an investment boom). The process then moves into reverse. Ex post, a financial cycle is evident." Return to text 10. Elsewhere I have discussed this emphasis at some length. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), " Financial Stability Regulation ," speech delivered at the Distinguished Jurist Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, PA, October 10. Return to text 11. It is important to emphasize here, as we do in our annual capital reviews of large banking organizations, that our supervisory stress testing of all covered firms simultaneously does not supplant the need for firms to develop, and make capital decisions dependent upon, their own stress scenarios that incorporate risks more specific to the activities and portfolios of each firm. That is, the necessary emphasis on macroprudential measures at the present time does not obviate the need for solid microprudentially inspired measures. Return to text 12. For a full explanation of the Board's approach to scenario design, see " Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing (PDF) ," Regulation YY--Enhanced Prudential Standards, 12 C.F.R. pt. 252 (2012). See also Nellie Liang (2013), " Implementing Macroprudential Policies (PDF) ," speech delivered at the Conference on Financial Stability Analysis: Using the Tools, Finding the Data, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and Office of Financial Research, May 31. Return to text 13. Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010), Section 113 (a)(1). Return to text 14. Dodd-Frank Act, Section 165. Return to text 15. For example, if the loss to the financial system from the failure of a systemically important firm would be five times that resulting from failure of the non-systemic firm, then the firm would have to hold additional capital sufficient to make the expected probability of failure one-fifth that of the non-systemic institution. Return to text 16. Among the useful efforts along these lines are a measure of Conditional Value-at-Risk (CoVaR) (see Tobias Adrian and Markus K. Brunnermeier (2011), " CoVaR (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 348 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September), and a measure of systemic risk based on each firm's contribution to the expected capital shortfall of the entire financial system in a crisis (see Christian T. Brownlees and Robert F. Engle (2011), " Volatility, Correlation and Tails for Systemic Risk Measurement ," New York University Working Paper (New York: New York University, June). The concept behind the latter measure is also described in Viral V. Acharya, Christian Brownlees, Farhang Farazmand, and Matthew Richardson (2011), "Measuring Systemic Risk," in Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New Architecture of Global Finance (New York: Wiley Publishers), pp. 87–119. Updated systemic risk rankings are maintained by the authors here . A helpful review of the efforts to measure systemic risk is Monica Billio, Mila Getmansky, Andrew W. Lo, and Loriana Pelizzon (2010), " Measuring Systemic Risk in the Finance and Insurance Sectors (PDF) ," MIT Sloan School Working Paper 4774-10 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Sloan School of Management, March). Return to text 17. One should note that "time-varying" supervision should not mean excessively procyclical supervision. Return to text 18. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2011), " Basel III: A Global Regulatory Framework for More Resilient Banks and Banking Systems (PDF) ," (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, June), p. 57. Basel III introduced the concept of a capital "buffer" to supplement the long-established concept of minimum capital requirements. In brief, the idea is that a bank's distribution of capital to shareholders or employees will be progressively more restricted as capital levels fall below required buffers, but--unlike the case where capital levels fall below minimum requirements--a bank need not bring its capital levels above the buffer by shedding assets or raising new capital. Basel III introduced a "fixed" capital buffer of 2-1/2 percent of common equity on top of the 4-1/2 percent minimum capital requirement. The countercyclical capital buffer would be placed on top of the fixed buffer. If applied at its maximum 2-1/2 percent amount, the countercyclical buffer would thus require that a bank maintain equity capital of at least 9-1/2 percent of risk-weighted assets in order to remain unencumbered by restrictions on capital distributions. There is a view held by some that large banks would be under considerable market pressure to maintain their capital levels above the 7 percent total minimum requirement and fixed buffer (as well as the added systemic surcharge for those banks subject to it), even in stressed periods. Return to text 19. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2011). Return to text 20. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), " Guidance for National Authorities Operating the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (PDF) ," (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, December), p. 1. Return to text 21. For a useful discussion of the pros and cons of variants on countercyclical capital buffers, see Douglas J. Elliott (2011), " An Overview of Macroprudential Policy and Countercyclical Capital Requirements ," (Washington: The Brookings Institution, March 10). Return to text 22. A draft policy statement was published even before the April 1, 2013, effective date of the new FPC authority. See Bank of England (2013), " The Financial Policy Committee's powers to supplement capital requirements (PDF) ," (London, U.K.: Bank of England, January). Return to text 23. In 2006, just before the onset of the stresses that eventually led to the financial crisis, the largest U.S. financial firms relied on short-term wholesale funding for about half their total funding needs, and deposits for just over one-third. Today (or, more precisely, as of the end of the second quarter of this year) those proportions are almost exactly reversed. Some of the change is likely due to changes in risk assessment and supervisory expectations.But it is also true that deposits were a safe haven for many households and non-household investors during the crisis. It may be that, as financial and economic conditions continue to normalize, households and other investors will move more deposits into other investment vehicles. Return to text 24. Included in this grouping are repo, reverse repo, securities lending and borrowing, and securities margin lending. Return to text 25. Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability ," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., May 3. Return to text Last Update: September 20, 2013 Back to Top
