, there is ample room--and need--for some version of this cross-pollination. Issues such as those I have discussed today can only profit from an academic perspective, informed by practical and institutional considerations. Obviously, I am standing this afternoon in front of an almost ideal audience to provide that perspective, and I look forward to hearing your lectures in the future. 1. For example, the Garn-St. Germain Act of 1982, P.L. 97-320; 96 Stat. 1469, authorized banks to offer a deposit account with deregulated interest rates, and the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking & Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, P.L. 103-328; 108 Stat. 2338, substantially liberalized restrictions on interstate banking. Return to text 2. Section 108 of Gramm-Leach-Bliley did mention financial stability, but in the context of requiring a study of potential subordinated debt requirements for large insured depository institutions and bank holding companies whose failure could adversely affect financial stability. Return to text 3. DFA § 619. Return to text 4. DFA § 622, adding Section 14 to the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1841 et seq.). Return to text 5. DFA §604(b), amending §5(c)(2) of the Banking Holding Company Act. Return to text 6. Section 731, amending Commodities Exchange Act by adding new Section 4s--this is §4s(e)(3)(A). Return to text 7. Others include the authority granted the SEC to require reporting of certain information by hedge funds (§ 404) and the creation of a new Federal Insurance Office, which is charged with "identifying issues or gaps in the regulation of insurance that could contribute to a systemic crisis in the insurance industry or the United States financial system." 31 USC 313 (c)(1)(A), as added by DFA §502. Return to text 8. There are ten voting members and five non-voting members. The voting members are the Secretary of the Treasury, who serves as the Chairperson of the FSOC; the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; the Comptroller of the Currency; the Director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission; the Chairperson of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; the Chairperson of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission; the Director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency; the Chairman of the National Credit Union Administration Board; and an independent member with insurance expertise. The non-voting members are the Director of the OFR, the Director of the Federal Insurance Office, a state insurance commissioner selected by the state insurance commissioners, a state banking supervisor chosen by the state banking supervisors, and a state securities commissioner designated by the state securities supervisors. Return to text 9. DFA §120. The FSOC is also required to issue an annual report to Congress assessing the impact of market and regulatory developments on, and threats to, the financial stability of the United States. DFA§ 112(a)(2)(N). Return to text 10. DFA §153 (a). Return to text 11. DFA §111(2)(N) and §153(d). Return to text 12. DFA §113(C)(1). Return to text 13. DFA § 113(a)(2)(K). Return to text 14. DFA §803 (6). Return to text 15. For financial market utilities, unlike nonbank financial firms, the likelihood of becoming systemically important is enough to authorize designation. DFA §804 (a)(1). This same provision allows designation of "payment, clearing, or settlement activities," presumably regardless of who conducts those activities. Return to text 16. DFA §805. Return to text 17. DFA §803 (9). Return to text 18. U.S. Department of the Treasury (2012). " Financial Stability Oversight Council Makes First Designations in Effort to Protect Against Future Financial Crises ," press release, July 18. Return to text 19. DFA §121(a). Return to text 20. DFA §173. Return to text 21. The two dealing with the acquisition of merger of banks simply require that each factor be "taken into consideration," whereas the provision for acquisition of nonbanks requires consideration of the factors in the context of a determination of whether the proposed transaction "can reasonably be expected to produce benefits to the public that outweigh possible adverse effects."12 USC 1843(j)(2)(A). Somewhat confusingly, and a bit unaccountably, the wording of the financial stability factor also differs. In the Bank Holding Company §4(j)(2)(A) and Bank Merger Act lists, the new factor is simply "risk to the stability of the United States banking or financial system." In the Bank Holding Company Act §3(c)list, the factor is "greater or more concentrated risks to the stability of the United States banking or financial system." While the import of this different wording does not seem great, it is unclear why it was chosen in this provision and not in the Bank Merger Act, which also covers bank acquisitions. Return to text 22. Office of Financial Research, U.S. Department of the Treasury, 2012 Annual Report (PDF) (Washington: Office of Financial Research), p. 1. Return to text 23. Office of Financial Research, 2012 Annual Report , p. 16. Return to text 24. Some representative examples include: Markus Brunnermeir, Andrew Crocket, Charles Goodhart, Avinash D. Persaud, and Hyun Shin (2009), "The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation," Geneva Reports on the World Economy 11 (Geneva, Switzerland: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, June); Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2010), "Regulating the Shadow Banking System," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, Fall), pp. 261-297; Nicola Gennaioli, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny (2012), "Neglected Risks, Financial Innovation, and Financial Fragility," Journal of Financial Economics , vol. 104, issue 3, pp. 452-468; Perry Mehrling (2011), The New Lombard Street (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press); Jean Tirole (2011), "Illiquidity and All Its Friends," Journal of Economic Literature , vol. 49, issue 2, pp. 287-325. Return to text 25. 15 U.S.C. §1. Return to text 26. See, e.g., United States v. Trans-Missouri Freight Assn., 166 U.S. 290 (1897). Return to text 27. Section 165 (b)(3) adds two additional considerations: 1) whether the firm owns an insured depository institution and 2) the nonfinancial activities and affiliations of the firm. Return to text 28. For example, if the loss to the financial system from the failure of a systemically important firm would be five times that resulting from failure of the non-systemic firm, then the firm would have to hold additional capital sufficient to make the expected probability of failure one-fifth that of the non-systemic institution. Return to text 29. Among the useful efforts along these lines are a measure of Conditional Value-at-Risk (CoVaR) (See Tobias Adrian and Markus Brunnermeier (2011), CoVaR (PDF) , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 348 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, September) and a measure of systemic risk based on each firm's contribution to the expected capital shortfall of the entire financial system in a crisis (See Christian T. Brownlees and Robert F. Engle (2011), "Volatility, Correlation and Tails for Systemic Risk Measurement," New York University Working Paper (New York: New York University, June). The concept behind the latter measure is also described in Viral V. Acharya, Christian Brownlees, Farhang Farazmand, and Matthew Richardson, "Measuring Systemic Risk,," in Regulating Wall Street: The Dodd-Frank Act and the New Architecture of Global Finance (Wiley Publishers, 2011), pp. 87-119. Updated systemic risk rankings are maintained by the authors at http://vlab.stern.ny.edu. A helpful review of the efforts to measure systemic risk is Monica Billio, Mila Getmansky, Andrew W. Lo, and Loriana Pelizzon (2010), "Measuring Systemic Risk in the Finance and Insurance Sectors," MIT Sloan School Working Paper 4774-10 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Sloan School of Management, March). Return to text 30. It is worth noting, in this regard, that in developing systemic risk capital requirements one early idea was to construct a continuously varying function for calculating a systemic risk surcharge. That is, a formula for calculating a firm's "systemic footprint" based on relevant characteristics such as size of assets, liabilities, counterparty exposures, and the like would yield a specific capital surcharge for each firm with more than $50 billion in assets. While the difficulties with this approach went beyond the false precision that it would have given the surcharge, that was certainly one consideration in declining to adopt this approach. Return to text 31. Another important provision requiring interpretation of financial stability as a legal standard is the designation of systemically important nonbank institutions by the FSOC. As noted earlier, this is an instance in which an evaluation of financial stability effects is the direct test for action. In implementing this authority the FSOC took a methodical, comparative approach. Details can be found in Financial Stability Oversight Council (2012), "Authority to Require Supervision and Regulation of Certain Nonbank Financial Companies," Federal Register, vol. 77 (April 11), pp. 21637. In the first stage of the process it has established, the FSOC applies a purely quantitative screen in order to identify nonbank financial companies that merit further consideration. In Stage 2, the Council conducts an in-depth analysis of each firm that has been identified through the Stage 1 screens, based on information that is either publicly available or already in the possession of financial regulators. After this analysis is complete, firms that the Council believes merit further consideration will be moved into Stage 3, during which information will also be collected directly from the firms. On the basis of this review, the Council may vote by the necessary two-thirds majority to designate the firm as systemically important. The Council has also elaborated, in general terms, the conditions under which it would determine that a "threat to financial stability" may exist and the transmission channels through which distress at a firm could affect the broader economy. What is noteworthy for my purposes today--beyond the elaborate nature of this exercise--is that ultimately the FSOC will make each determination on a very company-specific basis, with attention to the particular risks posed by each individual company. Indeed, recognizing that the assessment of different kinds of financial firms may require varying analytic frameworks, the FSOC has segmented its work. So, for example, it will consider asset managers and hedge funds separately from other forms of financial intermediaries. Return to text 32. In fact, of course, the antitrust agencies and the courts have over the years given greater or lesser weight to possible efficiencies resulting from a merger, thereby introducing a consideration other than competition as such. Return to text 33. As noted earlier, the two governing provisions in the Bank Holding Company Act differ somewhat. For the present purpose of discussing financial stability analysis, however, we need not dwell on these differences. Return to text 34. The HHI is calculated by squaring the market share of each firm in a particular market and then adding those squared market shares. The antitrust agencies have specified the relative level of scrutiny that can be expected from particular combinations of changes in, and post-merger HHIs, although they are careful to point out that HHI is not a "rigid screen." U.S. Department of Justice, Horizontal Merger Guidelines §5.3 (Aug. 19, 2009). Return to text 35. In the Wells-Wachovia and JPMorgan-Washington Mutual cases, concerns about the impact of Wachovia's failure on the Deposit Insurance Fund may also have played a role. Return to text 36. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Capital One Financial Corporation, McLean, Virginia, Order Approving the Acquisition of a Savings Association and Nonbanking Subsidiaries (PDF) , FRB Order No. 2012-2 (Feb. 14, 2012) at p. 28. Return to text 37. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Order Approving Acquisition, pp. 28-29. Return to text 38. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, Order Approving Acquisition, p. 30. Return to text 39. There are eight U.S. banks on this list, as well as many foreign-based firms with significant U.S. operations. However, the buckets to which they will be assigned will not be finalized under more up-to-date data is available and analyzed next year. Once final agreement has been reached by the Basel Committee, ordering the systemically important banks into categories with progressively increasing surcharges, the Federal Reserve Board intends to propose matching provisions for covered U.S. banks under its Section 165 authority. In conducting our annual reviews of the capital levels and planning processes of major U.S. bank holding companies, we have already instructed the eight firms on the Basel Committee list to include their estimated required surcharge in their plan for reaching their ultimate capital requirement. Return to text 40. The Basel Committee has not yet completed its work on this initiative. Its proposal has been published in Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Consultative Document on a Framework for Dealing with Domestic Systemically Important Banks (June 2012). The proposal is that national authorities would designate these institutions (as compared to the global systemically important banks, which are to be designated by the Basel Committee itself), and that the nature of the enhanced loss absorbency for any such institutions also be left to national discretion (as compared to the global systemically important banks, for which capital surcharges are to be required and their amounts specified by the Basel Committee). Return to text 41. A paper by Katharina Pistor explains how the regulatory implications of three different theories of financial stability would differ. Katharina Pistor (2012), "On the Theoretical Foundations for Regulating Financial Markets," Columbia Law School Public Law & Legal Theory Working Paper 12-304, June. Return to text 42. Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), " Shadow Banking After the Financial Crisis ," remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Conference on Challenges in Global Finance, San Francisco, California, June 12. Return to text 43. Treasury Secretary Timothy F. Geithner (2012), letter to members of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, September 27. Return to text Last Update: October 10, 2012 Back to Top
