COVID-19 and the Minneapolis Fed: What we’re doing, how we’re working Read President Neel Kashkari’s statement March 17, 2020 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO COVID-19 and the Minneapolis Fed: What we’re doing, how we’re working Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter The coronavirus continues to present a unique challenge for all of us in the Ninth Federal Reserve District and across the country. Here at the Minneapolis Fed, it has changed how we work and where we work. What has not changed is our commitment to fulfilling our public service mission. Visit our COVID-19 page for resources, research, and media interviews Read more As you can tell from our numerous articles , research papers , and real-time COVID-19 dashboard , during this difficult time our economists and writers have been dedicated to providing local, state, and federal policymakers, business and community leaders, and the general public with the kinds of critical information they are seeking. Of course, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, I am deeply engaged in the critical actions the Fed is taking to support our nation’s economy. Every day, we monitor the spread of COVID-19 and assess its potential impact on our economy, both in the region and across the nation. We are united in our resolve to use our tools to achieve the goals Congress has assigned us: maximum employment and price stability. Here in the Ninth District, we are focused on maintaining operations that are essential to keeping our economy and financial system functioning. For example, at the Minneapolis Fed we’ve been tasked with the responsibility to manage the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) for the Federal Reserve System. We’re conducting our business while ensuring the health and well-being of our employees and their families in Minneapolis and Helena, Mont. Much of our workforce has the ability to work from home and is now doing so. I am thankful for their dedication to our mission of pursuing an economy that works for all of us. As always, my goal—and that of the Federal Reserve System—is to remain open and transparent and do our part to support the U.S. economy and the American people. Sincerely, Neel Kashkari Updated on May 5, 2020 More On Public health More On Public health COVID-19 and the Ninth District economy: A dashboard Use interactive charts to see COVID-19’s impact on our region. Explore the data › Related Content Scholar spotlight: Karen Kopecky Article Interview with Kosali Simon: How health economics can help people get back to school, work, and family Article Year in review: Summary of 2023 Institute Working Papers Article Related Content Scholar spotlight: Karen Kopecky Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
