1 Presentation to Australian Business Economists San Francisco, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on March 23, 2015 President Williams presented similar remarks to the CFA Society Hawaii in Honolulu, Hawaii, on March 5, 2015. The View from Here: The Economic Outlook and Its Implications for Monetary Policy Good evening, at least from me; good afternoon, in your case. It’s truly a pleasure to be speaking to you, though I must admit it would be more of a pleasure if I could be there in person. What I’d like to do is give you the 30,000-foot view: the economic outlook of the U.S. as a whole and how I view the trajectory of monetary policy in that context. Economists rarely make definitive statements—we usually add dozens of modifiers and caveats, which is why a typical sentence can run to about 90 words. But I feel comfortable saying in the absolute that 2015 is going to be a very interesting year for monetary policy. Now is probably a good time to deliver the usual disclaimer that the views expressed are entirely my own, and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. If you’re a Fed-watcher, you know they don’t reflect the views of some of my colleagues…. 2 The outlook As you probably know, the Fed has a dual mandate of full employment and price stability, and our aim is to set monetary policy that best achieves both those goals. Starting with employment, the U.S. Congress mandated a goal of “maximum employment”…though it didn’t actually define precisely what that meant. Which is a good thing—it means we have to think hard about what the right employment level should be in a healthy economy, examine the data, and use economic analysis based on a number of factors, rather than aiming for an arbitrary or potentially anachronistic target. Most economists— including me—think about maximum employment in terms of the unemployment rate. When the economy is at full strength, the unemployment rate is somewhere between 5 and 5½ percent. My view, to be precise, is that 5.2 percent is the right number. We’re obviously getting much closer to our target of full employment. The current unemployment rate of 5.5 percent is not only a positive sign in and of itself, it’s a measure of our progress: It’s dramatically lower than the 10 percent peak we saw at the height of the Great Recession. In addition to the falling unemployment rate, we’re seeing exceptional job growth and improvement across multiple labor market indicators. They all tell the same story: That the U.S. economy and labor market are on the mend and closing in on the full employment goal. My view is that we will reach maximum employment by the end of this year, if not sooner. Indeed, 3 given the momentum in the economy, there’s a good chance we could see the unemployment rate fall below 5 percent sometime later this year or next year. I’ve been in this job for four years now, which have not exactly covered the cheeriest of economic times. In the early days, it was hard not to feel like a harbinger of doom when I spoke to groups like this. So it’s a very, very welcome day that I can say that we’re closing in on our maximum employment goal. Turning to our second mandate, price stability, we again use a range of economic analyses to determine our goal because Congress—again in its infinite wisdom—didn’t specify what, exactly, “price stability” should mean. We, meaning the Federal Open Market Committee or FOMC, define it as a 2 percent inflation rate over the medium term. Not every month, not every year, but on average we want 2 percent inflation, based on the most comprehensive measure of prices of consumer spending. Currently, that number is well below our 2 percent goal. In fact, it’s been below 2 percent for the past few years. In that context, how do I see the future of our price stability mandate unfolding? Despite the current low rate of inflation, I’m actually quite confident that we’ll be able to reach our 2 percent target within the next few years. This—as my inbox makes clear—provokes the question of why I expect that inflation will pick up, considering that it’s been persistently low for so long. 4 My answer is that, with the U.S. economy improving and unemployment falling to quite low levels, I expect wage pressures to build and price pressures to return to more normal levels over the course of the next two years. There are also significant near-term factors currently pushing inflation down that I expect to be transitory: falling import and energy prices due to global economic developments and the decline in oil prices. Taking those in turn: First, wage and price pressures. One of the reasons people question inflation’s momentum is that wage growth has been extremely sluggish. In a normal cycle, when the economy picks up, wage growth follows—and that hasn’t happened yet. But there are reasons for that. My research staff has been studying a feature of the last recession with the charming title “downward nominal wage rigidity.” In essence, employers were loath to cut wages during and after the Great Recession. As a result, wages have remained stagnant to make up for the pay cuts that never came, but businesses wanted to impose.1 As the economy picks up, these pent-up wage cuts will dissipate, the gap will close, and we should see wages start to rise more strongly. This reflects the broader tendency for a lag between the “cause” of the economy rebounding and the “effect” of wage inflation.2 If past is prologue, as Shakespeare wrote, we should look to prior recessions, which have followed the same pattern: one in which wage growth doesn’t really start to pick up until the economy nears full employment. As I said earlier, 1 Daly and Hobijn (2015). 2 Daly and Hobijn (2014). 5 that’s in sight, and I expect wages to start moving up as we get closer; but given historical precedent and economic patterns, I’m not surprised that we haven’t seen that movement yet. As the unemployment rate goes from the mid-5s down to the low 5s over the rest of the year, we’re going to see a labor market that’s much stronger, which will spur wage and price growth, which, in turn, will overwhelm some of the other factors that have been pushing inflation down—which I’ll turn to now. The first is falling import prices. Europe, China, and Japan, the biggest economies outside the United States, are all experiencing disappointment in growth and inflation. With the exception of the U.S. and a handful of other countries, the global economic outlook has darkened. That has led to strong policy actions, both by central banks and governments abroad, to stimulate their economies. So what happens when you have weakness abroad and those central banks are trying to stimulate their economies? One effect is that it causes their currencies to fall in value relative to the dollar. This is a standard function of monetary policy, and I should point out that the strength of the dollar relative to other currencies reflects the weaker economic conditions in those countries compared to the U.S. The end result is that the U.S. dollar has increased in value over the past year, which has lowered the prices we pay for imported goods and services, which in turn has pushed down the U.S. inflation rate. 6 The second is energy—I don’t have to tell anyone here that oil prices have plummeted. And that’s having an enormous impact because energy is a significant part of the consumer spending basket. So as gasoline and other energy prices have come down sharply, they’ve also lowered the inflation rate. What do I think of these two factors? It’s something of a personal tenet that policymakers have to be very careful about not reacting to short-term fluctuations in commodity or other import prices. Instead, I take a perspective that looks one or two years ahead—research shows that’s the minimum amount of time it takes for monetary policy to have its full effect.3 What I’m considering, as a policymaker, is what effect those factors that are currently unfolding—movements in the U.S. economy, weakness abroad, oil prices—will have not this week or this month, but later this year and in 2016 and 2017. Given that lag between the implementation of policy and its full effect, the question should be: What’s the path we’re on and what’s the right monetary policy for that path? History and experience show that energy price swings leave an imprint on inflation in the short term, but don’t affect underlying inflation rates over the medium term.4 The same holds true for movements in the exchange value of the dollar: They obviously affect inflation in the short run, but they don’t have much of an impact further down the road.5 3 Havranek and Rusnak (2013). 4 Evans and Fisher (2011) and Liu and Weidner (2011). 5 Gust, Leduc, and Vigfusson (2010). 7 I’m therefore looking at underlying rates of inflation, not just the month-to-month movements, but the fundamental trends. Fed economists are frequently accused of neither eating nor driving, because we like to look at core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices. For the average consumer, those matter a lot—you can’t really talk about what a dollar can buy if you don’t look at those products. But for economic trends, and for guiding monetary policy, measures of inflation that remove the most volatile components, like core inflation, or something called the “trimmed mean” inflation,6 give a better lay of the land. What I see when I look at the data that strip out the short-term volatility is an economy that’s got a good head of steam and is getting close to full employment and an inflation trend that’s running about 1½ percent based on the trimmed-mean measure. That’s why, as things continue to get better, I see the strengthening domestic economy overwhelming the energy and currency valuation impacts, and inflation gradually moving back to 2 percent. Inflation expectations from business and consumer surveys are generally consistent with that forecast. On the other hand, financial markets are sending mixed signals, with declining yields on inflation-indexed securities suggesting that inflation expectations may have fallen. It’s always important to listen to what financial markets are saying. But it’s also important to note that the research shows the meaning of these movements is not definitive.7 And while markets are important, interpreting their fluctuations is not a substitute for the economic research and 6 See http://www.dallasfed.org/research/pce/index.cfm. 7 Christensen, Lopez, and Rudebusch (2010) and D’Amico, Kim, and Wei (2014). 8 analysis we look to when thinking about economic developments and determining appropriate policy. In a nutshell: Things are looking better—in fact, they’re looking downright good. The economy is showing solid momentum and there’s good news in virtually every sector. I expect U.S. growth to be about 2½ percent in real GDP. I see the continued improvements in the economy pushing wages and prices up, and inflation moving back toward its target. And, as I said, I expect to reach full employment by the end of the year. Implications for monetary policy Of course, what everyone wants to know is what all this means for monetary policy. I personally still think it’s appropriate to start the process of normalizing monetary policy this year. “Normalizing policy,” as we all know, is code for “raising interest rates.” The exact timing for that is going to depend on the data—I cannot emphasize enough, by the way, that our decisions are data-driven. I say it in every speech, every interview, every conversation…. The data may push us a little further in one direction or another, and there will be a lot of discussion and debate. But assuming that things unfold along the lines I’ve forecast, I think that by mid- year it will be the time to have a discussion about starting to raise rates. I’m not making a prediction about what the Fed will do; I am saying that in my view, it would be appropriate to start weighing the pros and cons of taking action at that time. This is a good thing: After all, the economy’s improved a lot, unemployment’s coming down, and we may be able to start cutting 9 back on accommodation because of that strength. Of course, the one thing that would change my view would be if the data contradicted the forecast I laid out today. Not everyone agrees, of course. There are a number of people who think we should wait until inflation is very close to, or has crossed, the finish line. They’re mainly worried that raising rates too soon would allow inflation to fall further and possibly derail the recovery. The argument is: What’s the rush? Why not get as much evidence as possible that your forecast is right? The case for extensive patience certainly has valid points, and esteemed supporters, so let me explain my position. First, it’s important to remember that I’m not talking about instituting tight policy, I’m talking about taking a first step in pulling back somewhat on what is a very high degree of accommodation. To use an over-worn, but accurate, analogy: There’s a difference between easing off the gas and applying the brakes. Monetary policy has been extremely stimulative for the past six-plus years, and it’s going to remain so for quite some time. Even after we start raising interest rates they will be very low and the Fed’s $4 trillion-plus balance sheet will continue to provide substantial stimulus. So no one should worry that we’re pulling the rug out from underneath the economy. 10 Second is the factor I mentioned previously: Monetary policy, as Milton Friedman famously reminded us, has long and variable lags.8 As I said, it usually takes a year or two for policy to have its full effect. As a result, policy must be forward-looking. When you’re driving towards a stoplight, you don’t keep your foot on the accelerator; you ease off so you’re ready to stop at your target. Otherwise you slam on the brakes—and probably wind up in the middle of the intersection. The data convince me that inflation will move back up to our target as the economy strengthens and we close in on full employment. Nearing our goal means easing up on the gas. By waiting until we’re face-to-face with 2 percent inflation, we could drastically overshoot the mark—winding up in that metaphorical intersection or even fully running the red light. Overshooting our target would force us into a much more dramatic rate hike to reverse course, which could have a destabilizing effect on the markets and possibly damage the economic recovery. The decision to raise rates is actually three decisions: Not just when, but how quickly and how high. I see a safer course in a gradual increase, and that calls for starting a bit earlier. It’s been posited by some that the risk of overshooting the inflation target is minimal, because inflation is so low and is unlikely to accelerate quickly. I’ll offer a counterpoint to that, from a time in U.S. history when things looked similar to the snapshot today: In 1965, when the Fed was debating whether to tighten policy, core inflation was 1¼ percent, labor costs were 8 Friedman (1961). 11 growing relatively slowly, and the unemployment rate was about one-half percentage point above the estimate of maximum employment at that time. Only 18 months later, core inflation was over 3 percent, labor cost growth had more than quadrupled, and the unemployment rate was down three-quarters of a percentage point—the economy was on a tear. I’m not predicting that this will happen today, but it’s a reminder of just how fast things can change when the economy is strong.9 The Fed has a lot of decisions ahead, and people have a lot of opinions about those decisions. I’m sure I’m going to hear some of them in Q&A.... But the attention shouldn’t just be focused on what the Fed’s going to do, because, as you well know, there’s also the story that’s unfolding globally: the policy decisions in Japan, Europe, and elsewhere will spill over to other economies around the world. Now I’ve talked a lot about my forecast and what I expect to happen. Of course, events rarely follow the script. There are downside risks to the forecast—mostly related to developments abroad. And there are upsides as well, for example, we could have another year of better-than-expected job growth. Typical economist, always with a caveat. But also typical of an economist, I’ll be watching the data and the decisions that are being made, and not just relying on a forecast. 9 See Orphanides and Williams (2013) for a discussion of monetary policy during this episode. 12 And that’s really the message here, my mantra: Decisions are data-driven. The data convince me that we’ll close in on maximum employment by the end of the year. The data convince me that as we do, wage and price pressures will rise. The data convince me that as that happens, it will push inflation up, and we’ll meet our target in about two years. The data convince me that lags in monetary policy mean acting before we reach our goals, not when we reach them, to avoid overshooting the targets. And that means the data convince me that the time is coming when we’ll be making our first steps down the road to normalization. Thank you. 13 References Christensen, Jens, Jose Lopez, and Glenn Rudebusch. 2010. “Inflation Expectations and Risk Premiums in an Arbitrage-Free Model of Nominal and Real Bond Yields.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42(s1), pp. 143–178. Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2014. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips Curve.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 46(s2), pp. 51–93. Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2015. “Why Is Wage Growth So Slow?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015- 01 (January 5). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/january/unemployment-wages-labor-market-recession/ D’Amico, Stefania, Don Kim, and Min Wei. 2014. “Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation-Protected Security Prices.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series working paper 2014-24. http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2014/201424/201424abs.html Evans, Charles L., and Jonas D.M. Fisher. 2011. “What Are the Implications of Rising Commodity Prices for Inflation and Monetary Policy?” Chicago Fed Letter 286 (May). https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/chicago-fed-letter/2011/may-286 Friedman, Milton. 1961. “The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 69(5), pp. 447−466. Gust, Christopher, Sylvain Leduc, and Robert Vigfusson. 2010. “Trade Integration, Competition, and the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through.” Journal of Monetary Economics 57(3, April), pp. 309– 324. Havranek, Tomas, and Marek Rusnak. 2013. “Transmission Lags of Monetary Policy: A Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(4, December), pp. 39–75. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q4a2.htm Liu, Zheng, and Justin Weidner. 2011. “Does Headline Inflation Converge to Core?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-24 (August 1). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2011/august/headline-inflation-core-convergence/ Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2013 “Monetary Policy Mistakes and the Evolution of Inflation Expectations.” In The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking, eds. Michael D. Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 255–297.

1 Presentation to Chapman University, Orange, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on May 1, 2015 Monetary Policy and the Independence Dilemma Recently there has been a great deal of commentary arguing that the Federal Reserve needs more oversight and greater transparency. This has culminated in a number of legislative proposals designed to constrain the Fed’s freedom of action in monetary policy and other spheres. One prominent example is the bill proposed in the House of Representatives entitled the Federal Reserve Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014, or the FRAT Act for short. Much of the debate surrounds the Federal Reserve’s policy actions during and following the global financial crisis and recession. But the deeper issue of oversight and independence of central banks in democratic societies is not new; on the contrary, it has been a contentious one for the past century. In the broader historical context, recent proposals are not unique to the current situation but instead represent the latest chapter in a long-running debate in the United States and around the globe. In this talk, I will delve into the question of central bank oversight and independence, examine some of the solutions that have been tried in the past but ultimately failed, and then turn to approaches that have proven more successful. I’ll conclude by considering how the lessons from the past apply to the current debate about how to enhance the oversight and transparency of the Federal Reserve. Throughout I will focus on monetary policy and not address payments systems, regulation of financial institutions, or other activities of central banks. At this point, I should emphasize that the views expressed here today are entirely my own, and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. 2 The independence dilemma Why has central bank oversight and transparency been so contentious? The independence dilemma stems from the enormous power central banks have to create money essentially out of thin air. Wielded judiciously, this power can foster economic prosperity and stability. However, it can also be misused as a short-term fix for governments to meet financing needs by printing money or to stimulate the economy before an election. Such misuse can undermine economic stability and fuel runaway inflation. The resulting longer-run damage may only be felt years or decades in the future, well outside usual political time frames. To avoid the temptation of opportunistic money creation, modern governments have generally delegated the day-to-day operation of monetary policy to an independent central bank. This independence means that policymakers are free to focus on the technical aspects of their task, removed from direct political influence. This arrangement, however, creates a new problem: Who tells the central bank what to do, if not the government? Thus, the dilemma: Successful monetary policy necessitates both an arm’s-length relationship to the political process and oversight by elected officials. The search for balance at the horns of this predicament has been at the heart of central bank debates and reforms over the past century. Two broad approaches have been taken to solve the quandary. In both cases, the overarching goal is the same: economic prosperity and stability. The difference is in the degree of operational latitude afforded the central bank. The first, more restrictive, approach is to delegate an operational mandate stipulating that the central bank achieve a specific intermediate goal. A legislated target for the growth rate of the money supply is one example of an operational mandate. The second approach is to delegate an overall economic goal, such as low 3 inflation, and let the central bank determine how to best achieve its goal with the tools at its disposal. Operational mandates In the past, central banks were typically given an operational mandate. This choice reflected a strong desire to limit the discretionary power of central banks and to provide a nominal anchor, that is, a stable value of money. Operational mandates were thought to be highly predictable, accountable, and transparent, and able to provide the basis for longer-term economic stability, at the cost of short-term flexibility and discretion. However, as I will discuss in more detail, operational mandates have been beset by a string of failures rooted in this very lack of flexibility to deal with changing economic conditions and crises. After each failure, a new operational mandate framework has been introduced that, while an improvement over the prior one, still proved prone to breakdown under economic and political stress. The classic example of an operational mandate is the gold standard. Under the gold standard, monetary policy is completely subordinate to the fixed price of gold at a legislated level. Many countries followed the gold standard before World War I and in the period between the wars. The gold standard represents the most extreme form of oversight and transparency. The central bank has little freedom of action or decision and is therefore unable to take potentially harmful actions on its own—or, for that matter, any actions on its own. History has shown that this inflexibility and the subservience of monetary policy to fluctuations in gold supply and demand contributed to economic crises and depressions. The gold standard’s inability to cope with economic stress is reflected by its frequent curtailment during times of war and crisis. In fact, so often was it suspended that deviations from the gold 4 standard routinely became the norm, rather than the exception. The inherent lack of flexibility in the money supply was blamed for contributing to the depth of the downturns experienced by many countries during the 1930s.1 Moreover, although the gold standard system was transparent in terms of the operational mandate, its execution was far from transparent in practice, as accounts of central bank dealings during the gold standard period illustrate.2 The failure of the gold standard led to a new type of operational mandate, the fixed exchange rate regime. Under this system, the central bank is required to maintain the value of the domestic currency in relation to that of a foreign currency. As with the gold standard, predictability, accountability, and transparency were considered paramount virtues. The most famous example was the Bretton Woods system, in which foreign currencies were pegged to the U.S. dollar. A fixed exchange rate system is somewhat less rigid than a gold standard and is far less subject to the particularities of gold supply and demand. Nonetheless, it puts a straitjacket on a central bank’s ability to set monetary policy attuned to domestic economic conditions, since policy is beholden to the exchange-rate peg. As a result, monetary policy is less able to counter cyclical swings in the economy. Once again, history has shown that fixed exchange rate systems perform very poorly and are often abandoned during periods of severe economic stress or crisis. Although some smaller economies, such as Denmark and Hong Kong, have successfully operated with exchange-rate pegs, other regimes have not stood the test of time. The Bretton Woods system collapsed in the early 1970s and the European Exchange Rate Mechanism faltered in the early 1990s. 1 Eichengreen 1992. 2 Ahamed 2009. 5 The string of failures associated with the gold standard and fixed exchange rates led to other proposed operational mandates, including monetary targets. Monetary targeting is most often associated with Milton Friedman’s proposal to have the money stock grow at a constant rate irrespective of economic conditions.3 In theory, monetary targeting has the benefit of being predictable, accountable, and transparent while providing a stronger automatic stabilizer for the economy than earlier, more rigid regimes. For example, if the economy heats up, demand for money balances rises, driving interest rates up, which slows the economy and reduces inflation pressures. However, in practice, monetary targeting has proved an unreliable and overly restrictive framework. In particular, changes in the financial system have caused the relationship between money demand and the economy to shift in unexpected ways. As a result, a fixed growth rate of the money stock can have unpredictable implications for economic growth and inflation. Following on the theoretical insight of William Poole, in a world where money demand is hard to predict, it is preferable to use the interest rate as the primary policy instrument rather than money supply.4 This is what central banks around the world have done, leaving monetary targeting by the wayside. Goal mandates In light of the string of past failures of various forms of operational mandates, many countries have settled on a very different approach to deal with the issues of oversight and independence. Instead of stipulating an operational target, they set high-level economic goals and delegate to the central bank the authority to decide how to best achieve them. Under such a 3 Friedman 1960. 4 Poole 1970. 6 goal mandate, the central bank is held responsible for achieving its objectives and is typically required to regularly report on its progress and the steps it is taking. This framework stresses the predictability, accountability, and transparency of the main economic goals of policy, rather than operational actions. An early entry in this category is the mandate under which the Federal Reserve has operated for the past 38 years. The Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977 states: “The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Open Market Committee shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Somewhat confusingly, this sentence combines elements of both operational and goal mandates. The operational mandate aspect is captured by the reference to long run growth of monetary and credit aggregates, hearkening to a monetary targeting regime. The goal mandate is specified as the ultimate objective of monetary policy. Later in this paragraph, the tension between the two approaches is resolved clearly in favor of the goal mandate: “Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted to require that such ranges of growth or diminution be achieved if the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee determine that they cannot or should not be achieved because of changing conditions.” Although the description of the goals is left somewhat vague, the Federal Reserve filled in this gap by issuing a statement describing the longer-run goals and policy strategy in greater detail.5 The Act of 1977 also demanded a greater level of oversight and transparency regarding monetary policy. It stipulated that the Fed would consult with congressional committees at 5 Board of Governors 2015. 7 semiannual meetings concerning “objectives and plans with respect to the ranges of growth or diminution of monetary and credit aggregates for the upcoming twelve months, taking account of past and prospective developments in production, employment, and prices.”6 The Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978 added a requirement that the Fed issue semiannual reports to Congress in conjunction with these meetings. The semiannual meetings and reports continue to this day. Other countries have taken the goal mandate framework considerably further. Some 25 years ago the Reserve Bank of New Zealand introduced a new goal mandate framework called inflation targeting.7 Since then, dozens of countries have adopted some form of inflation targeting. The cornerstone of this approach is that the central bank—often in consultation and in formal agreement with the government—assumes responsibility for inflation being, on average, near a numerical target. It is important to note that, although the inflation goal is front and center, inflation-targeting central banks also recognize a role for stabilizing economic activity— what is often referred to as “flexible inflation targeting.” The inflation-targeting framework also features clear communication of the central bank’s policy strategy and the rationale for its decisions, with the goal of enhancing the predictability of the central bank’s actions and its accountability to the public. This is generally done in regular public reports with detailed analysis of the economic outlook and policy strategy and decisions.8 Indeed, some governments require the head of the central bank to issue a public 6 Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977. 7 Leiderman and Svensson 1995, Bernanke and Mishkin 1997, Bernanke et al. 1999, Kuttner 2004. 8 See, for example, Norges Bank 2014. 8 letter when the inflation goal is missed, explaining why the target was not achieved and what is being done to rectify the situation.9 Although the legal and institutional structures of inflation-targeting frameworks differ across countries in their particulars, they share the following: a clear delegation of goals to the central bank, regular formal reporting on the attainment of these goals to the public, and a requirement to explain what the central bank is doing to best achieve its goals. As a testament to the effectiveness of this framework, countries with inflation goal mandates have generally kept inflation low and stable over the past few decades, even in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.10 Back to the future: Monetary policy rules as an operational mandate? Although many countries have found that a goal mandate coupled with strong oversight and transparency works much better than past operational mandates, some commentators argue that the problem has not been with the notion of an operational mandate per se, but with how it has been implemented. They accept that the gold standard, fixed exchange rate, and monetary targeting are flawed, and argue that a more sophisticated operational mandate is needed—one that is more flexible at dealing with changing economic conditions but still puts a meaningful constraint on the central bank. The latest proposed operational mandate is that the central bank should, under most circumstances, follow a fixed mechanical monetary policy rule such as the Taylor rule.11 This is the basic idea underlying the FRAT Act. According to many standard monetary policy rules, the 9 See, for example, Bank of England 2015. 10 Williams 2014a. 11 Taylor 1993. 9 real (inflation-adjusted) federal funds rate depends on a few macroeconomic variables: specifically, the utilization gap—the difference between the level of economic activity and its normal, full-employment level; the inflation gap—the difference between the inflation rate and its target level; and the normal, or “natural,” rate of interest. Like other operational mandates, this proposal places a high value on predictability, accountability, and transparency and aims to limit the discretionary decision making of the central bank. This approach has several advantages over previous operational mandate frameworks in terms of macroeconomic performance. First, a monetary policy rule makes clear the central bank’s longer-term inflation goal, which is an integral part of the rule itself. This clarifies the communication of policy goals and actions. Second, a properly specified policy rule incorporates the fundamental principle (“Taylor principle”) of monetary policy that the nominal interest rate needs to rise more than one-for-one with an increase in inflation as a necessary condition to achieve the desired level of inflation in the long run. Third, a policy rule incorporates systematic and predictable counter-cyclical responses to economic conditions consistent with economic theory and a wide range of economic models.12 Research has shown that a policy rule is likely to be superior to other operational mandates like the gold standard, fixed exchange rates, and monetary targeting.13 In model simulations of typical economic fluctuations, an optimally designed monetary policy rule can come very close to the first-best achievable outcomes.14 As a result, central banks around the world consult monetary policy rules in preparing forecasts, analyzing risk scenarios, and 12 Taylor and Williams 2011. 13 Bryant, Hooper, and Mann 1993. 14 Levin, Wieland, and Williams 1999, 2003; Levin et al. 2006. 10 studying alternative policy strategies. At the Federal Reserve, monetary policy rules have been a regular feature of monetary policy analysis, briefings, and discussions for the past two decades.15 There is no question that monetary policy rules provide an invaluable tool for research and practical policy considerations at central banks. Nonetheless, before one rushes to institute a policy rule operational mandate, there are substantive issues and open questions that need to be addressed. Three are particularly relevant: the treatment of unobserved variables such as the natural rates of economic activity and interest, the zero lower bound on interest rates, and the specification of the rule itself. An important element of most monetary policy rules is the dependence on unobservable measures of the normal, or “natural,” levels of economic activity—such as real gross domestic product or the unemployment rate—and interest rates. In principle, these natural rates change over time in unpredictable ways and are therefore subject to considerable uncertainty.16 Under a policy rule mandate, would the estimates of the natural rates be set by statute or by the central bank? Would they change over time as economic circumstances change or would they be fixed? These are not purely academic questions. Following the most recent recession, estimates of both the natural rate of output and interest have been subject to dramatic shifts, which would have sizable effects on the appropriate setting of policy according to standard monetary policy rules.17 If the mandated policy rule uses outdated or inappropriate measures of natural rates, economic performance will suffer. On the other hand, allowing the central bank to freely choose natural rate measures would significantly loosen the constraint on policymaking. In the extreme, any deviation from the mandated rule could be defined away by a shift in the estimated natural rate. 15 Williams 2014c. 16 Orphanides and Williams 2002, Laubach and Williams 2003. 17 Williams 2014b, 2015. 11 A second issue is the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates that limits the ability to lower interest rates during periods of economic downturn or very low inflation relative to the prescription of a monetary policy rule. During the recent U.S. recession, standard monetary policy rules prescribed negative nominal interest rates, but this was unattainable.18 In the end, the Federal Reserve and other central banks turned to unconventional means to provide the missing monetary stimulus. These measures, including asset purchases and explicit forward policy guidance, are outside the realm of standard monetary policy rules. In such circumstances, which are very likely to occur again in the future, a policy rule mandate will be silent. Moreover, research shows that the very presence of the zero lower bound argues for deviating from a standard policy rule around times when the constraint binds, as the central bank aims to make up for lost monetary stimulus.19 Third, although there has been a great deal of research about the properties of well- performing monetary policy rules, there is, as yet, no consensus about the best specification of such a rule. Different models imply different best rules. In addition, in the presence of the zero lower bound or uncertainty about natural rates, the best performing rules can be very different from those designed absent these features.20 In those circumstances, mechanically following one type of standard policy rule designed to work well under one set of assumptions can yield very poor economic outcomes when those assumptions are violated. Where do we go from here? I have argued that the independence dilemma has been with us for a very long time. Despite the best intentions, attempts to solve it through an operational mandate have proven 18 Board of Governors 2009, Rudebusch 2009, Williams 2009. 19 Reifschneider and Williams 2000. 20 Orphanides and Williams 2002, 2006; Reifschneider and Williams 2000. 12 fruitless in the past. Although a policy rule operational mandate is unquestionably superior to past operational mandates, such an approach is subject to a number of issues and questions. First and foremost, what rule should the central bank follow? One lesson from the history of operational mandates is that what looks good in theory often fails to deliver when circumstances change in unpredictable ways. Particularly in situations of economic stress or crisis, operational mandates have proven to be ineffective and have often been abandoned. Given the challenges for an operational mandate to succeed, a potentially more promising approach to address the independence dilemma may be to look to the experiences of inflation- targeting countries, where the principle of enhancing accountability and transparency within a goal mandate framework has proven to be very successful. Thank you. 13 References Ahamed, Liaquat. 2009. Lords of Finance: The Bankers Who Broke the World. New York: Penguin Group. Bank of England. 2015. “Letter from the Governor of the Bank of England to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, February 12, 2015.” https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/inflationary-targets Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen. 1999. Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1997. “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(2, Spring), pp. 97–116. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2009. “Monetary Policy Alternatives.” June 18, p. 37. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20090624bluebook20090618.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2015. “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” Adopted January 24, 2012, amended January 27, 2015. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf Bryant, Ralph C., Peter Hooper, and Catherine L. Mann. 1993. Evaluating Policy Regimes: New Research in Empirical Macroeconomics. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. Eichengreen, Barry. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919–1939. New York: Oxford University Press. Federal Reserve Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014. 2014. House Resolution 5018. https://www.congress.gov/bill/113th-congress/house-bill/5018 Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977. 1977. Public Law 95-188, 91 Statute 1387. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-91/pdf/STATUTE-91-Pg1387.pdf Friedman, Milton. 1960. A Program for Monetary Stability. New York: Fordham University Press. Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978. 1978. Public Law 95-523, 92 Stat. 1887. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg1887.pdf Kuttner, Kenneth N. 2004. “A Snapshot of Inflation Targeting in its Adolescence.” In The Future of Inflation Targeting, eds. Christopher Kent and Simon Guttmann. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp. 6–42. http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/confs/2004/pdf/kuttner.pdf Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams. 2003. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(4), pp. 1,063–1,070. http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/003465303772815934 Leiderman, Leonardo, and Lars E.O. Svensson, editors. 1995. Inflation Targets. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research. Levin, Andrew T., Alexei Onatski, John C. Williams, and Noah Williams. 2006. “Monetary Policy under Uncertainty in Micro-founded Macroeconomic Models.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2005, vol. 20. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 229–287. 14 Levin, Andrew T., Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams. 1999. “Robustness of Simple Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty.” In Monetary Policy Rules, ed. John Taylor. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, pp. 263–299. Levin, Andrew T., Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams. 2003. “The Performance of Forecast-Based Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty.” American Economic Review 93(3, June), pp. 622– 645. Norges Bank. 2014. Monetary Policy Report with Financial Stability Assessment. September. Oslo: Norges Bank. http://static.norges-bank.no/pages/101366/monetary_policy_report_3_14.pdf Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2002. “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, pp. 63–145. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2006. “Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge.” Journal of the European Economic Association 4(2–3, April/May), pp. 366–375. Poole, William. 1970. “Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple Stochastic Macro Model.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 84(2, May), pp. 197–216. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams. 2000. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low- Inflation Era.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(4), pp. 936–966. Rudebusch, Glenn D. 2009. “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2009-17 (May 22). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2009/may/fed-monetary-policy-crisis/ Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39 (December), pp. 195–214. Taylor, John B., and John C. Williams. 2011. “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy.” In Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3B, eds. Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 829–860. Williams, John C. 2009. “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Lower Bound.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 1–37. Williams, John C. 2014a. “Inflation Targeting and the Global Financial Crisis: Successes and Challenges.” Presentation to the South African Reserve Bank Conference on Fourteen Years of Inflation Targeting in South Africa and the Challenge of a Changing Mandate, Pretoria, South Africa, October 31. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams- speeches/2014/october/inflation-targeting-global-financial-crisis/ Williams, John C. 2014b. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at Brookings. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, January 16. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2014/01/16-monetary-policy-zero-lower- bound/16-monetary-policy-zero-lower-bound-williams Williams, John C. 2014c. “Policy Rules in Practice.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 49 (December), pp. 151–153. 15 Williams, John C. 2015. “The Decline in the Natural Rate of Interest.” Manuscript, March. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/economists/jwilliams/Williams_NABE_2015_natural_rate_FRBSF.pdf

1 Presentation to Pacific Community Ventures, San Francisco, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on May 4, 2015 Impact Investing, Impacting Neighborhoods Thank you, Julius, and good afternoon everyone. It’s a pleasure to be here. While I was preparing to speak to you all today, I sat down with some of my staff to talk about what I should say, the points we should emphasize, the usual—I’m an economist, so I’m always over-prepared and fixated on data. The headline, obviously, was: PCV is a great organization because they directly invest, they advise on both the investor and investee side of the equation, and they’re a thought-leader in the sector. But I wanted to dig deeper into the economic impact. And as we talked—about the economic benefit of PCV’s work, how it compares to other options in these neighborhoods, looking at the data—we kept coming back to something: Not everything PCV does is quantifiable in hard numbers. Don’t get me wrong, there are data—which satisfies my need to see a spreadsheet and a cost-benefit-analysis, something I’m sure many of the bankers here can relate to. But you can’t really put a number on what truly defines this work. Which is a good thing…as uncomfortable as it makes a numbers geek like me. PCV helps small businesses succeed, creates jobs where they’re most needed, and ultimately helps make communities stronger, and the impact of that is multifold. An uneven recovery 2 PCV’s work is particularly important in the context of the last several years. I’ve been in this job for just over four years now, and they have not exactly been the best of economic times. Now we’re finally coming into the light at the end of the proverbial tunnel. Nowhere is that more evident than San Francisco—if you look out the window at our offices on Market Street, you see buildings going up on all sides. But if San Francisco is a showcase of the best of the recovery—the epicenter of the tech sector, the boom in property—it’s also the center of the debate about the people who aren’t bouncing back. This economic recovery hasn’t been the same for everyone. There are people who were left behind. There are people who were, frankly, left behind even in the best of times. Which is why we need these targeted investments, so that everyone can benefit from the recovery. And since we’re in San Francisco today, there’s a certain poetic symmetry to PCV using Silicon Valley knowhow and investing acumen to focus on social problems and to develop neighborhoods. It’s a sort of nexus of San Francisco life. Sustainability and staying power As we talked in my office, one of the points I kept coming back to was the advice part of PCV’s work. After I graduated from college, I spent a couple years managing a small business called Blondie’s pizza. While I was there, I met and talked with small business owners. Something I found fascinating was that many of them had gone to community college and that’s where they learned how to open and operate their stores. It was surprising to me at the time, 3 though now it’s obvious, that the community college system is basically our incubator for mom- and-pop shops. I remember thinking that this is something incredibly valuable that the community college system provides: a handbook for how to start a business. But starting a business and sustaining a business are two different things. Particularly in disadvantaged neighborhoods, people just don’t have the networks that other small business leaders do—people who’ve been through the myriad frustrations and stages of establishment and growth. People they can talk to and learn from. It’s true in any job that the connections you make and the networks you establish are important to your success. I’m sure most of you have worked in organizations that have mentoring and career development programs, because the company understands that it’s important for someone to show you the ropes. Or you’ve worked in an area that depended on bringing in outside business, which is a whole lot easier if you’ve got people to make introductions. So that richer advice and counsel PCV provides is truly invaluable. Starting a business is hard enough, but doing it in an underserved area, without the benefit of peer-to-peer advice, mentoring, networks…it’s a herculean task. Add to that the difficulties of starting a business in the aftermath of the Great Recession: Loans were extremely difficult to get, and because personal assets are an important source of funding for these types of businesses, the drop in housing values hit the sector hard. So for that, hats off to everyone in this room who’s made that terrifying leap, and a word of thanks to everyone who’s supported them. 4 Strengthening neighborhoods Speaking of the people who’ve offered financial support, I know a lot of potential investors may wonder: Why should I do this? What’s the return on investment? We know that most of these businesses aren’t going to go from four to 40,000 employees. And that’s a fair point. But they will go from four to 14, and then to 40, some may even make it all the way to 400. The important thing is that when they’re a success, they lay the groundwork for others in the area to enter the market and push up jobs, wages, and productivity. There is an economic effect that, say, a newly opened family-run grocery store has on a low-income neighborhood. That’s increased if you add a bakery, a nail salon, and a hardware store on the same block, all locally owned and operated. The obvious benefit is the increase in local wages. But the real impact is how it can change a community. It’s helping to establish a commercial corridor, creating an economic foundation that creates jobs, raises local incomes, and makes underserved areas more prosperous, safer, and self-sustaining. It’s giving the community an anchor. And that’s an exponential return. Conclusion Someone once said that you should always finish speaking before your audience has finished listening. And since my instinct when I’m up on stage is to go into an economics lecture, I’ll spare you all. 5 I just want to wrap up by really commending the ingenuity and leadership of PCV, the bravery and fortitude of their clients, and the generosity and open-mindedness of their investors. Also their money. Thanks again to everyone.

1 Presentation to the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, NY By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on May 12, 2015 Looking Forward, Forward Looking: The Path for Monetary Policy Good afternoon. It’s a pleasure to be here. New York is obviously one of the greatest cities in the world, so that’s easy to say. But I have to be honest: If I’d had to come here during the winter you just had…well, I still would have said it, but I would have just been being polite. Springtime in New York, however, is no hardship, so, aside from being delighted to address this particular audience, I’m very happy to be back. I’d like to give an overview of the economy today and where I see us going. I’ll address some of the questions I’ve been hearing most frequently, and talk about the trajectory of monetary policy going forward. As usual, my comments are my views alone, and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Disappointing first quarter There are two questions I’m asked on an almost daily basis right now, so I’ll preempt the Q&A and get to them right off the bat. One of them is: Given first-quarter weakness, am I revising my outlook for the year? So far, I’ve been relatively upbeat about the economic outlook and the direction we’re heading. The answer leads me to something I say frequently: We need to look at data over the longer term. We can’t get distracted by blips and temporary downs—or ups for that matter. The data I’m looking at convince me that we’re still on solid footing. Yes, in recent months, spending and employment numbers have come in a little weaker than we had anticipated. However, for the past four years, first-quarter real GDP growth has averaged more 2 than 2 percentage points lower than during the rest of the year. While there is no single culprit, weather has definitely been a villain. It affected huge swaths of the country, even where the winter itself wasn’t debilitating. A business contact of mine in the trucking industry told me that, while this winter was not as bad as the previous one, it was still one of the worst on record for delayed and cancelled shipments. We were also affected by the West Coast port slowdown, which slowed economic activity. With that in mind, and looking at the past several years, I expect that 2015 will match the pattern that’s emerged: After a disappointing first quarter, we should see above-trend growth for the rest of the year. Further data to support this forecast can be found in a new measure of economic activity that may paint a better economic picture than GDP alone, called GDP Plus.1 It’s a measure that factors in both GDP and GDI, or gross domestic income, and filters out some of the noise. GDP Plus grew at an annual rate of 1.7 percent in the first quarter and averaged 3 percent growth over the past four quarters. Something I really want to stress is that it’s important that we don’t jump to conclusions—or policy decisions—based on noisy data. As more information comes in, we’ll have a better picture of where the economy is headed. We’ll have two additional months of data going into the next FOMC meeting, which should paint a more complete picture than we have now. Either way, there’s no pressure to decide on the future path of policy today, so I am in “wait and see mode,” with a keen eye on the data. My bottom line on the economy is: The fundamentals are sound. The underlying momentum in job growth remains solid. I expect wage growth to continue to rise and consumer 1 For more information on GDP Plus, see Aruoba et al. (2013) and http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/real-time-center/gdpplus/. 3 confidence to continue to pick up steam. Monetary policy will remain highly accommodative— regardless of what may or may not happen with rates this year—which will spur spending. Being based in San Francisco means I’m seeing evidence of the positives all around; some sectors aren’t so much hot as akin to the sun’s surface. A tech executive recently told me that competition for talent is so fierce that some firms are offering raises of 20 percent or more, along with perks including housing…which is no small amenity in the Bay Area. I think New Yorkers can feel our pain, since San Francisco only recently took the title of “most expensive rental market” in the U.S.—while this is great for property owners, I can say with confidence that the renting population of San Francisco would be delighted if you’d take the title back… Commercial real estate is booming as well, with financing readily available on generous terms. All in all, things continue to look good. Employment They’re looking very good on the jobs front as well. When we talk about maximum employment, one half of the Fed’s mandate, we’re generally referring to the natural rate of unemployment—the lowest rate we consider normal in a healthy economy. Economists typically put it somewhere between 5 and 5½ percent; my own view is that 5.2 percent is the right number. We’re obviously nearing that goal, and I think that we’ll get to, or even below, 5 percent by the end of the year. Which, considering the peak of 10 percent during the worst of the recession, is remarkable progress. But I do see more slack in the labor market than the standard unemployment rate alone indicates. Taking into account the other measures of labor market health—people who are part- time but want full-time work, people who want a job but stopped looking—I think that even when we hit my estimation of the natural rate, there will be some lingering bruises. Thankfully, 4 if my growth forecast comes to pass, we’ll see those workers come back into the fold and reach what I consider to be full employment across multiple indicators by next year. Inflation That’s the unambiguously positive news—or as unambiguous as policymakers are wont to get, as anyone who’s read an FOMC statement can attest to. That does not mean, however, that there aren’t areas that warrant close attention. I said I’m currently hearing two questions quite persistently and the second one is: Why am I confident that inflation will move back up towards the Fed’s 2 percent goal? Given that wage and price pressures have been persistently low, given inflation’s further drop, given low inflation abroad, why would I be optimistic? There are a few factors that convince me. First, recent low inflation numbers are consistent with an economy that, while rebounding, is still not operating on all cylinders. That is, we’re not seeing anything out of the ordinary. Wage growth in particular has been sluggish. There’s been some upward movement, but not what one would consider representative of a fully recovered economy. There are a few reasons for that. My research staff has been studying a feature of the last recession with the imaginative name “downward nominal wage rigidity.” Put simply, employers were loath to cut pay during and after the Great Recession. As a result, wages remained stagnant to make up for the pay cuts that never came, but businesses wanted to impose.2 As the economy picks up, these pent-up wage cuts will dissipate, the gap will close, and we should see wages start to rise more strongly. 2 Daly and Hobijn (2015). 5 This lagging effect of economic recovery on wage growth is a recurring pattern.3 We’ve seen in prior recessions that wage growth doesn’t tend to really pick up until the economy nears full employment. I’m therefore not particularly surprised that the acceleration in wage growth has been slow to materialize. Another thing to consider is that wage growth doesn’t really dictate inflation’s path. When dealing with something as vast and varied as the U.S. economy, it’s important to mine prior experience. To some extent, economics is an active example of William Faulkner’s famous dictum that “The past is never dead. It’s not even past.” History has shown that wage growth has not been a strong indicator of where inflation is going or when it will arrive—even though theory says it should. Obviously, rising wages are healthy for the economy. They’re a positive sign for the recovery and the country. But looking at patterns in prior recessions and the history of monetary policy, they’re not an indicator of overall inflation one way or another. That means that I’m not surprised by their slowness to rebound and I’d be disinclined to lose sleep were they to rebound sharply—at least inasmuch as relates to their contribution to inflation. The second factor to consider is that the past drops in import and oil prices have been holding inflation down, but these effects will dissipate, assuming import and oil prices stay relatively stable. U.S. import prices have been depressed because growth and inflation have generally been low in Europe, China, and Japan, the biggest economies outside the United States. That has led both central banks and governments abroad to take strong policy actions to stimulate their economies. Of course, the textbooks tell us that one result of this will be weakened currency, which means the dollar gains strength in comparison. This is a standard function of monetary 3 Daly and Hobijn (2014). 6 policy. However, it also means that, as the dollar’s value has risen, it has lowered the prices we pay for imported goods and services, which in turn has pushed down the U.S. inflation rate. Energy prices have also dropped dramatically, as every American well knows. The fall in oil prices is having an enormous impact because energy is a significant part of the average consumer’s spending basket. As prices for oil and gas have come down, they’ve also taken inflation with them. Anyone who knows me, or has listened to my speeches, will notice three recurring themes. The first, and foremost, is that monetary policy is data-driven. I am so data-focused that I literally had a T-shirt made to express my personal policy mantra. The second is that I think patterns and history are important indicators of our economic present and future—they are, frankly, just another form of data to be mined. As is the case with the effect that wages have on overall inflation, sometimes the theory doesn’t play out in practice, and history is an eloquent teacher. The third is that I believe policymakers have to be very careful about not reacting to blips. This again is an extension of the “data, data, data” view: We have to look at what’s happening in the economy not just today, not just this month, but over the medium term, analyzing trends and looking at multiple indicators. That’s why we should be very circumspect about reacting to short-term fluctuations in commodity or other import prices. Just as the Fed didn’t immediately intervene in the spring of 2011, when inflationary pressures from oil and import prices were going up, we shouldn’t jump the gun now that they’ve gone down. I take a perspective that looks one or two years ahead, which research shows is the minimum amount of time it takes for monetary policy to have its full effect.4 What I’m considering is what impact those factors that are currently unfolding— movements in the U.S. economy, weakness abroad, oil prices—will have not next week or next 4 Havranek and Rusnak (2013). 7 month, but later this year and the year after that and the year after that. My goal is policy that meets the needs of the path we’re on, not where we’re standing this second. With that in mind, history and experience show that energy price swings leave an imprint on inflation in the short term, but don’t affect underlying inflation rates over the medium term.5 The same holds true for movements in the exchange value of the dollar: They obviously affect inflation in the short run, but they don’t have much of an impact further down the road.6 I’m therefore looking at underlying rates of inflation. Fed economists are frequently accused of neither eating nor driving, because we prefer to measure “core” inflation, which excludes food and energy prices. For the average consumer, those matter a lot—you can’t talk about what a dollar can buy if you don’t look at those products. But for economic trends, and for guiding monetary policy, measures of inflation that remove the most volatile components, like core or “trimmed mean” inflation, give a better lay of the land.7 What I see when I look at the data that strip out the short-term volatility is an economy with good momentum, that’s nearing full employment, with an inflation trend that’s running about 1½ percent. As things continue to get better, I see the strengthening domestic economy driving inflation gradually back to 2 percent. The third factor I want to highlight is that the vicissitudes of foreign economies do not control America’s fate. What happens abroad is clearly important to our economy, and effects can and do easily cross borders. But the current international situation is not unique to this recovery. We’ve seen time and time again that the U.S. can use monetary policy to meet its inflation goals regardless of the direction inflation takes elsewhere around the globe. Given 5 Evans and Fisher (2011) and Liu and Weidner (2011). 6 Gust, Leduc, and Vigfusson (2010). 7 See http://www.dallasfed.org/research/pce/index.cfm. 8 historical precedent, I’m confident that we can control inflation through monetary policy actions now as well. Impact on monetary policy What everyone wants to know, of course, is when we’ll begin liftoff. As I have made possibly overly clear, the exact timing will be driven by the data. They may push us a little in one direction or the other, and there will be a lot of discussion and debate. Every FOMC meeting is on the table. That’s what it means to be data dependent. To be able to even entertain such a move is a tremendously positive sign: It highlights how much the economy’s improved, that unemployment has come way down, and that we may be able to start cutting back on accommodation because of that strength. I recognize that not everyone shares my rosy view, or even thinks that 2015 is a good year to take action. There are a number of people who think we should wait until inflation is very close to, or has crossed, the finish line. Their overarching concern is that a premature rate hike would allow inflation to fall further and possibly derail the recovery. They’re wondering what the rush is. The first thing to point out is that when the Fed raises rates, it will not be instituting tight policy, merely easing back on exceptionally accommodative policy. We’ve had over six years of this stance, and accommodation will continue to characterize monetary policy for some time. Rate rises will likely be gradual, and the Fed’s $4 trillion-plus balance sheet will continue to provide substantial stimulus. We’re not pulling the rug out from underneath the economy. Second is the factor I mentioned previously: Monetary policy, as Milton Friedman famously wrote, has long and variable lags.8 As I said, it usually takes a year or two for policy to have its full effect, so decisions need to be made with that in mind. It’s like driving a car: You take your foot off the gas when approaching an intersection. The data convince me that inflation 8 Friedman (1961). 9 will move back up to our target as the economy strengthens and we close in on full employment. By waiting until we’re face-to-face with 2 percent inflation, we could need to slam on the brakes or even skid through the intersection. Overshooting the mark would force us into a much more dramatic rate hike to reverse course, which could have a destabilizing effect on the markets and possibly damage the economic recovery. The decision to raise rates is actually three decisions: Not just when, but how quickly and how high. I see a safer course in a gradual increase, and that calls for starting a bit earlier. Conclusion The Fed has a lot of decisions ahead, and people have a lot of opinions about those decisions. But the outlook is positive. We’re nearing full employment and inflation is on track to return to our 2 percent goal. We’re not out of the tunnel yet, but we can definitely see the light at the end. And, in case you missed it, policy will be data dependent. Thank you. 10 References Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2014. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips Curve.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 46(s2), pp. 51–93. Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2015. “Why Is Wage Growth So Slow?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015- 01 (January 5). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/january/unemployment-wages-labor-market-recession/ Aruoba, S. Borağan, Francis X. Diebold, Jeremy Nalewaik, Frank Schorfheide, and Dongho Song. 2013. “Improving GDP Measurement: A Measurement-Error Perspective.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 13-16. http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/publications/working-papers/2013/wp13-16.pdf Evans, Charles, and Jonas D.M. Fisher. 2011. “What Are the Implications of Rising Commodity Prices for Inflation and Monetary Policy?” Chicago Fed Letter 286 (May). https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/chicago-fed-letter/2011/may-286 Friedman, Milton. 1961. “The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 69(5), pp. 447−466. Gust, Christopher, Sylvain Leduc, and Robert Vigfusson. 2010. “Trade Integration, Competition, and the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through.” Journal of Monetary Economics 57(3, April), pp. 309– 324. Havranek, Tomas, and Marek Rusnak. 2013. “Transmission Lags of Monetary Policy: A Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(4, December), pp. 39–75. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q4a2.htm Liu, Zheng, and Justin Weidner. 2011. “Does Headline Inflation Converge to Core?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-24 (August 1). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2011/august/headline-inflation-core-convergence/

1 Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance, Singapore, Singapore By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on May 28, 2015 Macroprudential Policy in a Microprudential World Good afternoon and thank you. I first want to say what a pleasure it is to be in Singapore for the first time, and how auspicious to be coming in the year of the 50th National Day. I’m particularly pleased to see the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and the Monetary Authority of Singapore working together to organize this excellent symposium. We’re here today to talk about the evolution of regulatory reform. For central bankers and financial regulators it’s virtually de rigueur to emphasize the importance of taking a macroprudential approach to maintaining financial stability. Given the events of the past decade, this renewed focus on fostering a robust, resilient financial system is entirely appropriate.1 But what does this mean in practice? The answer to this question differs across countries, depending on laws, institutions, and history. There are many countries with deep experience in this arena and many in the audience today have firsthand knowledge of implementing macroprudential policies. Given my own experience, I will take a decidedly U.S.-centric perspective, based on the unique legal, institutional, and market structures of my home country, where macroprudential policies are still relatively new and untested. Before I proceed any further, I should emphasize that my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Now that I have that out of the way, let me be clear what I mean by “financial stability.” I’ll quote the European Central Bank’s definition: “A condition in which the financial system— 1 See, for example, Group of Thirty (2010). 2 comprising financial intermediaries, markets and market infrastructures—is capable of withstanding shocks and the unravelling of financial imbalances, thereby mitigating the likelihood of disruptions in the financial intermediation process which are severe enough to significantly impair the allocation of savings to profitable investment opportunities.”2 It goes without saying that the global financial system did not meet this definition when confronted by the Lehman shock and subsequent events. The resulting near meltdown of the global financial system almost toppled economies around the world. Even with dramatic and, in many cases, unprecedented action by governments and central banks, the fallout from the financial crisis was devastating. I should note that the renewed concern for financial stability represents more a return to the roots of central banking than new-age thinking. The Federal Reserve itself was created from the ashes of the panics and depressions that plagued the U.S. economy in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. In my remarks I will focus on policy options directed at improving financial stability in the United States. These include monetary policy and micro- and macroprudential policies. Lest I bury the lede: My main conclusions are: (1) monetary policy is poorly suited for dealing with financial stability concerns, even as a last resort; (2) a macroprudential, financial system-wide perspective is needed—but in the United States, explicitly macroprudential tools are hard to find; and (3) given (1) and (2), we need to rely primarily on microprudential regulations and supervision to achieve macroprudential goals. A final conclusion is that constant repetition of the words “macroprudential” and “microprudential” will render me unable to speak after about five minutes, so I’ll revert at times to “macro-pru” and “micro-pru” to spare us all. The role of monetary policy in financial stability 2 This is taken from the European Central Bank (ECB) website: https://www.ecb.europa.eu/home/glossary/html/glossf.en.html 3 Let me start with the least controversial topic first: the role of monetary policy in supporting financial stability goals. It has become a mantra in central banking that robust micro- and macroprudential regulatory policies should provide the main lines of defense for threats to financial stability. Nonetheless, there is some concern that these alone may be insufficient. Those who hold these worries conclude that there should be a financial stability goal in the monetary policy mandate. Central bankers themselves regularly refer to the connections between monetary policy and financial stability. At the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the Norges Bank, the Sveriges Riksbank, and elsewhere, policy discussions have frequently highlighted the tradeoffs between, and the appropriate balancing of, macroeconomic and financial stability goals.3 It is noteworthy that the recent heightened focus on the connections between monetary policy and financial stability is a sea change from the consensus before the global financial crisis. Central bankers were then nearly unanimous in their undying faith and fealty to a version of inflation targeting, whereby monetary policy is single-mindedly focused on price stability and, usually more quietly, other macroeconomic goals. Financial stability was viewed as a potentially dangerous distraction, risking the central bank’s attention to, and credibility in, achieving its price-stability mandate. This approach was codified in numerous central bank charters, which in some cases mandated consequences if the inflation goal was not met.4 Despite the clear need to consider all potential tools to avoid a financial crisis, I am unconvinced that monetary policy is one of them. Three observations lead me to this conclusion. First, monetary policy actions offer unfavorable and costly tradeoffs between macroeconomic and financial stability goals. Second, using monetary policy in pursuit of financial stability could 3 See, for example, Bank of England (2013), Norges Bank (2014), Sveriges Riksbank (2014 a). 4 Even at the Federal Reserve, where inflation targeting was never formally adopted, financial stability was rarely discussed at monetary policy meetings during the run-up to the financial crisis. See Fligstein et al. (2014) for a textual analysis of Federal Open Market Committee transcripts in the years before the global financial crisis. 4 undermine the credibility of the central bank’s commitment to its inflation target and unmoor inflation expectations. Third, the great uncertainty about, and long lags between, monetary policy actions and risks to the financial system argue against their playing a meaningful role. Taking these in turn: The first issue is the high cost, in terms of macroeconomic goals such as price stability and full employment, of using monetary policy to address potential risks to financial stability. Under normal circumstances, macroeconomic and financial stability goals are likely to be in harmony. However, in some circumstances, such as when the economy is weak but risks to financial stability appear to be growing, they may come into conflict. In such a case, the concern over financial stability may suggest raising interest rates higher than would be appropriate for macroeconomic goals, resulting in higher unemployment and lower inflation. This problem is starkly illustrated by the real-world tradeoff that Sweden’s central bank, the Sveriges Riksbank, faced in trying to mitigate risks to financial stability using monetary policy. Let me set the stage. In recent years, Sweden’s economy has been in the throes of persistently high unemployment and low inflation. At the same time, household debt has grown rapidly. In response, the Riksbank undertook a tighter monetary policy stance than purely macroeconomic considerations would have called for. In effect, inflation and unemployment goals were subordinated to reduce the risks to financial stability that stemmed from Sweden’s high level of household debt. Lars Svensson has argued that the Riksbank’s monetary policy actions induced a significantly higher rate of unemployment and a sustained shortfall of inflation relative to its target.5 Sweden’s dilemma is not an isolated example; a similar set of issues has faced Norway’s central bank, the Norges Bank.6 5 Svensson (2013). 6 For example, in the Norges Bank’s Monetary Policy Report (2014), they frame their policy decision as follows: “Both the objective of keeping consumer price inflation close to 2.5% and the objective of sustaining capacity 5 The second, related, observation is that policy actions aimed at addressing financial stability could drive inflation far from its target for many years. This could undermine faith in the central bank’s commitment to its inflation target and affect inflation expectations, which have been known to slip when central banks emphasize the role of financial stability when deliberating monetary policy. Figure 1 shows survey data on longer-run measures of inflation expectations for the United States, the euro area, Norway, and Sweden.7 These have remained stable in the United States and the euro area throughout the tumult of the global financial and euro crises, as well as the aggressive monetary policy undertaken by the Federal Reserve and the ECB. In contrast, long-run inflation expectations in Norway and Sweden fell below target when their central banks were highlighting financial stability worries.8 This followed long periods of inflation averaging below target levels and central bank communication that financial stability concerns had been affecting policy decisions. After the Riksbank reversed course in July 2014, inflation expectations rebounded, providing additional evidence to suggest a link between adherence to a financial stability mandate and inflation expectations. The Norges Bank, on the other hand, stayed the course and inflation expectations have remained depressed. So far, it’s unclear how durable this slippage will be. Nonetheless, it is an apt reminder of the potential long-run costs of losing sight of the price stability mandate. The steadfastness of the nominal anchor in most advanced economies has been, and continues to be, a key factor in many central banks’ ability to maintain low and stable inflation during and after the global financial crisis. If the anchor were to permanently slip, utilization in the years ahead could in isolation imply a somewhat lower key policy rate forecast… . On the other hand, a lower key policy rate may increase the risk of a further buildup of financial imbalances.” 7 Figure 1 is based on a chart in Levin (2014). 8 Other surveys show smaller downward movements in long-run inflation expectations. See Norges Bank (2014) and Sveriges Riksbank (2014b). 6 it would wreak lasting damage to central banks’ control over both inflation and economic activity, at considerable cost to the economy. My third observation is that while the costs of using monetary policy to address financial stability risks are clear and sizable, the potential benefits of such actions are much harder to pin down. In part, this uncertainty is due to the difficulty inherent in analyzing and measuring tail risks that could develop in the future. But it also reflects the shortcomings of available economic models, which do not provide much guidance on how monetary policy may affect such risks. 9 Moreover, monetary policy is likely to affect financial stability in myriad ways and even the direction of these effects may depend on the circumstances at hand. For example, Svensson argues that the Riksbank’s policies may have actually increased the already high household debt- to-income ratio, potentially exacerbating financial stability risks rather than mitigating them.10 More generally, once perceived risks to the financial system have begun to emerge, the implications for monetary policy are unclear. Take the current example of the purported effect of low interest rates on excessive risk-taking in financial markets. Does this argue for more rapid policy actions to discourage further risk accumulation? Or does it imply a more gradual course of action to minimize the risk of a sudden adverse market reaction? It’s not at all obvious. Based on the standard principle that highly uncertain policy actions should be used with caution, the ambiguous effects of monetary policy on financial stability are another argument for limiting use of this tool.11 Micro- and macroprudential policy and financial stability 9 See Adrian and Shin (2008) for a model of the interaction of monetary policy and financial stability. 10 Svensson (2013). 11 See Williams (2013) for a recent treatment of the implications of policy uncertainty on optimal policy choice of monetary policy. 7 I am convinced that monetary policy should not be used to address risks to financial stability given the very real and sizable costs, not to mention that the potential benefits are anything but certain. This brings me to micro- and macroprudential regulatory and supervisory policies, which better address financial stability at less cost to other economic goals. One of the key lessons of the recent crisis (and, for that matter, earlier crises) is the need to move beyond a standard microprudential framework. We should instead supplant the focus on individual institutions’ financial soundness, based on traditional measures of regulatory capital, with a more systemic view of the financial system’s overall health. Of course, strong microprudential regulation is a prerequisite for a robust and resilient financial system. The regulatory reforms in the Dodd-Frank Act and Basel III—including larger capital and liquidity-cushion requirements—strengthen the resilience of financial institutions from a microprudential perspective.12 This not only decreases the odds of an idiosyncratic failure, but reduces the contagion risks posed by outside events. However, experience teaches us that this alone may not be sufficient. The macro-pru approach extends the regulatory lens to include the interconnectedness of institutions and markets; correlations in strategies and risks across the financial system; risks of contagion across institutions during panics; and financial markets’ performance under stress.13 As I said earlier, countries around the globe have embraced this macroprudential approach in their various regulatory reforms in different ways. The development of a more macroprudential approach in the United States has been shaped by its particular legal and regulatory constraints, and in large part continues to be built on microprudential foundations. In fact, there are few explicitly macro-pru tools available in the United States of the kind found in many other countries. In addition, the sizable share of finance 12 See Shin (2011) and Yellen (2015). 13 See Bank of England (2009) and Group of Thirty (2010). 8 and credit that occurs outside of banks, in the so-called shadow banking sector, severely limits the ability of regulators to impose macroprudential restrictions like loan-to-value limits. Hence the title of this talk: Macroprudential policy in a microprudential world. Despite these limitations, there are important ways in which a macroprudential perspective is being integrated into the regulatory and supervisory framework in the United States. I’ll list three examples. Of course, this list is far from complete, and it ignores important issues such as resolution of failed institutions and regulation of nonbank financial institutions. But it highlights some of the key successes and challenges in executing macroprudential policies in the United States.14 The first is a detailed examination of the goings-on throughout the financial system—that is, looking beyond just the regulated depository institutions—to identify emerging threats to financial stability before it’s too late. The second is strengthening market structures to reduce the danger of credit markets freezing up during a crisis. And third is the use of stress tests as an indirect, but nonetheless powerful, method to bring a macroprudential outlook to an otherwise microprudential tool. One obvious lesson from the crisis is the need to have a full understanding of the complex interrelationships that permeate the financial ecosystem. Risks in one part of the system can easily and rapidly spill over to other parts, as was seen in 2007-2008, when problems in the shadow banking sector—including investment banks and insurers—threatened to overturn the entire system. Such monitoring and analysis of developments throughout the financial system has become a regular practice at the Fed.15 It has already helped identify latent or emerging risks 14 See Fischer (2015) for a more complete discussion. 15 See Bernanke (2013) and Adrian et al. (2014). 9 to financial stability. One example is the rapid growth of leveraged lending that led to the supervisory guidance to banks issued by U.S. regulators in 2013.16 The second macroprudential effort is the strengthening of market structures critical to the provision of credit.17 These include the recent regulatory reforms regarding money market mutual funds, designed to reduce the risk of flight from these markets during a panic, as we saw in 2008. Other efforts include reforms to the institutional structure around clearing of derivatives, and repurchase agreements aimed at minimizing contagion and market breakdowns during stress. In fact, this is one area where monetary policy does intersect with financial stability.18 In particular, the central bank can play the role of a ready, ultrasafe, short-term borrower, which may reduce the incentive in the financial sector to create risky money-like financial instruments.19 On the other hand, it may increase risks of a run on short-term funding markets during a panic.20 This is an important issue that requires more study. The third incorporation of macro-pru perspectives is the annual stress tests (officially called the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, or CCAR) undergone by large banks.21 The stress tests appear at first glance to be purely micro-pru exercises: They evaluate each firm’s balance sheet in isolation, subject to a set of common aggregate economic shocks—the so-called “severely adverse scenario.” The results, in terms of approving capital plans, are determined on a firm-by-firm basis, rather than by looking at the health of the overall financial system. 16 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and O ffice of the Comptroller of the Currency (2013). 17 See Fischer (2015). 18 See Williams (2014), Sheedy (2014), and Koenig (2013) for further discussion of ways in which monetary policy frameworks can affect financial stability. 19 See Stein (2012), Kashyap and Stein (2012), and Cochrane (2014). 20 Frost et al. (2015). 21 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015). Note that the CCAR process is for the largest banks. In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act requires a separate set of tests for medium- to large-sized banks. 10 But that takes far too narrow a view of the endeavor. In fact, the stress tests sit right at the intersection of the micro- and macroprudential worlds. First, the tests provide a huge amount of information regarding the intricate and numerous connections between financial institutions, along with the correlations in their strategies and exposures. This feeds into the macroprudential monitoring and analysis discussed earlier. Second, the design of the severely adverse scenarios can incorporate aspects of the potential risks to the economy and the financial system that this macro-pru observation has uncovered. These could include overvaluation of asset prices, duration risk at banks, lack of liquidity in bond markets, rapid growth in household debt, excessive risk-taking in shadow banks, foreign shocks...the list goes on. The point is that the stress tests place a penalty—and thereby an implicit shadow cost—on activities that would incur large losses in the test scenario. This creates a disincentive for banks to undertake such pursuits, which should reduce the very activity that threatens financial stability. Despite the macroprudential features already present in the current iterations of stress tests, it’s clear that this is still a work in progress and there is further potential for bringing macroprudential perspectives into the tests. This includes more explicit treatment of the interconnectedness of institutions and the endogeneity of financial and economic conditions. In addition, the tests can be used as a way to measure the overall susceptibility of the financial system to a crisis or panic, rather than a singular focus on individual firms’ capital plans. Conclusion There is a broad consensus that strong and effective micro- and macroprudential policies are needed to assure a robust and resilient financial system. As always, the devil is in the details. For the United States, the situation is somewhat more nuanced owing to the legal, institutional, and regulatory landscape. Microprudential regulation and supervision will for the foreseeable 11 future be the bulwark against systemic risks. Nonetheless, macroprudential approaches are increasingly being integrated into the regulatory framework and this process is sure to continue, albeit in a manner reflecting the unique aspects of the United States. Thank you. 12 References Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang. 2014. “Financial Stability Monitoring.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 601 (February 2013, revised June 2014). http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr601.html Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin. 2008. “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability, and Monetary Policy.” In Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 287–334. Bank of England. 2009. “The Role of Macroprudential Policy: A Discussion Paper.” November. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/other/financialstability/roleofmacroprudent ialpolicy091121.pdf Bank of England. 2013. “Forward Guidance.” Monetary Policy Committee statement, August 7. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Pages/forwardguidance.aspx Bernanke, Ben S. 2013. “Monitoring the Financial System.” Speech at the 49th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, May 10. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20130510a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2015. Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2015: Assessment Framework and Results. March. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20150311a1.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. 2013. “Agencies Issue Updated Leveraged Lending Guidance.” Joint press release, March 21. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20130321a.htm Cochrane, John H. 2014. “Monetary Policy with Interest on Reserves.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 49 (December), pp. 74–108. Fischer, Stanley. 2015. “Nonbank Financial Intermediation, Financial Stability, and the Road Forward,” Speech at the “Central Banking in the Shadows: Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Postcrisis,” 20th Annual Financial Markets Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Stone Mountain, Georgia, March 30. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/fischer20150330a.htm Fligstein, Neil, Jonah Stuart Brundage, and Michael Schultz. 2014. “Why the Federal Reserve Failed to See the Financial Crisis of 2008: The Role of ‘Macroeconomics’ as a Sense-Making and Cultural Frame.” University of California-Berkeley Institute for Research on Labor and Employment (IRLE) Working Paper 111-14 (September). http://www.irle.berkeley.edu/workingpapers/111-14.pdf Frost, Josh, Lorie Logan, Antoine Martin, Patrick McCabe, Fabio Natalucci, and Julie Remache. 2015. “Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-010. Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.010 Group of Thirty. 2010. Enhancing Financial Stability and Resilience: Macroprudential Policy, Tools, and Systems for the Future. New York: The Group of Thirty. http://www.group30.org/images/PDF/Macroprudential_Report_Final.pdf 13 Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein. 2012. “The Optimal Conduct of Monetary Policy with Interest on Reserves.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1), pp. 266–282. Koenig, Evan F. 2013. “Like a Good Neighbor: Monetary Policy, Financial Stability, and the Distribution of Risk.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(2, June), pp. 57–82. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q2a3.htm Levin, Andrew T. 2014. “The Design and Communication of Systematic Monetary Policy Strategies.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 49 (December), pp. 52–69. Norges Bank. 2014. “Monetary Policy Report with Financial Stability Assessment.” March. http://www.norges-bank.no/Upload/Publikasjoner/MPR/MPR_1_14/MPR_1_14.pdf Sheedy, Kevin D. 2014. “Debt and Incomplete Financial Markets: A Case for Nominal GDP Targeting.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 301–361. Shin, Hyun Song. 2011. “Macroprudential Policies beyond Basel III.” Bank for International Settlements Papers 60, December. http://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap60b.pdf Stein, Jeremy C. 2012. “Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, pp. 57–95. Svensson, Lars E.O. 2013. “Some Lessons from Six Years of Practical Inflation Targeting.” Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2013(3), pp. 29–80. http://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/Svensson-paper- -Some-lessons-from-six-years-of-practical-inflation-targeting.pdf Sveriges Riksbank. 2014a. “Monetary Policy Report, February 2014.” http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Rapporter/PPR/2014/140213/rap_ppr_140213_eng.pdf Sveriges Riksbank. 2014b. “Repo Rate Cut by Half a Percentage Point to 0.25 Per Cent.” Press release, July 3. http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Pressmeddelanden/2014/prm_140703_eng.pdf Williams, John C. 2013. “A Defense of Moderation in Monetary Policy.” Journal of Macroeconomics 38 (December), pp. 137–150. Williams, John C. 2014. “Financial Stability and Monetary Policy: Happy Marriage or Untenable Union?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2014-17 (June 9). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2014/june/financial-stability-monetary-policy/ Yellen, Janet L. 2015. “Improving the Oversight of Large Financial Institutions.” Speech at the Citizens Budget Commission, New York, New York, March 3. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20150303a.htm Figure 1: Longer-Run Inflation Expectations 14 Note: Each panel depicts the central bank’s inflation target with a dashed black line and the evolution of inflation expectations with a solid blue line. Inflation expectations for non-U.S. countries is defined as the average of the last two semiannual Consensus Forecast surveys of CPI inflation projections 6 to 10 years ahead. Inflation expectations for the United States for 2007 and after is the 4 quarter average of the 10-year PCEPI inflation forecast from the quarterly Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and an adjusted 10- year CPI inflation forecast from the SPF prior to 2007.
