Governor Lael Brainard At the Community Banking in the 21st Century, The Third Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, Cosponsored by the Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri Share I would like to thank the event organizers for inviting me to participate in this year's Community Banking Research and Policy Conference. Supporting the health and vitality of America's community banks is an important priority for me. Community banks have long been a central provider of finance to Main Street America. Despite the challenging environment of the past several years, community banks have continued to play a significant role in a number of key market segments. Today I want to focus on one of the most important of those segments--the provision of credit to small businesses--and to explore how the traditional role of community banks may be affected by the growing role of online lenders. Some view the growth of online platforms as a challenge to community banks in their traditional core businesses. But it is also possible that the very different strengths of community banks and online lenders could lead to complementarity and collaboration in the provision of credit to small business while recognizing there are important risks that must be managed by banks and borrowers. By working together, lenders, borrowers, and regulators can help support an outcome whereby credit channels are strengthened and the possible risks are being proactively managed. Small Businesses, Small Business Credit, and the U.S. Economy Small businesses make up a large and vitally important segment of the U.S. economy. And their vitality hinges centrally on their access to credit. More than three-fourths of American businesses have fewer than 10 employees and another nearly one-fourth have between 10 and 500 employees. 1 In addition to constituting the vast majority of firms in the United States, small businesses account for about one-half of private-sector employment. 2 And small firms, especially new small firms, are an even greater source of net new jobs in our economy. 3 Thus, ensuring that creditworthy small businesses have access to credit is vitally important. Discussions of small businesses, along with their credit needs, often fail to appreciate the tremendous heterogeneity that exists among these firms and, consequently, the variation in their credit needs. Small businesses include plumbers and electricians, medical and dental offices, dry cleaners and hair salons, restaurants and bodegas, as well as growth-oriented tech start-ups and small manufacturers. They range in size from having zero employees--which accounts for a very large share of small businesses--to the much smaller share of small businesses with a few hundred employees. Although some small businesses aspire to grow quickly, many others are unlikely to grow much at all. While some have audited financial statements, most small businesses do not. Some have assets that can be pledged as collateral, but many do not. Some have a long history of solid, profitable performance, while others have short histories or a mixed track record with regard to profitability. Not surprisingly, there is also considerable variation in the credit needs of small businesses. Some small businesses, particularly very small firms in knowledge or service industries, may have little or no need for credit. Larger small businesses, and those that require a substantial amount of equipment or need to hold sizeable inventories, tend to have greater credit needs. Among small businesses that do need credit, funds may be required for managing cash flow, for purchasing or maintaining property or equipment, for building inventory, or for expanding operations. Depending on the needs, firms may be interested in term loans, capital leases, lines of credit, or credit card loans. The characteristics of a small business and the nature of its credit needs influence the type of lender that is best suited to meeting those needs. Community Banks and Small Business Lending Community banks have long been a primary source of credit for small businesses and today may continue to have the best business model for fulfilling many small business credit needs. 4 But changing technology has led to increased competition in this product space from both larger banks and, in recent years, alternative lenders. Large banking organizations ramped up their small business lending between 2003 and 2008. Although they pulled back from this market segment in the wake of the financial crisis, their small loans to businesses have been gradually rising since 2011. Meanwhile, community banks experienced very modest growth in small loans to businesses during the pre-crisis period, followed by a decline from 2009 through 2013 and a subsequent leveling-off. Consequently, community banks' share of the dollar volume of outstanding small loans to businesses at commercial banks has declined over the past decade. 5 Despite this decline, community banks continue to hold about 50 percent of outstanding small business loans at commercial banks, far in excess of their 20 percent share of commercial banking assets and deposits. 6 To understand the continued strong role played by community banks, it is helpful to look at the differences in small business lending between large and small banks. Although large banks and small banks now provide about equal dollar volumes of small loans to businesses, they tend to provide different types of loans to different types of borrowers, using different underwriting methods. On the one hand, large banks generally have some advantages in the provision of transaction-based lending--that is, lending that relies on hard or quantitative information such as financial ratios, collateral, or credit scores. Small banks, on the other hand, have advantages in the provision of relationship-based lending--lending based on context-specific or qualitative information, such as the owner's character and reliability and the needs of the community. When we use Call Report data to break down commercial banks' loans to businesses by loan size, it is striking that most of the erosion in community banks' share over the past decade has been concentrated among the very smallest loans--those with initial principal amounts less than $100,000. Among these so-called micro loans, the share held by large banks grew from 42 percent in 2005 to 67 percent in 2015. In contrast, large banks' share of larger outstanding small loans to businesses--those with initial principal amounts between $100,000 and $1 million--grew much more modestly, from 39 percent to 43 percent, over the same time period. Business micro loans are typically underwritten based, primarily or exclusively, on credit scores because the small loan size makes it unprofitable to produce such loans using more costly traditional underwriting methods. Thus, the growth in large banks' share of micro business loans is likely attributable to their ability to benefit from economies of scale in credit-score-based lending. Business loans with principal amounts between $100,000 and $1 million are generally not underwritten solely on the basis of credit scores--probably because lenders are not willing to incur the risk associated with larger loan amounts without the benefit of a traditional underwriting approach. For these larger loans--and for smaller loans where the borrower does not qualify based on credit score alone--community banks are often the lender of choice. Their local knowledge and close ties to the communities they serve enable community bankers to establish a deep understanding of local businesses that allows them to prudently provide credit to borrowers who might not otherwise be considered creditworthy. A number of empirical studies confirm that relationships are important factors influencing both the availability and the terms of loans to small businesses. 7 Similarly, when we slice the Call Report data to separate commercial and industrial (C&I) loans from commercial real estate loans, we see that while community banks' share of outstanding small C&I loans dwindled from about 54 percent in 2005 to 40 percent in 2015, their share of small commercial real estate loans has remained relatively stable, moving marginally from 66 percent to 63 percent. Community bankers' intimate knowledge of their communities and their familiarity with local economic conditions provide an advantage relative to large, geographically dispersed banks in underwriting commercial real estate loans. Since large banks are unlikely to become as knowledgeable about local economic conditions or as adept at small business relationship lending as community banks, there may be some limits to their expansion in this segment of lending. Online Alternative Lenders In recent years, online alternative lenders have also made inroads into small business lending. There has been a lot of speculation about the effect of this sector on traditional banks: Will it disrupt their activities, broaden their reach, or maybe a little of both? Focusing specifically on nonbank alternative online lenders or online marketplace lenders, it is important to underscore that the online space is highly dynamic, with a number of business models emerging and evolving. I will touch on two business models in particular, recognizing that as these business models are tested, it is likely that some will prove more successful than others, and that some may adapt in ways that will cause us to revise our segmentation of online alternative lending. 8 First, online balance sheet lenders generally use their own capital to fund small business credit products that are originated either directly on their platforms or indirectly through brokers or referral partnerships. 9 Credit products offered by these lenders are usually short term and include loans, lines of credit, or cash advances. 10 Second, peer-to-peer lending platforms, by contrast, act as intermediaries to connect borrowers with lenders and to assist investors in identifying and purchasing loans that meet their investment criteria. These lenders can be individuals, banks, or institutional investors. 11 Although data are limited on this sector, the data that are available suggest that the various types of online alternative lenders have captured a small but rapidly growing share of lending since the financial crisis. In aggregate, the outstanding portfolio balances of these lenders have doubled every year since the mid-2000s. 12 It is estimated that online alternative lenders originated $12 billion in 2014, with unsecured consumer loans representing $7 billion and small business loans accounting for approximately $5 billion. 13 While this amount represents only a small fraction of U.S. unsecured consumer and small business lending overall, the rate of growth is notable. Much of the growth in online alternative lending has been supported by innovative uses of technology that allow lending platforms to streamline and automate loan applications, expedite underwriting and quickly price risk, and provide loan applicants with quick loan decisions and access to funds. Online alternative lenders use algorithms to provide rapid decisions on loan applications, often taking into account information from a wide range of sources that are not typically involved in bank underwriting of loans. For example, aggregated information for small business underwriting may include data on online banking, accounting, bookkeeping, credit card, shipping, supplier, and social media. So, while traditional banks often focus on personal credit scores for underwriting consumer loans and the majority of small dollar, small business loans, online alternative lenders may analyze a broader variety of data to develop different metrics to measure and price loan risk. Currently, the largest platforms typically offer online or mobile applications that allow consumers and small business owners to easily submit information and aggregate vast amounts of data to complete loan applications. Although rates vary by platform and borrower characteristics, when taking into account origination fees and repayment periods, the average annual cost of borrowing, or APR, associated with loans and credit products offered by online alternative small business lenders tend to be higher than those associated with traditional bank products. 14 Reports suggest that some borrowers are willing to pay a higher price in exchange for an easy application process, a quick decision, and rapid availability of funds. 15 While some see online alternative lenders as a disruptive threat to traditional lenders, banks increasingly are finding ways to partner with online alternative lenders, including through loan purchases and referral agreements. Loan purchases by community banks of loans originated by online alternative lenders have been focused on unsecured consumer debt. As the percentage of unsecured consumer debt outstanding held by community banks has been declining in recent years, several banks have partnered with online alternative lenders to grow and diversify their portfolios of unsecured consumer debt. 16 In contrast to the consumer loan activity, the small business partnerships that have developed so far are largely fee-based referral partnerships. In these partnerships, banks refer to online alternative lenders some of their small business customers who are usually seeking loan amounts that the referring banks may see as too costly to underwrite and service, particularly in the size range below $100,000. 17 For example, in 2014, OnDeck announced small business loan referral partnerships with BBVA Compass and with the ProfitStars Lending Network, part of the Independent Community Bankers of America Preferred Service Provider program. Another type of partnership that has been announced recently involves alternative online lenders and Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) that seek to provide loans to low-income and underserved borrowers and neighborhoods. These partnerships may enable the CDFI to use the online lender's technology platform at no cost or for a reduced cost in order to make underwriting decisions faster and more cost effective. 18 These partnerships are still in the early stages. Risks and Opportunities Across the Federal Reserve System, we are actively following developments in the alternative online lending space and have engaged with several alternative online lenders over the past few years to learn more about the industry, the technology, and the business models as well as engaging with bankers to understand how these developments are affecting their markets. 19 Most recently, several alternative lenders have participated in events where we have joined with community development finance experts to discuss ways to adopt platform lending technology to better serve low- and moderate-income borrowers and small business owners. 20 We want to better understand the opportunities presented by technological advances that may bring new data to bear and help lenders make available credit to a more diverse set of small business borrowers. In some cases, partnerships between community banks and online platforms may help expand access to credit for consumers and small businesses, and help banks retain and grow their customer base. As regulators, we also want to help the various stakeholders anticipate and carefully manage the associated risks. Of course, third-party and vendor risks are factors that banks should always take into account when introducing new products and services. Taking the time to identify and mitigate risks is a prudent step that banks can take to avoid unintended consequences when entering into partnership agreements with alternative online lenders. In addition, banks should consider whether the partnerships provide new opportunities to diversify their portfolios if they are purchasing loans, and whether the partnerships provide opportunities to offer new products that are a good strategic fit for their bank and their customers. 21 It is also important for banks to carefully consider regulatory compliance. When purchasing consumer loans originated by online alternative lenders, banks should examine whether fair lending or unfair or deceptive acts or practices issues result from the origination and underwriting methods used by online alternative lenders. 22 To the extent that the underlying algorithms used for credit decisionmaking use nontraditional data sources, it will be important to ensure that this does not lead to disparate treatment or have a disparate impact on a prohibited basis. Aside from these risks, banks should consider a variety of others, including the implications of credit risk stemming from the purchase of loans and reputational risk if referrals to online alternative lending platforms end badly. The risks I have described so far have primarily been from the perspective of banks considering partnerships with online alternative lenders. Another important set of concerns are focused on the small business borrowers who may be considering online alternative loans. Some have raised concerns about the high APRs associated with some online alternative lending products. Others have raised concerns about the risk that some small business borrowers may have difficulty fully understanding the terms of the various loan products or the risk of becoming trapped in layered debt that poses risks to the survival of their businesses. Some industry participants have recently proposed that online lenders follow a voluntary set of guidelines designed to standardize best practices and mitigate these risks. 23 It is too soon to determine whether such efforts of industry participants to self-police will be sufficient. Even with these efforts, some have suggested a need for regulators to take a more active role in defining and enforcing standards that apply more broadly in this sector. No doubt, ongoing technological advances and the evolving competitive lending landscape will continue to present both challenges and opportunities for community bankers who are deeply committed to the provision of credit to small businesses. I remain confident that community bankers will continue to play a vital role in the small business lending landscape as the respective business models of online platforms and community banks evolve. The advantage that comes from close relationships with their customers and intimate knowledge of their communities that lie at the heart of community banking will continue to provide a powerful advantage in serving the vital banking needs of small businesses, even as the use of nontraditional sources of data and electronic processing platforms may permit faster loan decisions, especially for smaller loan amounts, to a broader set of borrowers. Thank you, again, to the conference organizers for inviting me to this important event and for the opportunity to speak to you today. References Berger, Allen N., and Gregory F. Udell (1995). "Relationship Lending and Lines of Credit in Small Firm Finance," Journal of Business, vol. 68 (July), pp. 351-81. Berger, Allen N., Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein (2005). "Does Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence from the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 76 (May), pp. 237-69. Clark, Patrick (2014). "How Much Is Too Much to Pay for a Small Business Loan?" Bloomberg Businessweek, May 16, www.bloomberg.com/bw/articles/2014-05-16/how-much-is-too-much-to-pay-for-a-small-business-loan. Cole, Rebel A. (1998). "The Importance of Relationships to the Availability of Credit," Journal of Banking and Finance, vol. 22 (August), pp. 959-77. Cole, Rebel A., Lawrence G. Goldberg, and Lawrence J. White (2004). "Cookie Cutter Versus Character: The Micro Structure of Small Business Lending by Large and Small Banks," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, vol. 39 (June), pp.227-51. Cortese, Amy (2014). "Can't Get a Bank Loan? The Alternatives Are Expanding," New York Times, March 5. Cowley, Stacy (2015). "Online Lenders Offer a Faster Lifeline for Small Businesses," New York Times, April 8. Curran, Teresa (2013). " Consideration When Introducing a New Product or Service at a Community Bank ," Community Banking Connections, First Quarter. Federal Reserve System Community Banking Connections Advisory Board (2014). " Introducing a New Product or Service (PDF) ," FedLinks, September. Haltiwanger, John, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2013). "Who Creates Jobs? Small Versus Large Versus Young," The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.95 (May), pp. 347-61. Lipman, Barbara J., and Ann Marie Wiersch (2015). Alternative Lending through the Eyes of "Mom-and-Pop" Small-Business Owners: Findings from Online Focus Groups . Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, August. Mills, Karen G., and Brayden McCarthy (2014). " The State of Small Business Lending: Credit Access During the Recovery and How Technology May Change the Game (PDF) ," Working paper 15-004. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Business School, July. Morgan Stanley Research (2015). Global Marketplace Lending: Disruptive Innovation in Financials. Morgan Stanley, Global Research, May. Petersen, Mitchell A., and Raghuram G. Rajan (1994). "The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence from Small Business Data," Journal of Finance, vol. 49 (March), pp. 3-37. Tracy, Ryan (2015). "Lending Club, Small U.S. Banks Plan New Consumer-Loan Program," Wall Street Journal , February 9. U.S. Department of Treasury (2015). " Public Input on Expanding Access to Credit through Online Marketplace Lending (PDF) ," notice submitted to the Office of the Federal Register. Washington: Department of Treasury. I am grateful to Robin Prager for her assistance in preparing this text. 1. See Bureau of Labor Statistics, " Table G, Distribution of Private Sector Firms by Size Class: 1993/Q1 through 2014/Q1, Not Seasonally Adjusted (.txt) ." Return to text 2. See Bureau of Labor Statistics, " Table F, Distribution of Private Sector Employment by Firm Size Class: 1993/Q1 through 2014/Q1, Not Seasonally Adjusted (.txt) ." Return to text 3. For more on small firms and net new jobs, see Haltiwanger (2013). Return to text 4. For purposes of this talk, I define a community bank as a bank with less than $10 billion in assets, which is either independent or part of a banking organization that also has less than $10 billion in assets. Return to text 5. Small loans to businesses are loans to businesses with initial principal amounts of less than $1 million. Return to text 6. Data on bank assets, deposits, and small loans to businesses were compiled from Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, also known as Call Reports, that banks file with the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council. Data on banks' small loans to businesses are widely used to proxy for bank loans to small businesses because data on the latter are not collected. Return to text 7. Examples of such studies include Petersen and Rajan (1994), Berger and Udell (1995), Cole (1998), Berger and others (2005), and Cole and others (2004). Return to text 8. As the industry has evolved, alternative online lenders have increasingly been referred to as marketplace lenders, a term that helps emphasize the growing institutional investor base of the sector. So while peer-to-peer lenders initially allowed individual borrowers to connect with individual lenders, individual lenders increasingly are being replaced by institutional investors who are turning to online marketplace lenders for investment opportunities. Because some balance sheet lenders are now originating small business loans for institutional investors to purchase, balance sheet lenders are also often referred to as marketplace lenders. In the Treasury Department's recent Request for Information, they defined online marketplace lending as "the segment of the financial services industry that uses investment capital and data-driven online platforms to lend either directly or indirectly to small businesses and consumers." (See U.S. Treasury, 2015, p. 6.) Return to text 9. Online balance sheet lenders include companies such as OnDeck, Square Capital, Fundation, CAN Capital, Kabbage, and PayPal Credit. Return to text 10. Cash advances, sometimes known as merchant cash advances, capital advances, or business cash advances, are credit products that allow businesses to convert future credit card or payment account receivables into capital (Lipman and Wiersch, 2015). Return to text 11. Peer-to-peer lending platforms include companies such as Prosper, Lending Club, and Funding Circle. Return to text 12. See Mills and McCarthy (2014, p. 42). Return to text 13. For information on online alternative lenders, see U.S. Treasury (2015, p. 6); for more on unsecured consumer loans and small business loans, see Morgan Stanley Research (2015). Return to text 14. For example, Mills and McCarthy (2014, p. 44) note that many alternative lending platforms charge yields ranging from 30 to 120 percent of the loan value, depending on the size, term duration, and risk profile of the loan. Several alternative online lenders advertise lower rates, but industry sources note that lending is rarely done at those rates. Return to text 15. For example, see Clark (2014), Cortese (2014), Crowley (2015), and Mills and McCarthy (2014, p. 46). Return to text 16. In 1994, banks and thrifts with less than $10 billion in assets held about 69 percent of U.S. consumer loans, according to an analysis of regulatory filings by SNL Financial. That share dropped to 19 percent in 2004 and 9 percent in 2014 (Tracy, 2015). Recently, BancAlliance, a consortium of approximately 200 community banks, has partnered with Lending Club to purchase consumer loans originated on Lending Club's platform and the Western Independent Bankers, a consortium of more than 160 independent and community banks, have entered into a partnership with Prosper to encourage member banks to use Prosper's platform to facilitate consumer loans for their customers. Also, Lending Club and Citi Community Capital, the community development lending and investing division of CitiGroup, recently announced a partnership to facilitate up to $150million in consumer loans designed to provide more affordable credit to underserved, lower-income borrowers in low- and moderate-income communities. Return to text 17. As an indication of the demand for small dollar loans on the part of small businesses, the Joint Small Business Credit Survey conducted in 2014 by the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Atlanta, Cleveland, and Philadelphia found that more than one-half of small business loan applicants sought $100,000 or less in credit. (For more information, the survey report is available at www.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/SBCS-2014-Report.pdf . ) Return to text 18. For example, in June 2015, Lending Club and the Opportunity Fund, a California-based CDFI microenterprise lender, announced a partnership intended to provide $10 million in loans over a period of five months to 400 small businesses in underserved areas of California (for more information, see www.opportunityfund.org/media/blog/clinton-announces-partnership-between-opportunity-fund-and-lending-club). In 2012, the Association for Enterprise Opportunities (AEO) launched the TILT Forward platform, an online lending platform that is powered by OnDeck's technology and can be used by AEO's network of nonprofit community lenders and other community-based organizations to reach underserved entrepreneurs (more information is available at www.tiltforward.com). Return to text 19. In April 2014, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York hosted "Filling the Gaps: Summit on Small Business Credit Innovations." and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco will be hosting the Consumer Financial Services Revolution in November 2015. Return to text 20. For example, in March 2014, the Board and the Federal Reserve Banks of New York and San Francisco convened a small group of thought leaders for a discussion on the challenges and opportunities presented by crowdfunding investments as a significant source of capital for the community development industry; and in March 2015, we cohosted the Financial Innovations Roundtable with the University of New Hampshire's Carsey School of Public Policy and brought together representatives from banks, CDFIs, mission-driven lenders, and small business online alternative lenders to talk about opportunities for collaboration, the challenges of scaling up small business lending, and potential consumer and safety and soundness regulatory issues facing partnerships between regulated financial institutions and alternative online lenders. As the sector grows and evolves, we will continue to monitor the development of online alternative lenders and the risks and opportunities that they may have for a range of stakeholders. Return to text 21. If a bank is considering a referral partnership, the following questions could help identify potential risks: Do existing customers have a need for the product or are there less expensive products that would better serve borrower's needs? Are the features, risks, and terms of the products offered through the referral program explained clearly and conspicuously, or are they buried in a lengthy document full of "legalese" that makes it difficult for borrowers to make a truly informed choice? Finally, are the products offered through the referral partnership consistent with what would be recommended to a family member? (See Curran, 2013.) Return to text 22. There are several regulatory compliance-related questions that banks should consider. For example, have the loans offered or the lending platform to be partnered with been reviewed for compliance with applicable federal and state laws? Have the loans originated by the partnering lending platform been reviewed from a consumer fairness standpoint? When assessing referral partnerships, have any issues been identified that would lead to disparate treatment of customers if banks selectively refer customers to online alternative lending partners? (See Federal Reserve System Community Banking Connections Advisory Board, 2014). Return to text 23. For example, see www.responsiblebusinesslending.org . Return to text Last Update: September 30, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the "North America's Place in a Changing World Economy," 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. Share The will-they-or-won't-they drumbeat has grown louder of late. To remove the suspense, I do not intend to make any calendar-based statements here today. Rather, I would like to give you a sense of the considerations that weigh on both sides of that debate and lay out the case for watching and waiting. 1 The Outlook Domestic real activity has proven reassuringly resilient. Most notably, the labor market has continued to improve this year, pushing the economy closer to full employment. While monthly nonfarm payroll employment growth looks to have slowed over the past three months to a 167,000 monthly pace, so far this year it has averaged about 200,000. With these gains more than sufficient to absorb trend growth in the labor force, they have led to gradual increases in resource utilization. At 5.1 percent in September, the unemployment rate has declined 1/2 percentage point since December. Alternative broader gauges of unemployment--which include individuals who are marginally attached to the labor force and employees working part-time for economic reasons--have also shown steady improvement this year. Even so, a variety of evidence suggests there may be some distance to go to achieve full employment. Although the unemployment rate is near longer-run norms, other measures of labor utilization are not. The labor force participation rate remains materially below the pre-recession trend, even after adjusting for demographics. 2 And the share of employees working part time for economic reasons remains a full percentage point above the pre-recession level of around 3 percent, despite considerable recent improvement. Even if there has been some trend increase in part-time work, it seems unlikely to account for all of the difference between current levels and pre-recession levels. 3 Perhaps the most striking evidence in support of continued labor market slack is the absence of any acceleration in wages and prices. Our main gauges of wage inflation suggest that labor compensation is increasing at a pace of about 2 to 2-1/4 percent, little different from the rate of increase over the past several years. Indeed, the lack of wage acceleration is likely one of the key reasons that many Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants have revised down their estimates of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate. Most recently, a majority of participants moved their estimates below 5 percent. 4 By comparison, in September 2012, the central tendency of estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate ranged from 5.2 to 6.0 percent. More broadly, domestic real activity appears likely to continue to grow at a moderate pace. Domestic final sales, which exclude net exports and the volatile category of inventory investment, increased at an annual rate of 2-3/4 percent in the first half of the year, and recent indicators suggest a similar pace in the second half. Perhaps most notable, personal consumption expenditures are estimated to have increased at an annual rate of a little over 3 percent in the three months ending in August, and auto sales moved up to a strong 18.1 million unit annualized pace in September. Thus, even though equity prices are down this year, continued job growth, lower gas prices, rising house prices and some loosening in consumer credit look likely to support consumer spending over the second half of the year. Moreover, domestic investment also looks to be increasing at a moderate pace despite the drag from the energy sector. New orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods have turned up recently, pointing to positive equipment investment going forward, and investment in nonresidential buildings looks to have risen noticeably in the middle of the year. While investment in energy-related structures will likely move lower over the second half of the year in response to the most recent step-down in oil prices, the decline should be smaller than the sharp decline in the first half. Importantly, recent data suggest that the gradual recovery in housing continues. Single-family building permits were close to an annual rate of 700,000 units in August, up nearly 5 percent from the fourth quarter of last year. The improvement in single- family housing is welcome after having been somewhat slow to materialize. Even so, current levels remain below what would be suggested by fundamentals, such as population growth. While private consumption and investment thus appear to be on reassuringly solid trajectories, growth in government expenditures on goods and services is likely to remain tepid. Combined purchases at the federal, state, and local levels rose at an annual rate of only 1-1/4 percent in the first half of the year, and modest growth in revenue at the state and local level suggest continued limited gains going forward. In addition, spending restrictions in the Budget Control Act and the winding down of defense spending related to Afghanistan and Iraq have led to restraint at the federal level, although there is some uncertainty on the federal budget outlook. In contrast to the considerable progress in the labor market, progress on the second leg of our dual mandate has been elusive. To be clear, I do not view the improvement in the labor market as a sufficient statistic for judging the outlook for inflation. A variety of econometric estimates would suggest that the classic Phillips curve influence of resource utilization on inflation is, at best, very weak at the moment. The fact that wages have not accelerated is significant, but more so as an indicator that labor market slack is still present and that workers' bargaining power likely remains weak. Overall inflation has been subdued, running persistently below our 2 percent target. The personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index increased only 0.3 percent over the 12 months ending in August. Much of the weakness in this index can be explained by the drop in oil and energy prices over the past year. Assuming energy prices stabilize going forward, as futures markets suggest, then energy should be a neutral or perhaps even a small positive influence on inflation next year. But inflation has been stubbornly low, even excluding energy prices. Over the 12 months ending in August, core PCE prices, which exclude the often volatile categories of food and energy, increased 1.3 percent, and the 12-month change in core prices has been around 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent since the beginning of 2013. The persistence of the weakness in core price inflation deserves attention. For the post-recession period as a whole, low levels of resource utilization surely accounted for a substantial part of the weakness. But resource utilization has increased dramatically since 2009, and core price inflation has remained quite low. A sizable decline in import prices over the past year has also contributed. As a result of the sharp increase in the dollar over the past year or so, prices for non-oil imports fell at an annual rate of a little over 4 percent in the first half of the year and look to decline a further 2 percent at an annual rate over the second half. Estimates suggest the dollar's rise will hold down core inflation between 1/4 and 1/2 percentage point this year, restraint that would wane if the dollar stabilized going forward. However, recent weakness is not completely explained by import prices. Services prices excluding energy, which are generally relatively little affected by changes in the dollar, have also shown no sign of acceleration in recent years. Instead, inflation in this category has moved lower over the past year. In August, the 12-month change in non-energy services prices was 2 percent, 1/4 percentage point lower than the pace of increase from 2012 through the middle of 2014. The outlook for inflation is critical for purposes of assessing progress toward our 2 percent goal, since monetary policy operates with a lag. In this regard, the gravitational force of long-term inflation expectations is critically important. Although the story on this front is mostly reassuring, it warrants monitoring. Projections from the Survey of Professional Forecasters suggest that longer-run inflation expectations--which appear to be most relevant for predicting future inflation--have remained at 2 percent since the end of 2012. Household surveys, such as University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, suggest that households' longer-run inflation expectations have remained in a narrow range throughout the crisis and the recovery, although they have stayed in the lower end of that range over the past year. In contrast, market-based measures of inflation compensation, such as inflation swaps and the difference between nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury bond yields, have declined noticeably over the past year and a half at longer-term horizons. Of course, factors other than inflation expectations, such as changes in liquidity premiums and inflation risk premiums, may be at play. Although the balance of evidence thus suggests that long-term inflation expectations are likely to have remained fairly steady, the risks to the near-term outlook for inflation appear to be tilted to the downside, given the persistently low level of core inflation and the recent decline in longer-run inflation compensation, as well as the deflationary cross currents emanating from abroad--a subject to which I now turn. Over the past 15 months, U.S. monetary policy deliberations have been taking place against a backdrop of progressively gloomier projections of global demand. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has marked down 2015 emerging market and world growth repeatedly since April 2014. In the second half of 2014, persistently weak aggregate demand in Japan and the Euro Area led to heightened deflationary pressures. The policy response to these pressures and the anticipated divergence between the policy trajectory in these economies and the United States contributed to a 10 percent appreciation in the dollar in inflation-adjusted terms through the spring of this year, pushing down net exports and restraining activity in the United States. Net exports subtracted nearly 1 percentage point from the annual rate of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the first part of the year, and the most recent trade data suggest another substantial subtraction in the third quarter. More recently, weakness in foreign demand has extended to emerging market economies, which now account for about half of world output and have been an important source of growth for more than the past decade. Growing recognition of this weakness pushed the dollar up further to 15 percent above its level last summer, and has contributed to a more general tightening of financial conditions in the past few months. Much of the focus has been on China, whose large size and double-digit growth rate put it at the center of a powerful global commodity super-cycle over the past decade. Consequently, the challenges China faces today are raising questions about emerging market growth prospects more broadly. Most immediately, China's buildup of past property, and more-recent stock market, bubbles together with a steep run-up in business debt levels and questions about the policy stance and the outlook have raised concerns about downside risks. In weighing the implications for the U.S. outlook, it would be misleading to focus narrowly on the direct effect of U.S.-Chinese bilateral trade alone. Many commodity-exporting countries that have depended heavily on Chinese demand are adjusting with difficulty to the recent sharp commodity price declines. After increasing at an average rate of nearly 5-1/2 percent over the period from 2003 through 2011, GDP growth in emerging market commodity exporters is projected to be only 3-1/2 percent this year. Projected growth going forward has also been marked down materially. Moreover, more developed economies, such as Mexico and Canada, our most important trading partners, have also been affected, with Canadian GDP declining in the first two quarters of the year. 5 In addition, many non-commodity-producing East Asian economies are closely tied to China through trade and investment. Because of these ties, and for other idiosyncratic reasons, growth in East Asian economies has been weak so far this year. Growth in emerging Asia economies outside of China that are important destinations of U.S. exports slipped to 2-1/2 percent in the first half of the year, well below a trend rate of close to 5 percent. Downgrades to foreign growth affect the U.S. outlook through several channels. First, weak growth abroad reduces demand for U.S. exports. Second, the expected divergence in U.S. growth increases demand for U.S. assets, putting upward pressure on the dollar, which, in turn, weighs on net exports. The estimated effect of dollar appreciation on net exports has been shown to be substantial and to persist for several years. 6 Weak demand weighs on global commodity prices, which, together with the effects on the dollar, restrains U.S. inflation. Finally, the anticipation of weaker global growth can make market participants more attuned to downside risks, which can reduce prices for risky assets, both abroad and in the United States--as we saw in late August--with attendant effects on consumption and investment. Over the past year, a feedback loop has transmitted market expectations of policy divergence between the United States and our major trade partners into financial tightening in the U.S. through exchange rate and financial market channels. Thus, even as liftoff is coming into clearer view ahead, by some estimates, the substantial financial tightening that has already taken place has been comparable in its effect to the equivalent of a couple of rate increases. Looking ahead, one of the biggest sources of known uncertainty to the U.S. outlook is whether this foreign weakness fades or intensifies. A plausible baseline scenario might include a soft landing in China and growth in other emerging markets moving gradually back up to underlying trends. Of course, it is possible that a recovery in emerging market growth occurs sooner than in the baseline, such that the U.S economy moves modestly more quickly toward our goals. However, demand in emerging markets could also fall short of such a baseline. China is only part-way through challenging economic adjustments and financial market reforms, including reform of its exchange rate regime, debt deleveraging, and rebalancing of its economy toward more consumer-driven growth. During this process, market participants may have less accuracy in forecasting developments in China relative to many other major economies due to less clarity regarding the macroeconomic data and the policy framework. A more negative assessment of underlying Chinese growth fundamentals or its exchange rate regime would likely affect other important economies in the region, as well as commodity-producing economies, pushing global demand down further. In turn, expectations of additional weakness in global demand could have important effects on the exchange rate of the dollar, the valuation of risky assets in the United States, and U.S. inflation, moving the economy further from our goals. Policy Considerations There is a risk that the intensification of international cross currents could weigh more heavily on U.S. demand directly, or that the anticipation of a sharper divergence in U.S. policy could impose restraint through additional tightening of financial conditions. For these reasons, I view the risks to the economic outlook as tilted to the downside. The downside risks make a strong case for continuing to carefully nurture the U.S. recovery--and argue against prematurely taking away the support that has been so critical to its vitality. These risks matter more than usual because the ability to provide additional accommodation if downside risks materialize is, in practice, more constrained than the ability to remove accommodation more rapidly if upside risks materialize. The asymmetry in risk management stems from the combination of the likely low current level of the neutral real interest rate and the effective lower bound. Let me take each in turn. First, casual empiricism would suggest that we are experiencing a period of unusually low rates not only in the United States but also at the global level. Ten-year sovereign bond yields in G-7 economies excluding Japan currently range from just above 1/2 percent to just above 2 percent--well below the average range of 4 1/2 to 5 percent in the decade before the financial crisis. 7 This observation receives substantial support from a number of rigorous empirical papers over the past year that have estimated the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate to be lower now than previously. 8 The projection of a relatively low neutral rate over the next few years also receives some weight in the September 2015 Summary of Economic Projections. Most FOMC participants lowered their estimate of the appropriate target level for the federal funds rate in the long run, and a majority of participants now forecast a level no higher than 3.62 percent--down from 4.12 percent in September 2012. 9 A lower equilibrium funds rate implies a higher probability of policy being constrained by a lower bound for nominal interest rates. Second, the ability of policymakers to react to unexpected shocks using conventional tools remains highly asymmetric in the neighborhood of an effective lower bound. From the perspective of risk management, in today's circumstances, we have considerably greater latitude to adjust the path of policy in response to inflation that exceeds current forecasts than we have to provide additional accommodation in response to additional adverse shocks. Consider two possible scenarios. First, many observers have suggested that the economy will soon begin to strain available resources without some monetary tightening. Because monetary policy acts with a lag, in this scenario, high rates of resource utilization may lead to a large buildup of inflationary pressures, a rise in inflation expectations and persistent inflation in excess of our 2 percent target. However, we have well-tested tools to address such a situation and plenty of policy room in which to use them. Moreover, the persistently deflationary international environment, the gradual pace of increases in U.S. resource utilization, the estimated small effect of resource utilization on inflation, the likely low level of neutral interest rates, and the persistence of inflation below our 2 percent target suggests this risk remains modest. Financial markets appear to agree, as five-year inflation compensation is well below 2 percent. Now, take the alternative risk: that the underlying momentum of the domestic economy is not strong enough to resist the deflationary pull of the international environment. A further step-down in global demand growth and a further strengthening in the dollar could increase the already sizable negative effect of the global environment on U.S. demand, pushing U.S. growth back to, or below, potential. Progress toward full employment and 2 percent inflation would stall or reverse. With limited ability to ease policy, it would be more difficult to move the economy back on track. Indeed, many central banks in advanced economies have tightened policy since the financial crisis, prompted by improving domestic activity. In these cases, the tightening was reversed as the outlook evolved. Given the current uncertainty, we should put some weight on the risk of following this pattern. Indeed, market participants put the probability of returning to the zero lower bound within two years of liftoff at 20 percent. 10 To be fair, the past few years have demonstrated the capacity and will of central banks in many jurisdictions to deploy unconventional monetary policy tools, including quantitative and credit easing, forward guidance, and negative rates. That said, resorting to such tools is not without costs and uncertainties. We should not take the continued strength of domestic demand growth for granted. Although the outlook for domestic demand is good, global forces are weighing on net exports and inflation, and the risks from abroad appear tilted to the downside. Our economy has made good progress toward full employment, but sluggish wage growth suggests there is some room to go, and inflation has remained persistently below our target. With equilibrium real interest rates likely to remain low for some time and policy options that are more limited if conditions deteriorate than if they accelerate, risk-management considerations counsel a stance of waiting to see if the risks to the outlook diminish. References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). " Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall), pp. 197-275. Cajner, Tomaz, Dennis Mawhirter, Christopher Nekarda, and David Ratner (2014). " Why Is Involuntary Part-Time Work Elevated? " FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 14. Erceg, Christopher J., and Andrew T. Levin (2014). " Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 46 (October), pp. 3-49. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future," NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. International Monetary Fund (2015). World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices (PDF) . Washington: IMF, October. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). " What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF) " Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). " Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest ," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (4), pp. 1063-70. Valletta, Rob, and Catherine van der List (2015). " Involuntary Part-Time Work: Here to Stay? " FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-19. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June. I am grateful to Andrew Figura for his assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Much of the decline in recent years is due to the aging of the baby boom cohort. But even holding demographics constant, the participation rate is considerably lower now than before the recession, suggesting it is cyclically depressed. Aaronson and others (2014) find that demographics can explain only about half of the decline in the participation rate since the end of 2007. Thus, it may be a while further before the participation rate fully reacts to the full amount of improvement in labor market conditions that we have seen thus far, since wage growth has remained low, and the decision to participate in the labor force may respond with a lag to cyclical improvements. See Aaronson and others (2014) and Erceg and Levin (2014). Return to text 3. Changes in the structure of labor demand, such as a shift toward occupations or industries characterized by flexible and part-time hours, may have led to an increase in the equilibrium level of part-time work. For more on this issue, see Cajner and others (2014) and Valletta and van der List (2015). If workers combine two or more part-time jobs to arrive at a full-time workweek, part-time employment could be elevated with average weekly hours at normal levels. But the logistical costs of multiple job holding make such an outcome unlikely, and in recent years elevated part-time employment has not coincided with an increase in official estimates of multiple job holding. Return to text 4. See "Figure 3.B, Distribution of Participants' Projections for the Unemployment Rate, 2015-18 and over the Longer Run," in the Summary of Economic Projections, addendum to the minutes of the September 2015 FOMC meeting (PDF) , released on October 8, 2015. Return to text 5. For more detail on the recent experiences and likely prospects of commodity exporters, see "Where Are Commodity Exporters Headed? Output Growth in the Aftermath of the Commodity Boom," chapter 2 of the International Monetary Fund's (IMF, 2015) World Economic Outlook (PDF) . Return to text 6. Looking across a broad set of countries, the IMF (2015) estimates that a 10 percent appreciation in the real exchange rate will cause an eventual 1.5 percentage point reduction in the contribution of net exports to real GDP, with effects lasting for several years (see chapter 3, " Exchange Rates and Trade Flows: Disconnected? (PDF) "). Return to text 7. In Japan, the level is currently around 0.3 percent, down from an average of 1.5 percent in the decade before the crisis. Return to text 8. Building on the work of Laubach and Williams (2003), both Hamilton, Harris, Hatzius, and West (2015) and Kiley (2015), for example, have recently constructed alternative estimates of the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate. While these papers differ in their estimates and acknowledge a considerable amount of uncertainty, they all weigh in on the side of a relatively low equilibrium federal funds rate over the next few years. Return to text 9. See "Figure 3.E, Distribution of Participants' Judgments of the Midpoint of the Appropriate Target Range for the Federal Funds Rate or the Appropriate Target Level for the Federal Funds Rate, 2015-18 and over the Longer Run," in the Summary of Economic Projections, addendum to the minutes of the September 2015 FOMC meeting (PDF) , released October 8, 2015. Return to text 10. See the July 2015 " Responses to Survey of Market Participants (PDF) ," from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Return to text Last Update: October 12, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Outreach Meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Share Watch live On behalf of the Federal Reserve Board, I want to thank everyone for participating in the fifth outreach meeting held as part of the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) review process. I also want to thank President Charles Evans for hosting today. Under EGRPRA, the federal banking agencies are required to conduct a joint review of our regulations every 10 years. At the Federal Reserve, we view the current review as a timely opportunity to step back and look for ways to reduce regulatory burden, particularly for smaller or less complex banks that pose less risk to the system. Our ultimate goal is to identify outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulations and to take action to address those burdens. I was pleased to participate, along with colleagues from the other banking agencies, in the launch meeting held last November in Los Angeles. Since that time, staff across the Federal Reserve System, including here in Chicago, have been hard at work evaluating comments and identifying actions that will meaningfully reduce burden. In some cases, where we have authority and the benefit is straightforward, we have taken action. In other cases, which may require interagency agreement and changes to rules, the process will take longer. In still other cases, we may need to look to Congress to take action. I want to spend the rest of my time this morning highlighting those areas that hold the greatest promise to reduce undue regulatory burden, especially for our community banks. 1 Regulatory Reports We have heard the request to achieve a meaningful reduction in the burden associated with regulatory reporting, and we are taking action. In early September, the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) detailed steps regulators are taking to streamline and simplify regulatory reporting requirements for community banks and reduce their reporting burden. As an initial step to streamline some reporting requirements, the federal banking agencies, under the auspices of the FFIEC, are seeking comment on proposals to, in part, eliminate or revise several Call Report data items. Additionally, the federal banking agencies are evaluating the feasibility and merits of creating a streamlined version of the quarterly Call Report for community banking organizations. The Federal Reserve Board is conducting a separate review of the FR series of reports for holding companies to identify unnecessary burden. Of course, any changes to the bank Call Report forms will likely be reflected with corresponding changes to the Bank Holding Company FR Y-9 reports, but there are additional reports for holding companies that are included in our broader review. Small Bank Holding Company Policy Threshold The Federal Reserve Board has taken action to address burden concerns from community banks by expanding the universe of small bank holding companies covered by the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement. In December 2014, following congressional action, the Federal Reserve amended its regulation to raise the total asset threshold for the policy statement's applicability from $500 million to $1 billion in total consolidated assets. As a result, more than 700 holding companies (that are not engaged in complex activities) are now exempt from consolidated regulatory capital requirements, reducing both the cost of capital and reporting requirements for small depository institutions. 2 Community Reinvestment Act The Federal Reserve Board and the other federal banking agencies have received numerous constructive comments on ways to update the implementation of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) to better reflect changes in the ways banking services are being provided and banks are interacting with their communities. A few of the most common issues raised include those related to whether the definition of Assessment Areas should be revised because of changes in technology that allow banks to gather deposits and make loans far from existing branches and deposit-taking ATMs, whether the asset thresholds that determine the examination methods for banks of different sizes should be raised to lessen regulatory burden on smaller banks, and whether the performance tests should be revised to give more meaningful consideration to community development activities. These are important issues, and we are looking at a wide range of suggestions and options, which may mean it will take us time to distill the comments and formulate effective policy responses in collaboration with the other banking agencies. In the meantime, I urge you to continue providing specific suggestions to help inform our interagency deliberations. Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering We have heard from many community bankers that they would welcome guidance that would assist them in meeting their compliance obligations under the Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money Laundering rules in more cost-effective ways. Accordingly, we are taking a careful look at options that might reduce exam frequency for lower-risk banks and might enable small banking institutions to share expert resources. There may also be an opportunity to align insider abuse Suspicious Activity Report filing requirements with other filing requirements applicable to all other known or suspected criminal violations. Expediting and Improving Applications The Federal Reserve Board has received comments regarding the amount of time it takes to process applications. Last year, we started publishing a semiannual report that improves the transparency of the applications process by providing information on the applications that have been approved, denied, and withdrawn and the length of time to review applications. 3 We are currently reviewing our rules to see whether there are ways to expedite the applications review process by delegating additional matters to the Reserve Banks. In addition, we have received suggestions regarding possibly broadening the measure of the degree of competition in a banking market to include the activities of Internet banks. 4 Doing so would reduce the market shares of other banks and the measures of local market concentration, which in turn may help community banks in rural areas that are engaged in acquisitions. Appraisal Thresholds At past EGRPRA outreach meetings, participants have raised concerns that the requirement to obtain an appraisal on small dollar real estate loans is a significant burden, particularly in rural areas. The prudential regulators' rules issued under the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA) currently do not require the use of a state-certified or state-licensed appraiser for federally related transactions of $250,000 or less, or real estate secured business loans of $1million or less when the primary source of repayment is not sale proceeds or rental income from the property. The statute allows the agencies to determine the appropriate threshold below which an appraisal by a state-certified or state-licensed appraiser is not required if that threshold would not represent a threat to the safety and soundness of financial institutions. The agencies adopted these two thresholds in 1994. Given the passage of time and changes in the condition of real estate markets, I believe it is appropriate for the agencies to again review the current thresholds. In particular, the agencies need to assess whether the thresholds appropriately address collateral and credit risk in small dollar real estate loans and are reasonably balanced against the cost and time to obtain an appraisal, particularly in rural markets where fewer appraisers may be available. Of course, the agencies would need to consider whether any revision to the $250,000 threshold level would provide reasonable protection for consumers. Board staff is evaluating the appropriateness of the thresholds in the prudential appraisal regulation. We will work with other agencies in completing this analysis. 5 Simplified Capital for Small Institutions At previous outreach meetings, community banks have asked whether the Federal Reserve can exempt smaller financial institutions from meeting all of the revised capital requirements. Based on lessons from the crisis, bank capital requirements were significantly revised to make the requirements more risk-sensitive and raise the quality and quantity of capital. In some instances, smaller institutions have indicated that the degree of categorization of risks, the attendant recordkeeping and systems changes, and the increased reporting burden on their institutions are generating significantly increased compliance costs that are not commensurate with the risk profile of the institution. For smaller and less complex community banks, the benefit from this increased risk sensitivity may be outweighed by the burden of increased complexity, and a commensurate improvement in safety and soundness of the institution may be achievable by simply holding a larger cushion of capital measured against a simpler definition of assets. To be workable, such an approach would need to provide a robust measure of the financial institution's capital health and meet the objectives of the Collins amendment. We are currently exploring possible options. 6 Stress Tests for Regional Banks One additional item that I would consider worthy of congressional consideration in the EGRPRA context would be the stress tests currently performed by smaller, regional lenders, or those above $10 billion in assets but less than $50 billion in assets. It might be worthwhile to examine the prudential benefits--the additional insights gained by us as supervisors as well as by the banks' senior managers from the stress tests--against the opportunity costs in terms of compliance measures and the allocation of management and examination resources for both supervisors and those banks. And I look forward to discussing this in the coming months. In considering these issues, it is also important to underscore that we are already tailoring our expectations for the stress tests to the lower risk profile of smaller banking institutions, and the stress tests currently performed by these institutions should in no way be designed to mimic the more comprehensive and extensive stress testing program for larger and more complex institutions, particularly the Comprehensive Capital and Analysis Review (CCAR) program. Examination Cycle We are also examining whether there may be scope to extend examination cycles for community banks with lower risk profiles and in some areas have already taken action. For example, the Federal Reserve recently revised our consumer compliance examination frequency policy to lengthen the time frame between on-site consumer compliance and CRA examinations for lower-risk community banks with less than $1 billion in total consolidated assets. Another item to evaluate includes potentially increasing the number of healthy, well-managed community institutions that could qualify for an 18-month examination cycle by raising the threshold from its current $500 million level. In addition to reducing the examination burden on many community banks, this would also allow the federal banking agencies to better allocate resources to those banks that pose more significant supervisory concerns. Volcker Rule Finally, EGRPRA may provide a good opportunity to reevaluate whether community banks should be subject to the Volcker rule. Exempting banks with less than $10 billion in assets from its requirements would significantly help reduce burden on smaller institutions. 7 Conclusion The list that I have laid out here is meant to be suggestive, not comprehensive. I look forward to hearing your views on these issues as well as any additional suggestions you believe to be worthy of consideration. Each of the agencies will be using the information gathered at this outreach meeting and our other outreach efforts to support the review process, so we can reduce burden where possible, particularly for community banks. I encourage everybody to speak frankly and to be as specific as possible. Thank you again for coming. I am grateful to Angelyque Campbell for her assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board. Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Rule to Expand Applicability of Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and Apply It to Certain Savings and Loan Holding Companies ," news release, April 9, 2015. Regulatory capital requirements will continue to apply to the depository institution subsidiaries of these companies. Return to text 3. See Board of Governors, " Federal Reserve Board releases First Semiannual Report on Banking Applications Activity ," news release, November 24, 2015. Return to text 4. The Herfindahl-Hirschman Index ("HHI") is used to measure economic concentration in a banking market under the Department of Justice Bank Merger Competitive Review guidelines. Return to text 5. It is important to note that any change in the appraisal threshold will only affect federally related transactions covered by the prudential regulators' rules. The majority of residential mortgages would remain subject to the appraisal requirements set by secondary market, particularly by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Return to text 6. See Daniel K. Tarullo, " Tailoring Community Bank Regulation and Supervision " (speech at the Independent Community Bankers of America 2015 Washington Policy Summit, Washington, DC). Return to text 7. See Tarullo, "Tailoring Community Bank Regulation and Supervision"; and Jerome H. Powell, " Regulation and Supervision of Community Banks " (speech at the Annual Community Bankers Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York). Return to text Last Update: October 19, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the "Unconventional Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies," 16th International Monetary Fund Jacques Polak Research Conference, Washington, D.C. Share Watch live Among students of central banking, the Great Recession will be remembered in part for the monetary policy innovation it prompted. Since 2008, we have seen several episodes of extreme financial conditions in major economies. In many countries, monetary policy has shouldered a large share of the policy response. Debt-deleveraging dynamics and disinflationary pressures have confronted policymakers in several economies with the classic challenge of providing accommodation when constrained by the zero lower bound. In contrast to the Great Depression, a number of central banks have found the "courage to act," which has led to important policy innovation. While it will take many years for rigorous research to distill the lessons from this period, I will offer a few preliminary observations. 1 The Effectiveness of Unconventional Monetary Policy For much of the period since 2008, many economies, including the United States, the United Kingdom, Switzerland, the euro area, and Japan, have been at or near the zero lower bound. Many economies have experienced depressed aggregate demand and large and persistent gaps between output and potential, which have led to significant reductions in the level of policy rates in order to achieve full employment and target inflation. Moreover, the neutral level of short-term risk-free rates looks to be much lower now in many countries than it had been previously. A lower neutral rate raises the likelihood that the requisite monetary accommodation when using conventional tools alone implies setting the nominal policy rate below zero. With constraints on moving nominal interest rates significantly below zero, central banks have looked to unconventional policy, such as asset purchases. The evidence suggests that unconventional monetary policy can be effective at overcoming the limitations on policy at the zero lower bound by operating through channels broadly similar to conventional monetary policy. A number of studies have suggested that the forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases conducted by the Federal Reserve boosted the levels of employment and inflation at a time when the level of short-term interest rates was constrained by the zero lower bound. For example, Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider estimate that the Federal Reserve's forward guidance and asset purchase programs may have lowered the unemployment rate by as much as 1-1/4 percentage points and increased the level of inflation by 50 basis points. 2 While conventional policy operates directly on the current and expected future path of overnight interest rates, and thereby indirectly influences longer-term interest rates, asset purchases are directly targeted at lowering yields on longer-term securities, which continue to have positive interest rates. In the so-called portfolio balance effect, the asset purchases reduce the supply of long-term Treasury and agency securities available in the market, which leads investors to bid up the price of remaining securities, thus lowering yields across a range of financial assets. Despite this difference, the channels through which asset purchases affect the economy appear similar to those of conventional monetary policy. The resulting reduction in interest rates spurs investment and purchases of consumer durables, lowers the exchange rate, and increases the prices of risky assets, such as equities. In addition, many have also emphasized an indirect effect through a "signaling channel." By helping to shape expectations about the expected future path of the federal funds rate, asset purchases help reinforce forward guidance. Thus, asset purchases can affect longer-run interest rates by lowering the expected path of short-term rates as well as by reducing the term premium of long-duration securities. 3 Spillovers from Unconventional Monetary Policy Turning to the cross-border effects, just as unconventional policy appears similar to conventional policy in its domestic effects, the analysis so far suggests that spillovers from unconventional monetary policy work through the same three channels as conventional monetary policy does. 4 First, when monetary policy in one country responds to a negative economic shock by easing, this action helps support domestic demand, which in turn will likely lead to greater demand for the exports of foreign countries. Second, monetary policy easing can also lead to a depreciation of the country's foreign exchange rate, which switches domestic expenditures away from foreign exports. Finally, it eases conditions across financial markets in that country, which can lead to financial easing in foreign markets when global financial markets are tightly integrated. The spillovers are likely to be more positive the greater the expansion of domestic demand relative to the expenditure switching effect through the exchange rate and the greater is the easing of financial conditions. The magnitude of the relative cross-border effects from each of these three channels will depend on the size of the country that is easing monetary policy as well as its relative weight in international financial markets. Since 2008, changes in the stance of monetary policy in major economies have often elicited strong reactions in other economies. Whether the global spillovers from changes in monetary policy were viewed as benign or challenging depends on the relative strength of the three transmission effects described earlier, the relative divergence of conditions in foreign economies, and the flexibility of their monetary policy tools to offset divergent spillovers. To illustrate this point, let's start with a case where the effect of easing through unconventional means was broadly welcomed. From 2008 through 2009, the Federal Reserve eased policy through cuts in its policy rate and through large-scale asset purchases. That easing came in the context of a widespread global slump and severe strains in global financial markets, and in these circumstances it had significant positive international spillovers. The boost to domestic demand likely outweighed any effect via the exchange rate and contributed to an easing of U.S. and global financial conditions. Those positive spillovers were reinforced by widespread easing of conventional monetary policies by central banks across the globe in response to the depressed state of their economies. In contrast, in 2010 and 2011, when the Federal Reserve undertook its second round of large-scale asset purchases, the global reaction was mixed. By that time, several emerging market economies were experiencing economic conditions close to full employment and strong credit growth. For many of the countries with divergent economic conditions, the combination of a market-based exchange rate and a firmly anchored monetary policy framework oriented around domestic objectives was sufficient to offset spillovers. Others, however, saw the increased capital inflows associated with the divergence of conditions as presenting problems for the management of their own economies. One country in this category was China, which was experiencing an investment-led expansion accompanied by credit expansion. Separately, several emerging market economies with relatively flexible exchange rates, particularly those experiencing expansions because of strong commodity prices, saw risks from the combination of capital inflows and upward pressure on exchange rates. Elevated inflows of foreign capital can present challenges in circumstances where prudential oversight and control of financial markets are not fully developed. Thus, countries such as Brazil worried that heavy capital inflows could lead to an undesirable loosening of credit conditions and leave the economy vulnerable to rapid reversals. In the past two years, we have seen these concerns play out in reverse. During the "taper tantrum" in 2013 and again in recent months, an increase in expectations of policy divergence in the United States confronted economic policymakers in emerging markets with capital outflows and financial tightening against a backdrop of weakening economic growth and financial imbalances. For these economies, while exchange rate depreciation can help offset weaker demand for exports and tighter financial conditions, it also puts upward pressure on inflation and may create problems for corporations with considerable foreign-currency denominated debt. In the case of China, a previously set course of tying the renminbi to the U.S. dollar led to an appreciation of the currency from mid-2014 to mid-2015 in an economy that was already slowing. Attempts to offset the effects of this undesired appreciation have had mixed results. Discontinuity around the Zero Lower Bound If the research is correct in concluding that the channels for spillovers do not differ, these episodes should have played out little differently for conventional policy changes than they did for unconventional policy. That raises the question of why announcements of new policy actions around the zero lower bound have elicited such intense reactions. The launch of the Federal Reserve's second asset purchase program in November 2010, for instance, sparked a blistering response from several foreign policymakers. One foreign finance ministry official was famously quoted as denouncing it as "clueless," while others dubbed it the start of a "currency war." Officials from emerging markets with managed exchange rates argued that the United States "has not fully taken into consideration the shock of excessive capital flows to the financial stability of emerging markets." 5 The reaction was just as striking--albeit in the opposite direction--when the Federal Reserve first announced its intention to taper asset purchases in 2013. The taper talk coincided with a broad reassessment of prospects in several large emerging markets in which some combination of financial, fiscal, and external imbalances had been building for some time. Spillovers through financial channels were immediate despite the fact that the anticipated reduction in asset purchases in the United States was expected to take place gradually sometime in the future. My conjecture is that the widespread perception that unconventional monetary policy has large and disruptive spillovers may be a reflection of the discontinuity associated with discrete policy changes at the zero lower bound, along with greater uncertainty about the policy reaction function, rather than differences in the underlying channels of transmission. When policy rates are in a range comfortably above the lower bound, most of the major central banks confront a relatively narrow range of options in a relatively familiar framework of decisionmaking and communications. By contrast, over the past six years, decisions by major central banks to initiate asset purchases have neither been seen nor communicated as incremental adjustments, but instead as bold new initiatives whose cumulative intended scale, duration, or objective were announced at the outset, often against the backdrop of a public debate about the efficacy and appropriateness of various policy options. For example, in its first two asset purchase programs the Federal Reserve committed to buying $1.7 trillion and $600 billion of assets, respectively, while in the subsequent flows-based program it committed to continuing monthly asset purchases until the outlook for the labor market had met a target for substantial improvement. Cumulative asset purchases averaged a little over $1 trillion per program, which econometric estimates suggest contributed to sizable reductions in term premiums embedded in long-term yields and a downward shift in the expected path of the federal funds rate. Similarly, in 2013, the Bank of Japan announced asset purchases at an annual pace of about 50 trillion yen and committed to continuing these purchases until inflation had moved up to 2 percent. The European Central Bank, at the beginning of this year, committed to buying 60 billion euros of assets each month at least through September of next year, or until inflation is on a path to get to close to 2 percent. In all of these cases, the policy actions themselves were large and designed to generate a significant easing in overall financial conditions, and the announcement effect likely was amplified because the policy reaction function around the zero lower bound was not well known and hence was difficult to anticipate. International Coordination of Unconventional Monetary Policy The intense debates over cross-border spillovers of unconventional monetary policy during the crisis naturally elicited calls for global coordination of monetary policy to avoid beggar-thy-neighbor actions that could undermine growth globally. Recognizing the practical limitations of such proposals, in 2013, the Group of Seven (G-7) instead adopted a more circumscribed but achievable set of commitments. Each member committed that its monetary policy settings--unconventional as well as conventional--would be oriented to meeting its "respective domestic objectives using domestic instruments," and "not target[ing] exchange rates." 6 This agreement ensured that actions in the major advanced economies would be designed to provide accommodation targeted to supporting domestic demand, which would in turn support global demand--in contrast to classical demand-sapping beggar-thy-neighbor policies designed to shift demand by weakening the exchange rate. The agreement to use domestic policy instruments to support domestic output and inflation objectives is likely, on net, to be an important constraint against beggar-thy-neighbor policies, especially in the less charted territory of unconventional policy. Implications for the United States Finally, it is worth considering what this implies for the United States. While traditionally the United States is viewed more as a source than a recipient of cross-border spillovers, recent events have demonstrated that U.S. economic and financial conditions can be sensitive to spillovers from advanced economies as well as from major emerging market economies. Over the past two years, we have seen divergences emerge among major economies in domestic growth prospects and the expected direction of monetary policy. Earlier in this period, the focus was on heightened deflationary risks in Japan and the euro area. The policy response to these pressures and the anticipated divergence between the policy trajectories in these economies and the United States contributed to a 10 percent real appreciation in the dollar against a basket of currencies through the spring of this year. More recently, growth projections have been marked down for emerging market economies, which previously had been an important source of global growth. Increased recognition of the risks to the outlook for major emerging market economies pushed the dollar up further to 15 percent above its level last summer and contributed to a more general tightening of financial conditions over the summer. Much of the focus of investors and policymakers around the world has been on China, where the buildup of past property bubbles, and more-recent stock market, bubbles, together with a steep run-up in business debt levels and questions about the policy framework, have raised concerns. In turn, growth has slowed both in many commodity-exporting countries whose exports are sensitive to Chinese demand as well as many non-commodity-producing East Asian economies that are tied to China through trade and investment and are important destinations for U.S. exports. The feedback loop between market expectations of divergence between the United States and our major trade partners and financial tightening in the United States means that material restraint to U.S. conditions is already in place. Looking ahead, a further weakening of foreign growth could pose downside risks to the U.S. outlook. Under normal circumstances, policy in the United States could adjust to signs that spillovers from developments abroad were affecting activity in the United States. But with policy rates in the United States at the lower bound, the ability to offset spillovers from adverse developments in foreign economies with conventional policy is constrained, suggesting greater caution than normal. In conclusion, the Great Recession has sparked innovative actions in a number of countries that have helped monetary policy escape the constraints of the zero lower bound. Just as it appears that unconventional monetary policy can provide accommodation domestically similar to conventional monetary policy, so too it appears that cross-borders spillovers work through the same channels. Nonetheless, the discontinuity of discrete policy changes around the zero lower bound can amplify the effects. In response to heightened sensitivity around these spillovers, countries that have deployed unconventional policy have committed to do so in a way that targets domestic objectives using domestic instruments, thereby helping to ensure their actions would support rather than sap global demand. I am grateful to Andrew Figura and Paul Wood for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Eric M. Engen, Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015), " The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System). Return to text 3. A number of observers have suggested that the market and macroeconomic effects of the initial asset purchase programs announced at the most intense period of the financial crisis may have been larger than the programs announced later in the recovery. The initial programs were important in bolstering confidence broadly and supporting liquidity in financial markets. The later asset purchase programs, particularly the flow-based program whose duration was tied to a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, were important in signaling that the Federal Reserve was committed to taking all actions necessary to achieve its mandated objectives. Return to text 4. For example, see David Bowman, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2014), " U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Papers 1109 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June); John H. Rogers, Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright (2014), " Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Papers 1101 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March); Joshua Hausman and Jon Wongswan (2011), "Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 30 (April), pp. 547-71; and Reuven Glick and Sylvain Leduc (2013), " The Effects of Unconventional and Conventional U.S. Monetary Policy on the Dollar (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 2013-11 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May). Return to text 5. See, for instance, Steven Hill (2010), “Germany Speaks Out,” Op-Ed, New York Times, November 13, www.nytimes.com/2010/11/13/opinion/13iht-edhill.html?_r=0; Jonathan Wheatley and Peter Garnham (2010), “Brazil in ‘Currency War’ Alert,” Financial Times, September 15; and Newsmax Finance (2010), “China: Fed Easing May Flood World Economy With ‘Hot Money’,” Newsmax Media, November 8, www.newsmax.com/Finance/StreetTalk/China-Fed-Easing-Flood/2010/11/08/id/376288. Return to text 6. HM Treasury (2013), " Statement by the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors ," February 12. Return to text Last Update: November 06, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California Share Let me begin by noting that my comments today will not address the timing of liftoff for the federal funds rate. 1 Recent months have seen increased anticipation of the normalization of monetary policy in the United States. Many observers interpret normalization to mean a tightening cycle similar in pace to previous cycles, such as those from 1994 to 1995 and from 2004 to 2007, with the effect of returning interest rates to the level viewed as normal in the decades before the crisis. The Federal Reserve describes normalization as "steps to raise the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates to more normal levels." 2 But what do we mean by "more normal levels"? A broad deterioration in foreign growth prospects, together with greater risk sensitivity in the wake of the crisis and changes in the rate of potential output growth, may be contributing to a "new normal." The new normal is likely to be characterized by a lower level of interest rates than in the decades preceding the crisis, which counsels a cautious and gradual approach to adjusting monetary policy. The Benchmark Neutral Rate The appropriate pace and target for normalizing monetary policy depend centrally on understanding the neutral rate of interest. The nominal neutral interest rate is the level of the federal funds rate that is consistent with output growing close to its potential rate with full employment and stable inflation. 3 The appropriate benchmark for assessing the stance of monetary policy is the gap between the policy rate and the nominal neutral rate of interest: When the federal funds rate is below the nominal neutral rate, monetary policy is accommodative, and, when it is above the neutral rate, policy is contractionary. For this reason, many monetary policy rules, such as the well-known Taylor rule, incorporate an estimate of the neutral real interest rate as a critical parameter along with the target rate of inflation. 4 Although the neutral rate is a critical benchmark for monetary policy, it changes over time in response to important changes in economic conditions, necessitating corresponding adjustments in monetary policy in order to restore the economy to full employment. For instance, when there are modest adverse shocks to demand that lead to modest reductions in the shorter-run neutral rate, monetary policy can provide enough support to keep the economy at full employment simply by reducing the policy rate commensurate with the decline in the nominal neutral rate. However, when the adverse shocks to demand are sufficiently severe to push the nominal neutral interest rate substantially below zero, as they were during the Great Recession, monetary policy confronts the zero-lower-bound constraint, at which point the federal funds rate cannot fall low enough to provide the necessary degree of accommodation without becoming negative. This was the case in the United States for several years following the crisis and remains true today in a number of advanced foreign economies. That is why monetary policymakers in the United States and several other major economies have been compelled to use additional unconventional tools to promote full employment and target inflation, such as forward guidance and asset purchases. The neutral rate of interest is not directly observable, but we can back out an estimate of the neutral rate by relying on the observation that output should grow faster relative to potential growth the lower the federal funds rate is relative to the nominal neutral rate. In today's circumstances, the fact that the U.S. economy is growing at a pace only modestly above potential while core inflation remains restrained suggests that the nominal neutral rate may not be far above the nominal federal funds rate, even now. In fact, various econometric estimates of the level of the neutral rate, or similar concepts, are consistent with the low levels suggested by this simple heuristic approach. 5 The Past and Future Neutral Rate In assessing the policy path ahead, the critical question is whether a low neutral rate is likely to be a "new normal" in the longer run or whether the neutral rate is soon likely to increase back to levels considered normal in the decades before the crisis. To answer this question, it is helpful to use economic forecasts, market-implied expectations, and econometric models to assess where real interest rates are expected to be in the longer run, and compare them with the levels that prevailed in the decades before the crisis. In doing so, it is important to abstract from shocks that are transitory or cyclical and thus likely to fade away over a year or two. 6 Starting with economic forecasts, Blue Chip Forecasts publishes projections of the federal funds rate and consumer price index (CPI) inflation 6 to 10 years into the future, when the economy is typically expected to be near full employment. The implied Blue Chip consensus longer-run real federal funds rate averaged around 2.2 percent in the two decades preceding the crisis, which is close to the level of the intercept term in the Taylor (1993) rule, which in turn is based on empirical analysis of the period from the mid-1980s to the early 1990s. In contrast, the Blue Chip consensus longer-run rate is currently around 1.1 percent, about 1 percentage point lower than the pre-crisis average. 7 Similarly, although the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has not explicitly defined "normal," the central tendency or the median of the longer-run level of the federal funds rate in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) might reasonably be considered a rough proxy. By this proxy, forecasts of the neutral rate have moved down noticeably over the past several years. The median projection of the longer-run level of the real federal funds rate was 2-1/4 percent in January 2012, when projections of the longer-run federal funds rate were first included in the SEP. By comparison, the median projection for the longer-run real federal funds rate had fallen by 3/4 percentage point to 1-1/2 percent in the most recent SEP. 8 Market measures of expected forward rates evidence a similar decline. For example, we can back out an implied 1-year real rate 10 years from now from the Treasury inflation-protected securities, or TIPS, yield curve. The most recent readings are around 1.3 percent, close to 2 percentage points below the average rate from 1999 through 2007. Swaps prices tell a similar story. The implied expected 1-year real rate 10 years from now is currently close to 1 percent, again well below levels prior to the financial crisis. Finally, some of the econometric models used to estimate the current neutral rate, or closely related concepts, can also be used to assess whether low neutral rates are likely to persist. While estimates will depend on the model specification, several models estimate that the neutral rate will remain low for some time to come. Laubach and Williams, for example, estimate that the natural rate, a concept closely related to the neutral rate, likely will remain near zero for the foreseeable future. 9 Why Is the Neutral Rate Low? With a variety of estimates suggesting that the neutral rate of interest is likely to remain low relative to historical norms for some time, it is important to assess the underlying causes and their likely persistence. There are a host of factors that could lead the neutral rate to remain depressed in the longer run--ranging from the low level of world real interest rates, which affects the United States via the exchange rate and financial market channels, to slow-moving secular trends in the labor force and productivity, to persistent changes in risk perceptions stemming from the crisis. Although tight domestic credit conditions and concerns about downside risks to asset prices and domestic demand were the dominant drivers early in the recovery, the foreign outlook has become increasingly important as a source of downward pressure on the neutral rate in the past few years. In addition to concerns about weak demand in Japan and the euro area, more recently foreign growth concerns have broadened to include China, which is navigating difficult structural as well as cyclical adjustments. The financial reverberations from China are adversely affecting commodity exporters and emerging markets more broadly, and weak growth trajectories are now the norm in much of the world, pushing down interest rates globally. The broad-based reduction in interest rates in the rest of the world, by increasing demand for U.S. assets, puts upward pressure on the dollar, which in turn implies downward pressure on the U.S. neutral rate. One way to think about the spillover from abroad is how much adjustment in the federal funds rate might be necessary to insulate domestic employment from an appreciation in the dollar that is expected to persist. Let's take the roughly 15 percent real appreciation of the dollar that we have seen since June 2014. According to the Board's FRB/US model, it would require lowering the path of the federal funds rate by roughly 1 percentage point over the medium term to insulate domestic employment from the 15 percent stronger exchange rate in inflation adjusted terms. In the neighborhood of the zero lower bound, this shift down implies a delay in the date of liftoff and a shallower path for the federal funds rate over several years. In effect, this spillover from abroad implies some limitations on the extent to which U.S. monetary conditions can diverge from global conditions. Going forward, many observers expect global growth to stabilize and eventually move higher, easing pressure on the dollar and on commodity prices and leading to a higher neutral interest rate globally. 10 However, as foreign economies face structural as well as cyclical adjustments, the speed at which the stabilization and recovery of foreign growth takes place is highly uncertain, and there is a risk that this influence on the neutral rate could fade very slowly. Moreover, there are downside risks to the foreign outlook. Other factors likely pushing down the current neutral rate may prove even more persistent. Importantly, expectations that the economy's growth potential has fallen could contribute to a persistent decline in the neutral rate. Indeed, there is evidence that growth in the labor force, and perhaps productivity, have slowed persistently in recent years. After increasing noticeably over much of the post-World War II period, the labor force participation rate flattened out over the 1990s and began to decline in the early 2000s as the baby boom generation approached retirement. Most recently, the pace of decline has quickened, with the participation rate declining 1/2 percent per year, on average, over the recovery. 11 Productivity growth has also slowed, averaging just 1 percent per year over the recovery, about half the pace over the 50 years prior to the financial crisis. 12 Given this data, the Congressional Budget Office now estimates that the growth rate of potential output is only 1.7 percent currently, less than half the rate during the 50 years before 2008. Nevertheless, although there is evidence of a connection between low potential output growth and a low neutral rate, as pointed out by Hamilton and others, the relationship is not precisely estimated, which leaves considerable uncertainty about the magnitude of the effect. 13 Finally, investors' risk sensitivity appears to have been altered by the experience of tail risks during the crisis, which could have a persistent depressing effect on the neutral rate. To the extent that investors or firms are more attuned to the risks associated with capital investments than before the financial crisis, it increases the premium for risky investments, or the difference in return between a risk-free investment, such as overnight reserves, and somewhat riskier investment opportunities. A higher risk premium necessitates a lower risk-free rate to encourage the same amount of riskier investments as previously. Consistent with this explanation, there is evidence that the gap between the return to capital investment and the risk free rate has risen. For example, according to dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models estimated by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the natural rate of interest has been held down during the recovery by shocks that increase the difference between the marginal product of capital and the risk free rate, pushing down investment and reducing the level of capital. 14 In addition, a simple measure of the marginal product of capital suggests that the return to capital investment has not changed very much, or perhaps has even increased, over the past decade despite the decline in risk free rates. 15 Implications for the Path of Monetary Policy Before addressing what a persistently low neutral interest rate might mean for the normalization of monetary policy, it is helpful to review inflation developments. Because the federal funds rate is the real rate plus the expected rate of inflation and because it is the real rate that influences economic activity, the amount of monetary accommodation represented by a given nominal level of the federal funds rate decreases as expected inflation declines. In a low neutral rate environment, it is especially important to guard against extended periods of below-target inflation, which may lead inflation expectations to drift lower. It is thus notable that inflation has been below our 2 percent target for 3 years. Current below-target levels of inflation in part reflect disinflationary pressures from abroad, including lower import prices and lower commodity prices, which are likely to fade over time. However, inflation has been stubbornly low, even excluding energy prices. Over the 12 months ending in October, core personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, prices, which exclude the often volatile categories of food and energy, increased 1.3 percent, and the 12-month change in core prices has been around 1‑1/4 to 1-1/2 percent since the beginning of 2013. The persistent weakness in core price inflation deserves continued vigilance. In determining the outlook for inflation, the gravitational force of long-term inflation expectations is especially important. Some survey measures of inflation expectations have declined recently. For example, the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers median measure of inflation expectations at a 5-to-10 year horizon was 2.6 percent in November and has averaged 2.7 percent over the past year, slightly below the average reading over the past decade of 2.9 percent. Projections from the Survey of Professional Forecasters also suggest that 10-year-ahead inflation expectations edged lower this quarter, although they have remained at or very near 2 percent since the end of 2012. Market-based measures of inflation compensation at longer-term horizons, such as inflation swaps and the difference between nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury bond yields, have declined more noticeably over the past year and a half. Although it is difficult to precisely disentangle the contribution of changes in inflation expectations, liquidity premiums, and inflation risk premiums to this downward shift, some decompositions suggest that, while expected inflation may not have declined much, market participants may be placing a somewhat greater likelihood than previously on episodes of below-potential growth being accompanied by below-target inflation. Thus, the decline in measures of inflation expectations warrants close monitoring. The slow progress on inflation, together with the likely low level of the longer-term neutral real rate and the slow pace at which the very low shorter-term rate may move to the longer-term rate, suggest that the federal funds rate is likely to adjust more gradually and to a lower level than in previous expansions. In short, "gradual and low" is likely to be the new normal. In addition, the combination of a low neutral real rate with slow progress on inflation suggests a greater likelihood of hitting the zero lower bound than in previous decades, when the neutral rate was probably much higher. The lower the longer-term nominal neutral rate is, the smaller in magnitude an adverse economic shock must be to push growth sufficiently below potential to necessitate a nominal federal funds rate below zero to provide accommodation. Assuming there has not been a material reduction in the frequency and severity of negative shocks since the pre-crisis period, the implication is that the probability of being constrained by the zero lower bound is greater than prior to the crisis. Although empirical analysis suggests that unconventional tools affect the economy through the same channels as the federal funds rate, even so, there are greater costs and uncertainties associated with unconventional policies relative to changes in the federal funds rate. 16 As a result, policy is likely to remain more constrained at the zero lower bound than above it. As the probability of hitting the zero lower bound increases, the asymmetry in policy flexibility becomes more pronounced. Because we have more space to respond by raising rates if inflationary forces accelerate than by cutting rates if disinflationary forces emerge, when nominal neutral rates are likely to be lower on average, we should be cautious about raising rates, do so gradually, and carefully assess the effects on economic and financial conditions as we go. Moreover, because the Federal Reserve's asset holdings help maintain accommodative financial conditions, it would be prudent to maintain reinvestments until the normalization of the federal funds rate is sufficiently far along to allow room to cut nominal rates if economic conditions deteriorate. The asymmetry of policy flexibility at the zero lower bound also arises when there is uncertainty about the level of the neutral real rate. As discussed in recent papers, if there is significant uncertainty about the level of the neutral real rate, risk management considerations suggest that policymakers should respond cautiously to signs that the neutral real rate may be rising, particularly when the policy rate is close to the zero lower bound. 17 In the presence of uncertainty, there is a risk that the actual neutral real rate is either higher or lower than current estimates of the neutral real rate, and the stance of policy will therefore be either more accommodative or more restrictive than intended. If the actual neutral rate is higher than estimated, and policy is more accommodative than intended, the stance of policy can be readily tightened later to restrain any buildup in inflationary pressures. But, if the actual neutral real rate is lower than estimated, and the stance of monetary policy is tighter than intended, unexpected policy restraint may prove difficult to offset later with more accommodative policy because the policy rate is already close to the zero lower bound. Finally, there is a risk that with persistently lower neutral rates, there may be greater pressures for investors to reach for yield, increasing the demand for risky assets. As a result, macroprudential policy may take on greater importance to guard against financial stability risks. Since the crisis, the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies have implemented a number of new rules to strengthen capital, liquidity, and risk management at the largest financial institutions. Many of these rules are "through the cycle" safeguards, meaning that they impose structurally higher standards. In addition, when the risks to financial stability increase, the Federal Reserve, in consultation with the other banking agencies, can temporarily increase the amount of capital that large banks are required to hold in order to build resilience at these institutions and to restrain undue risk-taking on a cyclical basis. Conclusion A variety of evidence suggests that the longer-run neutral rate is lower now than it has been historically, and that the very low shorter-run neutral rate may adjust to it very slowly, due to a combination of weaker foreign demand growth, greater risk sensitivity as a result of the crisis, higher risk premiums for productive investment, and lower growth in potential output. The lower neutral rate means the normalization of the federal funds rate is likely to follow a more gradual and shallower path than in previous cycles, although the actual path will be determined by economic conditions. It also implies that the likelihood of the federal funds rate hitting the zero lower bound will be persistently greater than it has been previously, which could make it more difficult to achieve our objectives of full employment and 2 percent inflation. With the nominal neutral interest rate lower than in the past, and with policy options being more limited if conditions deteriorate than if inflationary pressures accelerate, the asymmetry in risk-management considerations counsels a cautious and gradual approach. References Baily, Martin Neil, James Manyika, and Shalabh Gupta (2013). " U.S. Productivity Growth: An Optimistic Perspective (PDF) ," International Productivity Monitor, vol. 25 (Spring), pp. 3-12. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2014). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans ," press release, September 17. Byrne, David, and Carol Corrado (2015). " Recent Trends in Communications Equipment Prices ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 29. Byrne, David M., Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel (2015). " How Fast Are Semiconductor Prices Falling? (PDF) " NBER Working Paper Series 21074. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. Byrne, David, and Eugenio Pinto (2015). " The Recent Slowdown in High-Tech Equipment Price Declines and Some Implications for Business Investment and Labor Productivity ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 26. Cúrdia, Vasco (2015). " Why So Slow? A Gradual Return for Interest Rates ," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-32. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October 12. Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, Matthew Cocci, Sara Shahanaghi, and Micah Smith (2015). " Why Are Interest Rates So Low? " Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), May 20. Engen, Eric M., Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). " The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Evans, Charles, Jonas Fisher, Francois Gourio, and Spencer Krane (2015). " Risk Management for Monetary Policy Near the Zero Lower Bound (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring. Gomme, Paul, B. Ravikumar, and Peter Rupert (2015). " Secular Stagnation and Returns on Capital ," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Economic Synopses, no. 19, August 18. Gust, Christopher J., Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David López-Salido (2015). " Monetary Policy, Incomplete Information, and the Zero Lower Bound (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-099. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). " The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future (PDF) ," NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. International Monetary Fund (2015). World Economic Outlook: Adjusting to Lower Commodity Prices (PDF) . Washington: IMF, October. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2015). " Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 2015-16. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October. Taylor, John B. (1993). "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy , vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. Taylor, John B. (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41. I am grateful to Jim Clouse and Andrew Figura for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. For example, see Board of Governors (2014, paragraph 2). Return to text 3. The closely related concept of the natural rate of interest--the rate of interest at which investment and savings are equilibrated at full employment--is originally attributed to Swedish economist Knut Wicksell. Return to text 4. See Taylor (1993) and Taylor (1999). Return to text 5. See, for example, Cúrdia (2015) and Del Negro and others (2015). Return to text 6. Hamilton and others (2015) use moving averages of real rates as their measure of the equilibrium real rate. Using a similar measure, in the United States, the 11-year moving average of the short-term real interest rate is now at its lowest level since the beginning of the series in the late 1950s. Return to text 7. Here the longer-run real rate is defined as the consensus longer-run nominal federal funds rate minus the consensus longer-run rate of CPI inflation. Because most forecasts of economic conditions far into the future are predicated on the economy being at full employment, forecasts of relatively low actual real rates are consistent with forecasts of relatively low neutral rates. Return to text 8. In the SEP, longer-run projections represent each participant's assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy. Return to text 9. Laubach and Williams define the natural rate as "the real short-term interest rate consistent with the economy operating at its full potential once transitory shocks to aggregate supply or demand have abated" (2015, p. 2). Return to text 10. See, for example, chapter 1 of the IMF World Economic Outlook (2015). Return to text 11. Population growth has also moved gradually lower in the United States, though the effect has not been as large as in some foreign economies, where the size of the population is now stagnant or falling. Return to text 12. It is unclear how persistent recent low rates of measured productivity growth will be. While weak investment levels, particularly early on in the recovery, likely contributed to lower productivity gains, investment levels going forward could be closer to historical norms. Also, recent technological gains may eventually contribute strongly to productivity growth; see, for example, Baily, Manyika, and Gupta (2013). In addition, there is evidence that some of the contribution of technology gains to productivity growth is being understated; see, for example, Byrne and Pinto (2015), Byrne and Corrado (2015), and Byrne, Oliner and Sichel (2015). Return to text 13. See Hamilton and others (2015). Return to text 14. See Del Negro and others (2015). In these models, the natural rate of interest is defined as the "rate of interest that would obtain if all prices and wages had adjusted so as to bring the level of economic activity to its full-employment rate." Return to text 15. See Gomme, Ravikumar, and Rupert (2015). Return to text 16. See Engen, Laubach and Reifschneider (2015), for example. Return to text 17. See the recent papers by Gust, Johannsen and López-Salido (2015) and Evans and others (2015). Return to text Last Update: December 01, 2015 Back to Top
