The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Communications Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Stanley S. Watts Lecture The Robins School of Business, University of Richmond Richmond, VA March 21, 2017 1 Introduction I thank Dean Nancy Bagranoff, Professor Dean Croushore, and the University of Richmond’s Robins School of Business for the opportunity to deliver this year’s Stanley S. Watts lecture. I feel honored to join the list of distinguished speakers who have previously presented the Watts lecture. I have had the pleasure of knowing and working with Professor Croushore for many years. Through his research and analysis, Dean has made important contributions to the Federal Reserve System and to the economics profession. As a professor, he is passing on his knowledge by training the next generation of economists and business people, an important public service. This evening, I will speak about monetary policy and the role of communications in Federal Reserve policymaking. I serve on the Federal Open Market Committee’s subcommittee on communications, so it may not be surprising that I believe communications play an essential role in monetary policy implementation. Of course, my remarks this evening will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Last Week’s FOMC Monetary Policy Decision and the Economic Outlook This is an opportune time to talk about policy communications because, as I’m sure many of you know, the FOMC announced last week that it had decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by one-quarter percentage point to 3/4 to 1 percent. This decision was based on the Committee’s view of actual and expected economic performance, the risks around the outlook, and the progress toward our goals of maximum employment and price stability. I fully supported this further step on the path of increases in the federal funds rate that the Committee has indicated for some time is likely to be appropriate to achieve and maintain our objectives, should the economy evolve as anticipated. In my view, the underlying fundamentals supporting the economic expansion are sound. Looking through the quarterly pattern of ups and downs, we find that output has sustained a moderate pace of 2 about 2 percent growth, on average, over the past three years. So far, based on the limited data available, tracking estimates suggest that growth in the current quarter may come in on the weak side. I am not taking much of a signal from this, as it likely reflects some transitory factors like reduced energy demand due to unseasonably warm weather early in the year and residual seasonality in the data – we’ve seen a pattern over the past several years of weak growth in the first quarter followed by stronger growth in subsequent quarters. I see favorable fundamentals as supportive of GDP growth over the next year at somewhat above trend, which I estimate at 2 percent. These fundamentals include accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, improved household balance sheets and income growth, and continued strength in the labor market. In 2016, the economy added over 2.2 million jobs, about 187,000 per month on average. This year, that strength has been sustained, with an average increase of 237,000 jobs per month in January and February. The pace is well above estimates of trend employment growth, which range from around 75,000 to 120,000 per month, depending on what one assumes about labor force participation. Demographic factors, including the aging of our population, have resulted in a downward trend in participation, which is one of the reasons trend employment growth is lower than it was a few decades ago. But rather than declining like its trend, the participation rate has been basically stable for the past three years. This is a further sign of strength in the labor market. As the economy has added jobs, the unemployment rate has been moving down. In February, it stood at 4.7 percent, less than half of its peak after the Great Recession. Although payroll job growth is likely to slow a bit from its current pace, given the progress that’s already been made, it will be sufficient to put further downward pressure on the unemployment rate. I expect the unemployment rate to stay below my estimate of its longer-run rate of 5 percent over the next two years. 3 The other part of the Fed’s dual mandate is price stability. For a while, inflation has been running below the Fed’s target of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, total PCE inflation. But inflation has picked up over the past year and is moving in the right direction. There are likely to be monthly variations in the inflation numbers as previous changes in energy and import prices roll out of our year-over-year measures, and current fluctuations roll in. In determining where we are relative to goal, we need to look through transitory movements in the numbers, both those above and those below our goal, and focus on where inflation is going on a sustained basis. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and with appropriate adjustments in monetary policy, I believe the conditions are in place for a sustained return over the next year or so to our symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation. Conditions supporting the return to goal include the firmer data on inflation, reasonably stable inflation expectations, continued strength in the labor market, and growth expected to be at or slightly above trend. The appropriate adjustments in monetary policy are those that will sustain the expansion so that our longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment are met and maintained. If economic conditions evolve as anticipated, I believe further removal of accommodation via increases in the fed funds rate will be needed. My current assessment is that the pace of removal won’t call for an increase in the fed funds rate at each meeting, but it does mean more than the one-increase-per-year seen in the past two years. This upward policy path will help prolong the expansion, not curtail it. It will help avoid a build-up of risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy is allowed to overheat, as well as risks to financial stability if interest rates remain too low and encourage investors to take on excessively risky investments in a search for yield. Along with its rate increase, last week the FOMC also announced that it was maintaining its policy of reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities and principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, essentially maintaining the Fed’s balance sheet at its very large size. 4 The balance sheet grew when the Fed undertook several programs to purchase longer-term assets. The FOMC used this nontraditional policy tool to address the Great Recession, once its traditional policy tool, the fed funds rate, had been reduced to effectively zero. As Chair Yellen mentioned in her press briefing, the FOMC is discussing its reinvestment policy, but no decisions have been made. In my view, if economic conditions evolve as I anticipate, I would be comfortable changing our reinvestment policy this year. I view this as consistent with our principles of policy normalization and our statement that we anticipate continuing reinvestments “until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way.”1 Ending reinvestments is a first step toward reducing the size of the balance sheet and returning its composition to primarily Treasury securities over time – a welcome acknowledgment that the economy and policy are transitioning back to normal. Fed Structure, Monetary Policy Independence, and Accountability I have already mentioned two important pieces of monetary policy communication, namely, the FOMC’s post-meeting statement and the Chair’s press briefing. But before I go any further, it will help if I provide a little information about the structure of the institution responsible for setting U.S. monetary policy. Congress established the Fed in 1913 to operate in the public interest to promote the health of the U.S. economy and financial system. Congress designed the Fed as a decentralized central bank, independent within the government but not independent from the government. The Fed’s design balances public- sector and private-sector interests, and Wall Street and Main Street concerns. The Federal Reserve System has 12 regional Reserve Banks distributed across the country – including one right here in Richmond. The Reserve Banks are overseen by a seven-member Board of Governors in 1 See, “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” FOMC, September 17, 2014, and the FOMC post-meeting statement of March 15, 2017. 5 Washington, D.C.2 I believe the regional structure of the Federal Reserve has served the country well for more than 100 years. This design allows monetary policy decisions to take into account the diversity of the American economy and its people. Setting monetary policy is a complex undertaking, and I believe the history of the Fed has shown that better policy decisions are made when diverse information and views are considered. The Fed’s structure also helps us to carry out our other responsibilities. These include supervising and regulating banks and other important financial institutions, promoting the stability of the financial system, playing a major role in overseeing the nation’s payments system, providing certain financial services to the U.S. government, and identifying effective community development policies and best practices for promoting economic progress and access to credit in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. The FOMC comprises the seven members of the Board of Governors, the president of the New York Fed, and four other Reserve Bank presidents, who serve on a rotating basis. As president of the Cleveland Fed, I vote every other year, as does the Chicago Fed’s president. The other presidents vote every third year. I note, though, that all Reserve Bank presidents, whether voting members at the moment or not, participate in FOMC meetings. Thus, by design, the discussions at our meetings contain a mosaic of economic information and analysis from all parts of the country. When I attend FOMC meetings, I make it a point to bring the economic information the Cleveland Fed staff and I have garnered from business, consumer, and labor contacts throughout the Fourth District, which comprises the state of Ohio, western Pennsylvania, eastern Kentucky, and the northern panhandle of West Virginia. This regional information, along with economic and financial data and analysis, plays an important part in the FOMC’s setting of national monetary policy in pursuit of our goals of maximum employment and price stability, which were given to us by Congress. 2 Currently, there are two openings on the Board of Governors and there will be another when Governor Daniel Tarullo steps down in early April. 6 While Congress has set the Fed’s goals, it has also wisely given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of those goals. That is, monetary policy decisions do not have to be approved by the president or Congress. This is wise because a substantial body of research and actual practice indicate that when a central bank formulates monetary policy free from short-run political interference and is held accountable for its decisions, better economic outcomes result. Independence in setting monetary policy is worth preserving because it yields more effective policy. But accountability must go hand in hand with independence. A central bank cannot expect to remain independent from the political process unless it is transparent about the rationale for its policy decisions. It takes some time for monetary policy to affect the economy, so the public won’t be able to immediately see whether a policy action was a good one. So it is incumbent upon policymakers to explain their decisions, including their assessment of economic conditions, as well as their outlook for the economy. In other words, clear communications play a crucial role in monetary policymaking. The Benefits of Clear Communications in Monetary Policymaking Clear communications can make monetary policy more effective by helping households and businesses make better economic and financial decisions. When policymakers are clear about the goals of monetary policy and the economic information that is important in their forecasts and policy decisions, and set policy in a systematic way, the public will have a better idea of how monetary policy is likely to change as economic conditions evolve. They will have a better sense of how policy will react not only to anticipated changes in conditions but also to unanticipated economic developments. Such knowledge helps households and firms make better saving, borrowing, investment, and employment decisions. Achieving clearer monetary policy communications is better viewed as a journey rather than as a destination. Indeed, over the past two decades, the Fed has taken several steps on this journey to become more transparent, as the benefits of transparency have become better appreciated. It might surprise you to 7 know that it wasn’t until 1994 that the FOMC began to explicitly announce changes in its fed funds rate target and later added more description about the state of the economy and the rationale for its decisions. Before 1994, there was no post-meeting FOMC statement; the public had to infer what the FOMC decided by looking at how it implemented policy through its open market operations in financial markets. Now, the post-meeting statement describes the FOMC’s view of the state of the economy and the rationale for its decisions, as well as the votes of individual members and the preferred policy choices of any dissenters. Further context for the decisions is provided in the meeting minutes, which are released by the FOMC three weeks after the meeting, and a full transcript is released with a five-year lag. Outside of the blackout period around FOMC meetings, many of the FOMC participants present speeches – like this one – in which they share their perspectives on the economy and monetary policy with the public. In fact, as a Reserve Bank president, I view myself as a public servant and believe one of my duties is to explain the rationale for my decisions to the public. In addition to speeches, the Chair testifies before subcommittees of both houses of Congress at two regularly scheduled monetary policy hearings a year, and at additional hearings when asked. And the Chair holds press briefings after four FOMC meetings per year. These briefings, which started in 2011, allow the Chair to expand on things that are too complex to discuss in the FOMC’s relatively short post- meeting statement. The four meetings followed by press briefings are also ones at which the FOMC releases its Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP. I would like to spend the balance of my talk discussing the role of these projections in monetary policy communications and a recent enhancement the FOMC made to the SEP. The Summary of Economic Projections The Summary of Economic Projections, released four times a year, provides information on individual participants’ economic projections, conditional on the path of policy that each participant sees as appropriate to promoting the FOMC’s goals of price stability and maximum employment. It is worth 8 noting that unlike private-sector forecasts, the SEP policy path projections are not policy forecasts, but rather the individual participants’ view of what constitutes appropriate policy. The projected economic variables included in the SEP are real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and core inflation, that is, inflation excluding food and energy prices, which tend to be volatile, with appropriate policy given by the federal funds rate. The projections are for the current year and for up to three additional years, and also include the participants’ estimates of the longer-run values for these variables. I believe the SEP is an important part of monetary policy communications. Because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, policymakers need to be forward looking, and the SEP provides the public with a sense of where FOMC participants see the economy evolving and the associated policy path consistent with that outlook. Of course, it is important to put the FOMC’s projections into proper context. The economy can evolve in unexpected ways. The FOMC is not prescient, nor should we expect it to be. At the end of the year, the media often writes a story on how the economy actually fared compared to what the FOMC was projecting at the start of the year, and when the misses are large, more than one story is written. For example, according to the central tendency of the projections, at the start of 2012, FOMC participants expected real GDP growth for the year to be 2.2 to 2.7 percent. It turns out that the economy grew at only a 1.3 percent pace that year, a forecast miss of around 1.0 to 1.5 percentage points. On the other hand, participants underestimated the improvement seen in the unemployment rate in 2012. At the start of the year, they projected an unemployment rate of 8.2 to 8.5 percent by the fourth quarter, but the unemployment rate ended up lower, at 7.8 percent. The FOMC also was more optimistic about growth at the start of 2015 than what came to pass, and inflation ran below projections over 2013-2015. The public has to hold the FOMC accountable for its performance, but it should not hold monetary policymakers to an unrealistic standard. To evaluate the performance of FOMC projections, it is 9 important to put these forecast misses into context by remembering that even though forecast errors of this magnitude, both above and below actual outcomes, may seem large, they are the norm among economic forecasters, not the exception.3 Forecasting is a difficult task. The economy is constantly being buffeted by shocks that can lead economic conditions to evolve differently than anticipated. Moreover, our view of current economic conditions can be cloudy because many economic data are revised over time. Data revisions complicate forecasting and setting monetary policy in real time. University of Richmond’s Dean Croushore is at the forefront of economic research into how forecasters and policymakers should incorporate data revisions into their work. Another reason forecasting is difficult is what economists call “model uncertainty”: it isn’t clear which model will best predict the future path of the economy at any given time. One way to approach this model uncertainty is to average across various models to develop a forecast. From a practical policymaking standpoint, I find that looking at forecasts from several models gives me a better sense not only of the most likely forecast but also the risks around the forecast. It is important to keep in mind that around any economic forecast there is typically quite a lot of uncertainty. To illustrate the level of uncertainty around its projections, the FOMC will now be providing charts showing confidence bands, so-called fan charts, around the median projections, something I have advocated for quite some time. 4 The future is inherently uncertain, and the confidence bands will give the 3 It is also worth remembering that the FOMC projections are conditional on what each participant views as the appropriate policy path and not necessarily what the participant views as the most likely policy path. For a clear and very useful explanation of what the FOMC projections are and are not, see Ben S. Bernanke, “Federal Reserve Economic Projections: What Are They Good For?” Brookings Institution blog post, November 28, 2016. 4 See Loretta J. Mester, “Forward Guidance in Extraordinary Times, in Normal Times, and Betwixt the Two,” remarks at the Money Marketeers of New York University, Inc., New York, NY, November 6, 2014; Loretta J. Mester, “Forward Guidance and Communications in U.S. Monetary Policy,” Imperial College, London, U.K., November 20, 2014; Loretta J. Mester, “The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy Communications,” National Association for Business Economics 2015 Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C., March 9, 2015; Loretta J. Mester, “Recent Inflation Developments and Challenges for Research and Monetary Policymaking,” The 47th Konstanz Seminar on Monetary Theory and Monetary Policy, Insel Reichenau, Germany, May 12, 2016; Loretta J. Mester, “Acknowledging Uncertainty,” Shadow Open Market Committee Fall Meeting, New York, NY, October 7, 2016; Loretta J. Mester, “A Serenity Prayer for Monetary Policymakers,” Global Interdependence Center, Central Banking Series, Singapore, February 20, 2017. 10 public a better sense of the reasonable amount of variation to expect in forecasts and in outcomes relative to projections. The confidence bands are also a helpful reminder to policymakers to remain humble about our ability to know the future with much certainty. Figures 1 to 4 show 70 percent confidence intervals (in light blue and teal) around the median projections from the FOMC’s March SEP. If the level of uncertainty is similar to that experienced in the past and the upside and downside risks around the forecast are broadly balanced, then there’s a 70 percent probability that the actual outcomes will lie within the band. For example, for real GDP growth, a 70 percent confidence interval around the forecast is about ±1.6 percentage points for this year and a little over ±2.0 percentage points for each of the following two years. The intervals tend to fan out over time because there is increasingly more opportunity for unforeseen shocks to occur. The miss of the FOMC’s early 2012 forecast that I referred to earlier was within the interval. The confidence bands around forecasts of unemployment and inflation are also pretty wide. So the FOMC’s forecast performance has been quite reasonable by this metric. The policy path in the SEP receives considerable scrutiny. In March, there was essentially no change in the median policy path compared to December because there was little change in the economic outlook. The median projection for the federal funds rate is 1.4 percent at the end of this year, 2.1 percent at the end of next year, and 3 percent at the end of 2019, which is its median longer-run value. The SEP indicates that most participants expect that an upward path of policy will be appropriate based on their current assessment of the outlook. The federal funds rate path differs from the other variables in the SEP because policymakers choose the path. But because there is uncertainty around the economic outlook, there is also uncertainty around the appropriate policy path. The confidence band is a reminder that the median policy path in the SEP is not meant to be a firm commitment on the part of the FOMC. Instead, policy should be expected to respond 11 to changes in economic and financial conditions that materially affect the medium-run outlook. As you can see, the range of reasonable outcomes for the policy path is actually quite wide, and considerably wider than some of the variation we’ve seen in the SEP policy path over time, even though those small shifts have often drawn considerable media attention. The dispersion in forecasts across participants also receives attention, but as you can see in the figures, that dispersion – shown in dark blue for the economic variables and in the famous dot plot for the fed funds rate – is quite a bit narrower than the degree of uncertainty around the forecasts. Conclusion The addition of fan charts to the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections is the most recent step the Committee has taken on its journey of increased transparency and better communication. The FOMC will continue to strive for further improvements because when the public has a better understanding of how monetary policy decisions are made, the policy itself is more effective, and the public will have the information it needs to hold us accountable for our decisions. This accountability provides a crucial foundation for allowing monetary policymakers to pursue the congressionally mandated goals of price stability and maximum employment free from short-run political considerations. This independence of monetary policy decisions results in better economic outcomes. Because our policy decisions depend on the economic outlook, it is important for the FOMC to provide as much information as we can on our current assessment of the outlook, at the same time explaining that the forecast can change because economic conditions can evolve differently than expected. Let me conclude with something former Fed Chair Alan Greenspan once said about monetary policy: “Because monetary policy works with a lag, we need to be forward looking, taking actions to forestall imbalances that may not be visible for many months. There is no alternative to basing actions on forecasts, at least implicitly. It means that often we need to tighten or ease before the need for action is evident to the public at large, and that policy may have to reverse course from time to time as the 12 underlying forces acting on the economy shift. This process is not easy to get right at all times, and it is often difficult to convey to the American people, whose support is essential to our mission.”5 Alan Greenspan made these remarks more than 20 years ago, yet they strike me as just as relevant today as they were then. 5 Alan Greenspan, “The Challenge of Central Banking in a Democratic Society,” remarks at the Annual Dinner and Francis Boyer Lecture of the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, Washington D.C., December 5, 1996. 13 14

Updates on the Economy and the Federal Reserve’s Payments System Improvement Initiative Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Tenth Annual Risk Conference: “Promise and Peril: Managing the Uncertainty of Rapid Innovation and a Changing Economy” Co-hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and DePaul University’s Center for Financial Services Chicago, IL March 30, 2017 1 Introduction I thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and DePaul University’s Center for Financial Services for inviting me to participate in this Tenth Annual Risk Conference. A conference series that has lasted a decade has something going for it, and this series is no exception. The first risk conference was held in 2008, in the midst of an emerging financial crisis, when the deficiencies in risk management and measurement became all too apparent. I think we have learned a thing or two since then – at least I hope we have. One of those things is that the world is constantly moving and innovating. Financial services is no exception. Given the important role that financial services plays in the economy, it behooves all of us – providers, supervisors, regulators, and consumers – to understand the risks that are inherent in the financial system and to manage those risks effectively so that the benefits of a sound and stable financial system can be realized for all. Although the technological changes affecting the industry are accelerating, we shouldn’t let that distract us from the fundamental matter of risk management. While technological change may increase some risks, it also has the potential to improve our methods of assessing risks, and we should harness its power. Technological change is very apparent in the payments system. This morning, I will focus a large portion of my remarks on an initiative that the Federal Reserve is leading to address the rapidly changing landscape in the payments industry in the U.S. This initiative is a collaborative effort between the Fed and a broad array of private-sector participants, and aims to improve the speed, efficiency, security, and ubiquity of the U.S. payments system. I am happy to say that the effort has made significant progress and that several important milestones will be reached this year. But before I turn to payments, it behooves me to say a little bit about the economy in which the payments system plays such an important role. I should add that what I say today about payments and about the economy are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 2 The Underlying Fundamentals Supporting the Economic Expansion Are Sound At its mid-March meeting, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate by one-quarter percentage point to 3/4 to 1 percent. This decision was based on the Committee’s view of actual and expected economic performance, the risks around the outlook, and the progress toward our goals of maximum employment and price stability. I fully supported this further step on the path of increases in the federal funds rate that the Committee has indicated for some time is likely to be appropriate to achieve and maintain our objectives, should the economy evolve as anticipated. In my view, the underlying fundamentals supporting the economic expansion are sound. Looking through the quarterly pattern of ups and downs, we find that output has sustained a moderate pace of about 2 percent growth, on average, over the past three years. While growth in the first quarter may come in on the weak side, I think this largely reflects transitory factors and residual seasonality in the data, and I see favorable fundamentals as supportive of GDP growth over the next year at somewhat above trend, which I estimate at 2 percent. These fundamentals include accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, improved household balance sheets and income growth, and continued strength in the labor market. In 2016, the economy added over 2.2 million jobs, about 187,000 per month on average. This year, that strength has been sustained, with an average increase of 237,000 jobs per month in January and February, well above estimates of trend employment growth. In a further sign of strength, as the economy has added jobs, labor force participation has been basically stable for the past three years rather than declining like its trend, and the unemployment rate has been moving down. In February, the unemployment rate stood at 4.7 percent, less than half of its peak after the Great Recession. Although payroll job growth is likely to slow a bit from its current pace, given the progress that’s already been made, it will be sufficient to put further downward pressure on the 3 unemployment rate. I expect the unemployment rate to stay below my estimate of its longer-run rate of 5 percent over the next two years. For a while, inflation has been running below the Fed’s target of 2 percent. But inflation has picked up over the past year and is moving in the right direction. There are likely to be monthly variations in the inflation numbers as previous changes in energy and import prices roll out of our year-over-year measures, and current fluctuations roll in. In determining where we are relative to goal, we need to look through transitory movements in the numbers, both those above and those below our goal, and focus on where inflation is going on a sustained basis. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, and with appropriate adjustments in monetary policy, I believe the conditions are in place for a sustained return over the next year or so to our symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation. Conditions supporting the return to goal include the firmer data on inflation, reasonably stable inflation expectations, continued strength in the labor market, and growth expected to be at or slightly above trend. The appropriate adjustments in monetary policy are those that will sustain the expansion so that our longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment are met and maintained. If economic conditions evolve as anticipated, I believe further removal of accommodation via increases in the fed funds rate will be needed. My current assessment is that the pace of removal won’t call for an increase in the fed funds rate at each meeting, but it does mean more than the one-increase-per-year seen in the past two years. This upward policy path will help prolong the expansion, not curtail it. It will help avoid a build-up of risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy is allowed to overheat, as well as risks to financial stability if interest rates remain too low and encourage investors to take on excessively risky investments in a search for yield. 4 Along with its rate increase, in mid-March the FOMC also announced that it was maintaining its policy of reinvesting the proceeds of maturing Treasury securities and principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, essentially maintaining the Fed’s balance sheet at its very large size. The balance sheet grew when the Fed undertook several programs to purchase longer-term assets. The FOMC used this nontraditional policy tool to address the Great Recession, once its traditional policy tool, the fed funds rate, had been reduced to effectively zero. As Chair Yellen mentioned in her press briefing, the FOMC is discussing its reinvestment policy, but no decisions have been made. If economic conditions evolve as I anticipate, I would be comfortable changing our reinvestment policy this year. I view this as consistent with our principles of policy normalization and our statement that we anticipate continuing reinvestments “until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way.”1 Ending reinvestments is a first step toward reducing the size of the balance sheet and returning its composition to primarily Treasury securities over time – a welcome acknowledgment that the economy and policy are transitioning back to normal. The Payments System Is Vital to a Sound Economy I don’t think anyone would disagree with the statement that a well-functioning and secure payments system is vital to a sound economy. Like highways, bridges, railroads, and water treatment plants, the payments system is a critical part of the infrastructure of our country. As the nation’s central bank, the Federal Reserve has an interest in promoting the macroeconomic and financial stability of our nearly $19 trillion economy, and our oversight of the payments system has this in mind. Indeed, everyone in the country has a stake in a sound payments system. According to the Fed’s latest payments study, in 2015 consumers, businesses, and government agencies executed 144 billion noncash, nonwire-transfer payments with a value of almost $178 trillion; that’s an average of 550 million payments worth $680 billion per working day.2 Because the current system works well, most people have spent little time 1 See, “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” FOMC, September 17, 2014, and the FOMC post-meeting statement of March 15, 2017. 5 thinking about the backbone that makes these payments possible and ensures that the payments system is reliable and secure. But with the changes brought by new technology, more people are seeking new ways to execute transactions, whether it be online or via cell phone, and they want to execute them faster. For example, the U.S. Census Bureau reports that e-commerce sales accounted for about 8 percent of total U.S. retail sales in 2016, more than double their share of 10 years ago.3 According to analysis commissioned by the Federal Reserve, about a third of consumers and three-quarters of businesses are willing to pay a fee for payments that offer faster availability to the payee.4 Demand is also rising for a more efficient way to execute payments across international borders, and to make person-to-person payments. On the supply side, we have seen an expanded set of providers, beyond traditional commercial banks, seeking to satisfy this demand for new and faster payments. Of course, innovation is nothing new. The U.S. has experienced a long history of payments system innovation, including the introduction of ATMs and debit cards, the move from paper checks to check imaging and electronic presentment, the introduction of online bill payment with the advent of the Internet, and expanded offerings of mobile banking. Some of the enhancements, like check imaging, made the system more efficient, while others, like chip credit and debit cards, made the system more secure. Yet, we have seen an increasingly rapid pace of technological change over the past several years, and this is again driving change in the industry. While the current system is working, we have to 2 These include debit card, credit card, ACH, and check payments. See “The Federal Reserve Payments Study 2016,” December 28, 2016. 3 See U.S. Census Bureau, “Quarterly Retail E-Commerce Sales: 4th Quarter 2016,” February 17, 2017, and the adjusted time-series data, “Estimated Quarterly U.S. Retail Sales (Adjusted): Total and E -Commerce.” In this report, e-commerce sales are “sales of goods and services where the buyer places an order, or the price and t erms of the sale are negotiated over an Internet, mobile device (M-commerce), extranet, Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) network, electronic mail, or other comparable online system. Payment may or may not be made online.” 4 See Federal Reserve Financial Services, “Key Themes from Consultation Paper Feedback and End-User Research,” April 2014. 6 recognize that the evolution of the payments landscape has led to a fragmented patchwork of payment vehicles and providers, often lacking interoperability with one another or the ability to combine invoice information with a payment. The complexity of the payments system, involving incumbent providers, new entrants, and end users, makes it harder to coordinate payments innovations. Platforms for making payments, including ACH, check, and credit and debit card systems, are lagging behind the technological advances. The current U.S. payments system has not kept up with the evolving expectations and demands of end-user consumers and businesses. Nor has it kept up with developments in other countries that have taken steps to modernize their payments systems. According to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), nearly 20 countries have either implemented or are building systems that offer real-time or nearly real-time payments, available as near as possible to 24 hours, 7 days a week. The role the central bank played in fostering these systems differs across countries; the roles include catalyst, overseer, and/or operator. The Federal Reserve Is Taking a Collaborative Approach to Fostering Payments Modernization The role that the Federal Reserve is playing in our payments system initiative is broadly a leadership/catalyst role. Assessing the trends in the payments landscape, the Federal Reserve and a diverse set of industry stakeholders have come to agree that the U.S. payments system needs to evolve further and faster to support the changing nature of commerce, keep pace with the global economy, meet the changing needs of end users, and address new and ongoing threats to security. An improved payments system – one that is more efficient and also secure – has several benefits. It will contribute to public confidence, economic growth, and global competitiveness. In addition to meeting customer demand, a modernized payments system could have an added societal benefit by helping the unbanked and underbanked join the financial mainstream, thereby receiving its benefits. It could also help low- income households, small businesses, and others who need to closely manage their finances to gain faster access to their funds. 7 In 2015, the Federal Reserve Board and Reserve Banks published a paper laying out the strategies and tactics that the Federal Reserve is pursuing in collaboration with a broad array of payments system stakeholders to facilitate the move to a faster, more efficient, ubiquitous, and secure payments system.5 Of course, a lot of work was done before the 2015 paper was published. In 2002 and in 2012, the Fed undertook gap and opportunity assessments of the payments environment. It sought and received considerable input from the public on possible improvements to the payments system.6 That work helped frame the current initiative that seeks to achieve five outcomes: (1) a payments system that offers a safe and faster electronic solution for making a variety of personal and business payments, and one that is ubiquitous and available on demand; (2) one that is secure and resilient, so the public can have high confidence in it; (3) an efficient payments system that offers better value to consumers and businesses; (4) one that allows for cross-border payments in a more convenient, cost-effective, and timely way; and (5) a payments system that has been improved via a collaborative process involving a broad array of payment participants.7 To further this work, the Fed has taken a leadership role to spur a private-sector solution that will align private-sector interests with those of the public. We view this as consistent with our responsibility to foster a well-functioning payments system for the benefit of the public. The Fed believes that comprehensive improvement of the system for making payments end-to-end will require a comprehensive approach. It will need collaboration among and actions from a diverse set of payment stakeholders, including traditional and nontraditional payment providers, technology companies, the government, and end-user businesses and consumers. We think this collaboration will encourage ubiquitous access and widespread adoption of new payment-system capabilities, which are keys to success. 5 See “Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System,” Federal Reserve System, January 26, 2015. This paper and other information on the Federal Reserve payments improvement initiative can be found on the website FedPaymentsImprovement.org. 6 See “Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper,” The Federal Reserve Banks, September 10, 2013; and “The Future of Retail Electronic Payments Systems: Industry Interviews and Analysis ,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Staff Study 175, December 2002. 7 See “Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System.” 8 Note that the Fed’s initiative is not preempting or competing with other efforts already being undertaken by the industry; nor is it halting our efforts to improve the efficiency of the payment services the Fed itself provides. For example, late last year, Early Warning announced its Zelle network, a faster payments network available to mobile banking customers, and The Clearing House, a large-bank association and payments company, is working on a real-time payments system that will be available to all U.S. financial institutions and is expected to be operable this year.8 Also, last September the Federal Reserve enhanced its same-day ACH service, consistent with NACHA’s (formerly, the National Automated Clearinghouse Association) new rules, which will result in wider usage of this service.9 And the Fed has also adopted new global messaging standards (ISO 20022) for wire and cross-border ACH payments to ensure better interoperability across platforms. I should note that the Fed’s approach to supporting and guiding the various parties working on improving the payments system differs somewhat from approaches taken in other countries. Perhaps this is not too surprising. For one thing, the number of entities involved in the U.S. payments system is quite large. According to BIS statistics, in 2015, over 12,000 entities offered payments services to non-banks in the U.S., compared to around 160 in Australia and around 360 in the United Kingdom.10 Even if we normalize this by population, the U.S. has many more service providers: 39 per million inhabitants in the U.S., compared to under 7 in Australia and under 6 in the U.K. In addition, the Fed does not have the 8 See “Early Warning Announces Zelle Network, October 24, 2016, and “The Clearing House to Undertake a Multi- Year Effort to Design and Develop a Secure, Real-Time Payment System,” The Clearing House press release, October 22, 2014; and “Innovative Real-Time Payment System for the U.S. – VocaLink,” The Clearing House press release, October 26, 2015. 9 See “Federal Reserve Board Approves Enhancements to Reserve Banks' Same -day ACH Service,” press release, September 23, 2015, “Enhancements to Federal Reserve Bank Same-Day ACH Service,” Federal Register, 80(187), September 28, 2015, pp. 58248-58253, and Same-Day ACH Resource Center on the Federal Reserve Bank Services website. Also see Strategy 5: Enhanced Federal Reserve Services in “Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System: A Progress Report,” Federal Reserve System, January 2017. 10 See Comparative Table 4, p. 450, in Bank for International Settlements, Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, “Statistics on Payment, Clearing, and Settlement Systems in the CPMI Countries: Figures for 2015 ,” December 2016 (http://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d155.htm). 9 power to mandate a solution, nor could we implement meaningful payment improvement on our own. We recognize that many payment innovations have come from the industry. Of course, even countries that have officially mandated changes to speed the adoption of more efficient payments systems recognize the important role the industry must play. For example, the Faster Payments Service launched in the U.K. in 2008 was implemented by the private sector at the request of the government.11 The New Payments Platform for immediate low-value payments, currently being built in Australia and expected to be operational in the second half of this year, was an industry-based solution proposed after the Reserve Bank of Australia, that country’s central bank, undertook a review of payments innovation and published strategic objectives it expected the payments system to meet.12 Considerable Progress Has Been Made on the Fed’s Payments System Improvement Initiative Stakeholder engagement has been better than we might have hoped for. Our Payments Strategy Director, Gordon Werkema, who oversees the initiative, hails from right here, the Chicago Fed, and has done a remarkable job. Two task forces were initiated in 2015 to work toward proposed solutions to our goals. In setting up the task forces, we knew it was important to have the perspectives of the diverse set of representatives with an interest in the payments system. The Faster Payments Task Force has over 300 members from eight segments, including small, medium, and large financial institutions; nonbank providers like technology companies; consumer interest organizations; government end users; business end users; and other industry segments, including regulators, rules and standards organizations, consultants, and academic institutions.13 The Payments Security Task Force has over 175 members, and it, too, includes wide stakeholder representation. These task forces are operating under the direction of 11 See Fumiko Hayashi, “Faster Payments in the United States: How Can Private Sector Systems Achieve Public Policy Goals?” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Research Working Paper no. 15 -03, June 2015. 12 See “Strategic Review of Innovation in the Payments System: Conclusions,” Reserve Bank of Australia, June 2012; and “RBA Core Criteria for a ‘Fast Payments’ Solution,” Reserve Bank of Australia, November 2012. 13 For more information, see the Fed’s payments improvement initiative’s website at https://fedpaymentsimprovement.org. 10 steering committees and have set up a framework for ensuring that task-force decisions and work products have broad support across members. Several work streams are now underway. The Faster Payments Task Force reached an important milestone in February 2016 when the Faster Payments Effectiveness Criteria were published.14 This set of criteria is being used to evaluate whether proposed alternative approaches would be effective in delivering a safe and ubiquitous faster payments capability. The 36 criteria fall into six categories: ubiquity, efficiency, safety, speed, legal considerations, and governance. The criteria were not intended to be a set of minimum requirements, but rather to differentiate the effectiveness of proposals across many dimensions, recognizing that many times there may be tradeoffs. For example, higher speed might entail lower security unless coupled with a mitigant. In the next stage, participants submitted proposed solutions for faster payments. Nineteen proposals have progressed through the review process, with reviews by an independent assessment team and the members of the two task forces. In an effort to be transparent about the process and the progress being made, in January, the Faster Payments Task Force published the first part of its final report, providing an overview of the task force’s mission and process, and the motivation for the work given the payments landscape. The second part of the final report will be published this summer. It will provide details of the proposed solutions for faster payments that have been evaluated against the effectiveness criteria, as well as a discussion of challenges, opportunities, and recommendations to the industry for implementing faster payments solutions. It is very important not to think about faster payments separately from secure payments. Indeed, each proposed faster payments solution is being assessed in terms of its security, including identity 14 Information on the effectiveness criteria is available on the Fed’s payments improvement initiative’s website at https://fedpaymentsimprovement.org/faster-payments/effectiveness-criteria/. 11 management, authentication, the security of sensitive information as the payment travels through the system, the handling of fraudulent or erroneous payments, and the robustness of the system. While the types of risks need not change with faster payments, some risks might be exacerbated. For example, while a faster payments system makes funds available to the payee much faster, settlement may still take some time. Deferred settlement means that the payee’s payments system is taking on credit risk until it gets the funds from the payer’s payments system. To reduce this risk, some, but not all, of the faster payments systems around the world couple real-time or near real-time settlement with faster payments.15 In addition to considering the security of the future faster payments system, the Secure Payments Task Force is also focusing on the security of the current payments system. The task force has mapped existing identity management practices in end-to-end payment flows to help discover ways to improve current practices; it has defined guiding principles for protecting sensitive data associated with payments, which could serve as the foundation for building a more comprehensive data-protection framework for the industry; and it has completed an inventory of current industry efforts to share information for fraud and risk prevention. As indicated in the January progress report, the Secure Payments Task Force plans to release further information on these initiatives later this year.16 There Is More Work to Be Done As I mentioned, the Faster Payments Task Force will publish the second part of its final report this summer, providing evaluations of the proposed solutions in terms of their effectiveness in providing the U.S. with a faster, more efficient, ubiquitous, and secure payments system. But that’s just the start of what 15 See Committee on Payments and Markets, Bank for International Settlements, “Fast Payments – Enhancing the Speed and Availability of Retail Payments,” November 2016. Also, for a discussion of some of the risks involved in faster payments, see Julius Weyman, “Risks in Faster Payments,” Retail Payments Risk Forum Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, May 2016. Weyman studies 15 faster payment schemes and finds that one-third involved real-time or near real-time settlement. 16 See Federal Reserve System, “Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System: Progress Report,” January 2017. 12 needs to be accomplished to modernize the U.S. payments system. A lot of further work will be needed to implement solutions, and I believe it will require the same high level of collaboration across the many payments system stakeholders that has proved to be so important to the progress made to date. At the same time, the Federal Reserve System, which has served as a catalyst for this effort, will need to consider what further steps we should take to support payments system modernization. As I mentioned earlier, central banks across the globe have played different roles in fostering their countries’ efforts regarding faster and secure payments. Some have served as catalysts, others have overseen industry efforts, and others have been providers. Today, the Federal Reserve plays all three roles with respect to payments. We have been a leader and catalyst for the current initiative, we provide retail and wholesale payment services, and we have some supervisory and regulatory oversight responsibility for the payments system deriving from the fact that a well-functioning and secure payments system plays an important role in fostering macroeconomic and financial stability in the public interest. The technological change we’ve experienced in recent years isn’t likely to stop, so it seems prudent that we should be working to ensure that our payments system evolves in a productive way. Innovation, competition, collaboration, broad accessibility, common standards, risk management, and appropriate supervision and regulation – all are important facets of a well-functioning payments system. Indeed, as the payments system evolves, I anticipate that how we go about effectively supervising the payments system will need to evolve as well to ensure that the system remains secure, effective, and broadly accessible. As new providers enter the field, we’ll need to focus on the risks rather than on the type of entity providing the service. One way in which central banks in several countries are supporting innovation in payments systems is by providing a “regulatory sandbox.” Such a sandbox allows private-sector firms to test out innovative products, services, business models, or methods of delivery in a real-life environment, with some reduction 13 in full regulatory requirements but with appropriate safeguards for consumers and the financial system in place during the experiments. The U.K. was the first country to provide such a sandbox in 2016, and several other countries, including Australia, Hong Kong, Malaysia, and Singapore, also offer sandboxes.17 Regulatory sandboxes have the potential to encourage more competition and faster, more effective innovation in the payments system, by allowing new ideas to be tried out, to be made more effective through experimentation, and to be designed to better comply with consumer protections and other regulatory requirements. Even if the tested ideas aren’t brought to market, finding out early on that an idea won’t work would seem to be very valuable information. The industry seems to have viewed the introduction of the sandboxes favorably. For example, the regulatory sandbox in the U.K. received 69 applications for its first cohort from a wide variety of firm-types, including start-ups and incumbents, with 24 applications meeting the eligibility requirements to move on to development toward testing. Although they are in their early stages, I find the regulatory sandboxes to be an intriguing idea and will be following the results closely. They provide but one example of the type of productive collaboration that central banks and regulators can have with the payments industry. The Federal Reserve’s payments modernization efforts, which I discussed today, are another important example of the value of collaboration. As the work moves forward, the Federal Reserve is committed to facilitating collaborative efforts with payment stakeholders to foster the move to a faster, secure, efficient, and ubiquitous payments system in the U.S. on behalf of the public. 17 See the remarks by Christopher Woolard, U.K. Financial Conduct Authority Director of Strategy and Competition, at the Innovate Finance Global Summit, April 11, 2016; U.K. Financial Conduct Authority, “Regulatory Sandbox,” November 2015; the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority’s regulatory sandbox web page; the Australian Securities and Investments Commission’s regulatory sandbox web page; Hong Kong Monetary Authority Fintech Supervisory Sandbox, circular B1/15C, B9/29C to all authorized institutions, September 6, 2016; Bank Negara Malaysia (Central Bank of Malaysia) Financial Technology Regulatory Sandbox Framework and press release; Monetary Authority of Singapore FinTech regulatory sandbox web page and FinTech Regulatory Sandbox Guidelines, November 2016.

The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Chicago Council on Global Affairs Chicago, IL May 8, 2017 1 Introduction I thank the Chicago Council on Global Affairs for this opportunity to speak about the economy and monetary policy. I was very pleased to receive this invitation from Michael Moskow. I have known Michael for quite a while now, having seen him in action around the FOMC table when he was president of the Chicago Fed and I was the director of research at the Philadelphia Fed. Michael personified what’s best about the FOMC’s collegial atmosphere. He was able to explain his thinking, listen to alternative views, and then persuade others about the appropriate path forward. Michael’s last FOMC meeting was on August 16, 2007. It was the second unscheduled conference call that month and the FOMC discussed the profound deterioration in credit market conditions. Of course, we all know what happened to the economy after that. It is common knowledge that Michael stepped down as Chicago Fed president because he had reached the official term limit, but I’m now wondering if the timing might also reflect his very keen ability to forecast the future. As everyone in this room knows, economic forecasting is both science and art. Today, I will discuss my outlook for the economy and my views on monetary policy. Of course, these are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook The economic expansion turns eight years old next month. It got off to a slow start from a very weak place, but now this expansion is one of the longest on record. While the quarterly pattern has had its share of ups and downs, output growth has maintained a moderate pace of a bit more than 2 percent, on average, over the expansion. The sustainability of the expansion through various economic shocks is a testament to the U.S. economy’s resiliency. While some of the recent readings on real activity have been soft, it is normal to see variability in the monthly and quarterly data. 2 In my view, the underlying fundamentals supporting continued expansion remain sound. These fundamentals include accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, improved household balance sheets, and strength in the labor market that has led to increases in personal income. In addition, although geopolitical risks remain, global economic conditions have improved. Supported by accommodative monetary policy, the recovery in Europe has gained traction, with unemployment rates down and inflation moving up, and the slowdown in the Chinese economy has been more orderly and moderate than what some had feared early last year. While there are upside and downside risks around my forecast, my modal outlook is that over the next year, the U.S. economy will expand at a pace at or slightly above its longer-run trend, which I estimate to be about 2 percent, and the unemployment rate will move further below its longer-run level, which I estimate to be about 5 percent. With appropriate adjustments in monetary policy, I believe the conditions are in place for a sustained return over the next year or so to our symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation. Let me put this outlook into context. Economic growth Despite the strong fundamentals, GDP growth in the first quarter was weak. At this point, I’m not taking much of a signal about future growth from that reading; there are reasons to think this was a transitory slowdown. We’ve seen a pattern over the past several years of weak growth in the first quarter followed by stronger growth in subsequent quarters. So even though the data are adjusted for seasonal effects, there appears to be some residual seasonality in the GDP data.1 The unseasonably warm weather early in the year appears to have weighed on growth, shifting spending from one quarter to another. For example, after growing strongly in the fourth quarter of last year, 1 See Kurt G. Lunsford, “Lingering Residual Seasonality in GDP Growth,” Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Number 2017-06, March 28, 2017, and Glenn D. Rudebusch, Daniel Wilson, and Tim Mahedy, “The Puzzle of Weak First-Quarter GDP Growth,” Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 2015- 16, May 18, 2015. 3 consumer spending, which makes up about two-thirds of U.S. output, decelerated in the first quarter in part because the warm weather led to lower spending on utilities. It is usually a good idea to average through some of these ups and down when trying to detect the underlying trend. Readings on consumer sentiment and confidence remain high, but more important for spending, personal incomes are growing. So the softness in the first quarter hasn’t changed my medium-run outlook, and I expect a rebound in consumer spending over the rest of the year. The housing sector continues to gradually improve. Despite a rise in mortgage rates, demand for housing is increasing, and in some places, supply has not kept pace with demand. The months’ supply of existing homes on the market has fallen to under four months, its lowest level since early 2005. Business contacts report that, in some cases, it has been difficult to find construction workers to build new supply. The mismatch between supply and demand is putting upward pressure on home prices, which are rising at about a 6 percent pace, on average, nationally. It shouldn’t be too surprising that the housing recovery has been a moderate one. The housing boom and crash are not something anyone wants to repeat. It took some time for household balance sheets and the labor market to recover to a point where households were confident enough to take on mortgage debt again. Borrowers are being careful not to take on more debt than they can handle, and lenders are extending credit, but to those with good credit quality. Multifamily housing activity has picked up more than single-family housing. Going forward, the mix between multifamily and single-family housing may differ from what it has been in the past, as both younger people and empty-nesters are drawn to urban environments, and some prefer to rent rather than buy. Overall, I expect activity in the sector to continue to expand at a sustainable pace. Business activity and investment are starting to strengthen after being quite subdued last year and through much of the expansion. The sizable drop in oil prices from over $100 per barrel in mid-2014 to around $30 in early 2016 led to a sharp pullback in the drilling and mining sectors and their suppliers. The 20 4 percent appreciation of the dollar from mid-2014 to the end of 2015 hurt manufacturers and other firms dependent on exports. But since then, conditions supporting business spending have improved. Oil prices began to firm in early 2016 and have been roughly stable near $50 per barrel since then, and the dollar has appreciated only modestly, on net, over the past year. In addition, the firming in global economic growth has increased demand for U.S. exports. U.S. business sentiment is at a very high level, but it has not translated into a surge in activity. Nonetheless, we are starting to see a pickup in business spending, driven by the improvement in underlying economic conditions. This gives me some confidence in positive momentum even if there is some downward adjustment in expectations going forward. Mining activity has increased: the number of active oil drilling rigs remains well below the level seen before the oil price drop, but has roughly doubled over the past year. National and regional manufacturing surveys suggest an improvement in activity and capital spending plans even if overall sentiment has been tempered. Even though motor vehicle production softened in March, manufacturing production was higher in the first quarter compared to the fourth quarter and compared to a year ago. This is particularly good news for the Cleveland Fed and Chicago Fed Districts, which have a higher share of employment in manufacturing compared to the nation. Both regions felt the brunt of the cyclical pullback in manufacturing, as well as the longer-run shift from manufacturing to services.2 Contacts in the Cleveland Fed District tell us that even if some of the proposals for tax reform, health insurance, infrastructure spending, and regulatory changes are delayed, they expect the business environment to remain positive and that this will translate into further increases in business spending and hiring. I would welcome a pickup in business investment in plant, equipment, and research and development because investment is an important factor influencing underlying productivity growth. Structural 2 The Cleveland Fed District includes Ohio, western Pennsylvania, eastern Kentucky, and the northern panhandle of West Virginia. The Chicago Fed District includes all of Iowa and most of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, and Wisconsin. Manufacturing employment is 8.5 percent of total payroll employment in the U.S. and 12 percent of total payroll employment in these nine states; these states account for 32 percent of U.S. manufacturing employment. 5 productivity growth – how effectively the economy combines its labor and capital inputs to create output – is a key determinant of an economy’s longer-run growth rate, the standard of living of its people, and wage growth. And productivity growth depends on factors like investment in human and physical capital and R&D that yields innovative products and processes. Over the past five years, labor productivity, measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector, has grown at an annual rate of only about a half of a percent; over the entire expansion it has averaged 1 percent. This is a step down from the 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent pace seen over the prior two expansions. Some of the slowdown in productivity growth likely reflects the difficulty in measuring productivity in the service sector, including health care, intellectual property, and information technology, which is becoming a larger share of the U.S. economy. Some of the slowdown is likely cyclical, reflecting persistent effects of the Great Recession. Indeed, it took a long time for investment in physical and human capital, key determinants of productivity growth, to emerge during this expansion. As the expansion continues and investment expands, it is reasonable to assume that the cyclical impediments will abate and we’ll see somewhat stronger productivity growth. This assumption underlies my expectation that longer-run growth will be 2 percent. But, in addition to measurement and cyclical issues, structural factors are likely weighing on productivity growth, as well. Monetary policy cannot address these structural issues, but other government policies, if they are well-designed and focused on spurring productive investments in human and physical capital, R&D, and innovation, would be helpful, and could, with sufficient time, lead to a somewhat higher longer-run growth rate.3 Another important determinant of long-run growth is growth in the labor force. U.S. demographic factors, including the aging of the population and a lower birth rate, especially if coupled with restrictions on immigration, suggest that labor force growth will be considerably slower than it has been in recent 3 See the discussion in Loretta J. Mester, “A Serenity Prayer for Monetary Policymakers,” remarks at the Global Interdependence Center Central Banking Series, Singapore, February 20, 2017. 6 decades. This means longer-run growth will likely remain lower than the 3 to 3-1/2 percent rate seen over the 1980s and 1990s.4 Indeed, the downward trend in the labor force participation rate is one of the factors we consider when assessing the condition of the labor market. So let me discuss labor market developments now. Labor markets In 2016, the economy added over 2.2 million jobs, about 187,000 jobs per month on average. Over the first four months of this year, firms sustained that pace, with a monthly average gain of 185,000 jobs. This is a slower pace than in the two expansions in the 1980s and 1990s.5 But it’s important to remember that because trend labor force participation is lower, trend employment growth is also lower. Indeed, estimates of trend employment growth range from around 75,000 to 120,000 per month, depending on the precise assumptions one makes about labor force participation. So the recent employment growth numbers are well above trend. As the economy has added jobs, the unemployment rate has moved down. It stood at 4.4 percent in April, less than half its peak of 10 percent in late 2009 and at the lowest reading achieved in the previous expansion. Although payroll job growth is likely to slow a bit from its current pace given the progress that has already been made in the labor market, I expect the pace will be sufficient to keep the unemployment rate below my estimate of its longer-run rate of 5 percent over the next two years. Other gauges of the under-utilization of labor have also improved significantly. For example, the broader U6 measure of unemployment, which includes the number of part-time workers who would rather work 4 The Congressional Budget Office currently estimates that potential GDP growth averaged 3.4 percent per year over 1982-1990 and 3.3 percent per year over 1991-2001; it projects that potential growth will average 1.8 percent per year over 2017-2027. See Congressional Budget Office, The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027, January 2017. 5 Payroll job gains averaged nearly 230,000 per month over the December 1982 -July 1990 expansion and about 200,000 per month over the April 1991-March 2001 expansion. 7 full time and the number of people who have been discouraged from looking for a job, has fallen to its lowest level since late 2007. In addition, the labor force participation rate has been essentially stable for the past three years. So relative to the downward trend, the stability we’ve seen in participation is actually another sign of strength in the labor market. For much of the expansion, wage growth has been subdued compared to what we’ve experienced in other expansions. Partly this reflects slow productivity growth.6 Still, we have seen a gradual acceleration in wages over time as labor market conditions have strengthened. For some time we have heard from our labor and business contacts across a broad set of industries that firms are having trouble finding qualified workers, both in high-skill occupations and in lower-skill jobs. More and more of these firms are responding by raising wages and offering other benefits to attract and retain workers. Contacts in the Cleveland Fed District expect wage increases to average about 3 percent this year, with significantly higher increases expected for highly skilled workers. These anecdotal reports are showing through to the wage data, where measures such as the employment cost index and average hourly earnings have accelerated from earlier in the recovery. This is a welcome state of affairs. As one of the characters in Beethoven’s opera “Fidelio” sings: “If you haven’t money by you, happiness is hard to find...But when it jingles round your pockets fate is at your mercy.” On balance, we’ve seen a sustained cyclical recovery in labor markets since the Great Recession. There are some longer-run structural issues that the country must tackle, such as making sure people have access to the training and development needed for the jobs in the modern economy. But from the standpoint of the cyclical conditions that monetary policy can address, I believe we have achieved the maximum employment part of the Fed’s monetary policy mandate. 6 Although actual wage setting is a complicated process, in economic models of competitive markets, real wages reflect the marginal product of workers. For a discussion of wages and their relationship to productivity growth over the expansion, see Roberto Pinheiro and Meifeng Yang, “Wage Growth after the Great Recession,” Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, March 21, 2017. 8 Inflation The other part of the Fed’s dual mandate is price stability. Consistent with meeting this part of the mandate over the longer run, the FOMC has set a goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year- over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. Most people understand why high inflation is a problem: it erodes the purchasing power of their money. But inflation that is too low is also a problem: it can lead consumers and businesses to delay purchases, thereby slowing the economy, and it increases debt burdens. For some time, inflation has been running below the Fed’s 2 percent goal, but over the past two years, inflation has been moving up. In March, we saw a decline in readings on consumer price inflation. But I’m taking little signal about the future path of inflation from those numbers. They partly reflected some one-off changes, such as the decline in prices for cell phone service plans, and they came after strong readings in January and February. Measured year-over-year, headline PCE inflation stood at 1.8 percent in March, up from under 1 percent a year ago. In determining where inflation is relative to our goal, we need to look through transitory movements in the numbers, both those below and those above our goal, and focus on where inflation is headed and where it will be maintained on a sustained basis. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, but we know that we can’t keep actual inflation at 2 percent at each point in time; inevitably shocks hit the economy and the inflation numbers move, sometimes below our goal and sometimes above. Still, we want to take actions to keep inflation from running either persistently below or persistently above 2 percent. In other words, our goal is symmetric – it isn’t a ceiling – and we aim to keep inflation at 2 percent on a sustainable basis. With appropriate adjustments in monetary policy, I believe the conditions are in place for a sustained return over the next year or so to our symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation. These conditions include the 9 firming in inflation that we’ve seen over time, reasonably stable inflation expectations, continued strength in the labor market, and growth expected to be at or slightly above trend. Monetary Policy Appropriate adjustments in monetary policy are those that will sustain the expansion so that our longer- run goals of price stability and maximum employment are met and maintained. In my view, we have met the maximum employment part of our mandate and inflation is nearing our 2 percent goal. Although we live in a high-frequency world, we cannot overreact to transitory movements in incoming data; our policymaking has to focus on what changes in economic and financial conditions imply for the medium- run outlook and risks around the outlook.7 If economic conditions evolve as anticipated, I believe further removal of accommodation via increases in the federal funds rate will be needed. In March, the FOMC raised the target range for the fed funds rate by one-quarter percentage point to 3/4 to 1 percent, and last week, the FOMC decided to maintain this range. Both decisions are consistent with the gradual upward path of interest rates that the Committee has indicated for some time is likely to be appropriate to achieve and maintain our objectives, should the economy evolve as anticipated. This upward policy path will help prolong the expansion, not curtail it. It will help avoid a build-up of risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy is allowed to overheat and risks to financial stability, should overly low interest rates encourage investors to take on excessively risky investments in a search for yield. It will put monetary policy in a better position to address whichever risks, whether to the upside or downside, are ultimately realized. Given my outlook, I don’t believe that removing accommodation calls for an increase in the fed funds rate at each meeting, but I do anticipate more than the one-increase-per-year seen in the past two years. In 7 See the discussion in Loretta J. Mester, “The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy: Low-Frequency Policymaking in a High-Frequency World,” remarks to the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, NY, April 1, 2016. 10 addition, I think that it’s important for the FOMC to remain very vigilant against falling behind as we continue to make progress on our goals, especially given the low level of interest rates and the large size of our balance sheet. We know that monetary policy affects the economy with long and variable lags, so policy actions have to be taken before our policy goals are fully met. If we delay too long in taking the next normalization step and then find ourselves in a situation where the labor market becomes unsustainably tight, price pressures become excessive, and we have to move rates up steeply, we could risk a recession. This is a bad outcome that disproportionately harms the more vulnerable parts of our society. In addition to removing accommodation by raising interest rates, we also have to consider the Fed’s balance sheet. To address the financial crisis and Great Recession, the FOMC undertook several programs to purchase longer-maturity assets. These purchases aimed at putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates once the FOMC’s traditional policy tool, the fed funds rate, had been reduced to effectively zero. As a result of the purchases, the Fed’s balance sheet has grown from nearly $900 billion in assets in 2007 to about $4.5 trillion today, and its composition has changed from mainly short-term Treasury securities to mortgage-backed securities and longer-maturity Treasuries. Normalizing the stance of policy also means taking steps to normalize the balance sheet, and the FOMC recognized this need from the very start of using nontraditional tools. Currently, the FOMC is continuing to reinvest the proceeds of maturing Treasuries and principal payments from agency debt and mortgage- backed securities, essentially maintaining the balance sheet at its very large size. But, as indicated in the minutes of our March meeting, the FOMC is discussing its reinvestment policy, including when and how best to implement a change in reinvestments.8 Such a change should be done in a way that allows for a 8 The Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14-15, 2017, pp. 2-3. 11 gradual and predictable reduction in the Fed’s asset holdings so that over time the balance sheet is reduced to the smallest size needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively.9 In my view, if economic conditions evolve as I anticipate, I would be comfortable changing our reinvestment policy this year, with clear communication in advance about how we plan to implement the change. My preference is that once we decide on a plan, we stay with it; the fed funds rate should be our main tool for responding to changes in the outlook during normal times. Because it will take several years to reduce the size of the balance sheet through asset run-off, we can end reinvestments before we have decided on the ultimate size of the balance sheet. This decision is essentially one about our longer- run monetary policy implementation framework: do we want to operate with scarce banking reserves (the so-called corridor system) or abundant reserves (the so-called floor system)?10 Regardless of which framework is chosen, the Fed’s balance sheet will be considerably smaller than it is today. I view the purchase of longer-term assets as a nontraditional tool that should be reserved for nontraditional times, times when we have lowered our policy rate to near zero and we need to add more monetary policy stimulus because of a deterioration in economic and financial conditions. Ending reinvestments and beginning the journey toward a smaller balance sheet composed mainly of Treasury securities will be a welcome acknowledgment that the economy has entered normal times and policy is transitioning back to normal, too. Acknowledging Risks In concluding, it’s important to remind everyone that there are risks around the economic outlook, and because of that, policy is not pre-set. Policy needs to remain systematic in how it reacts to incoming information relevant to the outlook, but not be dogmatic should the outlook indeed materially change. 9 See “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” FOMC, September 17, 2014. 10 The FOMC has undertaken an extended effort to evaluate different frameworks for implementing monetary policy in the long run. See the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 28-29, 2015, July 26-27, 2016, and November 1-2, 2016. 12 In March, the FOMC began providing confidence bands around its economic and policy path projections.11 These are very good reminders to both the public and to policymakers that there is always a lot of uncertainty around economic forecasts. There’s forecast uncertainty because the economy is constantly being buffeted by shocks, data are revised over time, and it isn’t clear which model will best predict the future path of the economy. Today, I view the risks to the real economy and to inflation over the medium run – the time horizon relevant for monetary policy – as roughly balanced and see a gradual reduction in monetary policy accommodation as appropriate. I acknowledge that there are geopolitical risks out there, including tensions in North Korea and the Middle East, but these aren’t the kinds of risk that preemptive monetary policy action can mitigate. Still, these types of risk need to be recognized when assessing changes in economic and financial conditions. Indeed, some of the recent downward pressure on long-term interest rates likely reflects some flight-to-quality flows in the face of rising geopolitical tensions, rather than a material re-evaluation of the modal outlook. In addition, there remains uncertainty around what fiscal and other economic policies might be forthcoming. These include changes to infrastructure spending, regulation, and policies pertaining to taxes, immigration, and trade. When one gauges the effects – both positive and negative – of any forthcoming policy changes on the outlook for growth, employment, and inflation over the short, medium, and longer runs, the devil will be in the details in terms of the size, composition, timing, and financing of such initiatives. My view that it is appropriate to continue on our gradual path of monetary policy normalization is not dependent on fiscal policy but, instead, is based on my reading of the resiliency in the U.S. economy’s 11 See the confidence band charts in the Summary of Economic Projections portion of the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14-15, 2017. 13 underlying momentum and the progress we have made on reaching our monetary policy goals of maximum employment and price stability.

The Economic Outlook and Some Longer-Run Issues Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Club of Minnesota Minneapolis, MN May 18, 2017 1 Introduction I thank the Economic Club of Minnesota for the opportunity to speak today. In looking at your website, I noticed a long list of distinguished speakers, including many from the Federal Reserve and other central banks around the world. I also discovered that John Surma, former chairman and CEO of U.S. Steel and current chair of the Cleveland Fed’s Board of Directors, has addressed your group. And with my current colleague Neel Kashkari and former colleague, friend, and fellow opera lover Chris Cumming here, I feel a connection and I am honored to participate. Today, I will discuss my current outlook for the economy and my views on monetary policy. I will also talk about some longer-run issues facing the economy. Of course, these are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook The economic expansion will celebrate its eighth birthday next month – that’s 56 in dog years – which is long by historical standards. Of course, expansions don’t die from old age and there is no reason to think that this one cannot continue. In fact, one of my focuses as a monetary policymaker is to set policy to meet and maintain our dual mandate goals of price stability and maximum employment. Doing so will help promote continued expansion. The expansion got off to a slow start from a very weak place in the aftermath of the Great Recession. But the fact that the expansion has endured through a variety of economic shocks is a testament to the U.S. economy’s resiliency. First quarter readings on real activity were soft, but it is not unusual to see variability in the monthly and even the quarterly data. To get a reading on where the economy is headed, it is important to smooth through the volatility and focus on underlying fundamentals. I believe the fundamentals supporting continued expansion are sound. These fundamentals include accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, improved household balance sheets, and increases in personal 2 income that have come from the continued strength in labor markets. In addition, although geopolitical risks remain, economic conditions in our global trading partners have improved. Of course, we always need to view things with humility: economics is not an exact science, nothing is certain, and there are upside and downside risks to my forecast. With that in mind, my modal outlook is that over the next year, the U.S. economy will expand at a pace at or slightly above its longer-run trend, which I estimate to be about 2 percent, and the unemployment rate will remain below its longer-run level, which I estimate to be about 5 percent. With appropriate adjustments in monetary policy, I believe the conditions are in place for a sustained return over the next year or so to our symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation. Let me expand a bit on growth, employment, and inflation, before turning to monetary policy. Economic growth Despite the strong fundamentals, output growth in the first quarter was weak. I am not taking much of a signal about future growth from that reading. Some of the weakness reflects transitory factors like reduced spending on energy because of unseasonably warm weather early in the year. There is also likely what economists call residual seasonality in the data, meaning that even though the data are adjusted for seasonal effects, we’ve seen a pattern over the past several years of weak growth in the first quarter followed by stronger growth in subsequent quarters.1 I anticipate we’ll see stronger consumer spending, which makes up about two-thirds of output, over the rest of the year. Readings on consumer sentiment and confidence remain high, but more important for spending, personal incomes are growing. Moreover, household balance sheets have improved over time. As a result of the Great Recession, households in the aggregate lost $13 trillion in net worth, made up of financial and housing equity. The deleveraging that households undertook and their increased savings, coupled with the cumulative increase in stock and 1 See Kurt G. Lunsford, “Lingering Residual Seasonality in GDP Growth,” Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Number 2017-06, March 28, 2017, and Glenn D. Rudebusch, Daniel Wilson, and Tim Mahedy, “The Puzzle of Weak First-Quarter GDP Growth,” Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 2015- 16, May 18, 2015. 3 house prices over the expansion, mean that households as a group have recovered that loss and have added another $25 trillion in net worth to their balance sheets. In the aggregate, households’ housing equity is now back to what it was at the peak, as the housing sector continues to gradually improve. Demand for housing is rising and is outpacing supply in some places. This mismatch between supply and demand is putting upward pressure on home prices, which are rising at about a 6 percent pace, on average, nationally, and are driving the increase in homeowners’ housing equity. It shouldn’t be too surprising that the housing recovery has been a moderate one. The housing boom and crash are not something anyone wants repeated. Households have been careful not to take on more mortgage debt than they can handle, and lenders are extending credit, but to those with good credit quality. Overall, I expect activity in the sector to continue to expand at a sustainable pace. Business activity and investment are starting to strengthen after being quite subdued last year and through much of the expansion. Part of the weakness reflected the sizable drop in oil prices from mid-2014 through early 2016, which led to a sharp pullback in the drilling and mining sectors and their suppliers. At the same time, the 20 percent appreciation of the dollar hurt manufacturers and other firms dependent on exports. Since then, conditions supporting business spending have improved. Over the past year, oil prices have been roughly stable near $50 a barrel and the dollar has appreciated only modestly. In addition, the firming in global economic growth has increased demand for U.S. exports. We’ve seen a pickup in the mining sector and in manufacturing, and the data on new orders suggest investment in equipment will expand further. Contacts in the Cleveland Fed District tell us that even if some of the proposals for tax reform, health insurance, infrastructure spending, and regulatory changes are delayed, they expect the business environment to remain positive and that this will translate into further increases in business spending and hiring. 4 Labor markets In fact, labor markets have been strengthening for some time and I expect that to continue. In 2016, the economy added over 2.2 million jobs, an average of about 187,000 jobs per month. Over the first four months of this year, firms sustained that pace, with an average monthly gain of 185,000 jobs. This is a slower pace than in the two expansions in the 1980s and 1990s.2 But it’s important to remember that because trend labor force participation is lower, trend employment growth is also lower. Indeed, estimates of trend employment growth range from around 75,000 to 120,000 per month, depending on the precise assumptions one makes about the participation rate. So the recent employment growth numbers are well above trend. As the economy has added jobs, the unemployment rate has moved down. It stood at 4.4 percent in April, less than half its peak of 10 percent in late 2009 and at the lowest reading achieved in the previous expansion. Given the progress that has been made in the labor market, payroll job growth is likely to slow from its current pace, but I expect it will be sufficient to keep the unemployment rate below my estimate of its longer-run rate of 5 percent over the next two years. Other gauges of the under-utilization of labor have also improved significantly. For example, the broader U6 measure of unemployment, which includes the number of part-time workers who would rather work full time and the number of people who have been discouraged from looking for a job, has fallen to 8.6 percent, its lowest level since late 2007. The labor force participation rate has been essentially stable for the past three years. This is another sign of labor market strength because, based on demographics, the trend in the participation rate is downward. 2 Payroll job gains averaged nearly 230,000 per month over the December 1982 -July 1990 expansion and about 200,000 per month over the April 1991-March 2001 expansion. 5 The strengthening in the labor market has led to a gradual acceleration in wages from earlier in the recovery. For some time we have heard from our labor and business contacts across a broad set of industries that firms are having trouble finding qualified workers, both in high-skill occupations and in lower-skill jobs. More and more of these firms report they are responding by raising wages and offering other benefits to attract and retain workers. Contacts in the Cleveland Fed District expect wage increases to average about 3 percent this year, with significantly higher increases expected for highly skilled workers. On balance, there has been a sustained cyclical recovery in labor markets since the Great Recession. There are some longer-run structural issues that the country must tackle, such as making sure people have access to the training and development needed for the jobs in the modern economy. But from the standpoint of the cyclical conditions that monetary policy can address, I believe we have achieved the maximum employment part of the Fed’s monetary policy mandate. Inflation The other part of the Fed’s dual mandate is price stability. Consistent with meeting this part of the mandate over the longer run, the FOMC has set a goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year- over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. Most people understand why high inflation is a problem: it erodes the purchasing power of their money. But inflation that is too low is also a problem: it can lead consumers and businesses to delay purchases, thereby slowing the economy, and it increases debt burdens. For some time, inflation has been running below the Fed’s 2 percent goal, but over the past two years, inflation has been moving up. Measured year-over-year, headline PCE inflation stood at 1.8 percent in March, up from under 1 percent a year ago. 6 I expect there will be some variability in the monthly data, but in determining where inflation is relative to our goal, we need to look through transitory movements in the numbers, both those below and those above our goal, and focus on where inflation is headed and where it will be maintained on a sustained basis. The inflation rate over the longer run is primarily determined by monetary policy, but we know that we can’t keep actual inflation at 2 percent at each point in time; inevitably shocks hit the economy and the inflation numbers move, sometimes below our goal and sometimes above. Still, we want to take actions to keep inflation from running either persistently below or persistently above 2 percent. In other words, our goal is symmetric – it isn’t a ceiling – and we aim to keep inflation at 2 percent on a sustainable basis. With appropriate adjustments in monetary policy, I believe the conditions are in place for a sustained return over the next year or so to our symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation. These conditions include the firming in inflation that we’ve seen over time, reasonably stable inflation expectations, continued strength in the labor market, and growth expected to be at or slightly above trend. Monetary Policy When I say “appropriate adjustments in monetary policy” I mean those that will sustain the expansion so that our longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment are met and maintained. As I mentioned, in my view, we have met the maximum employment part of our mandate and inflation is nearing our 2 percent goal. If economic conditions evolve as anticipated, I believe further removal of accommodation via increases in the federal funds rate will be needed. In March, the FOMC raised the target range for the fed funds rate by one-quarter percentage point to 3/4 to 1 percent, and two weeks ago, the FOMC decided to maintain this range. Both decisions are consistent with the gradual upward path of interest rates that the Committee has indicated for some time is likely to be appropriate. This upward policy path will help 7 prolong the expansion, not curtail it. It will help avoid a build-up of risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy is allowed to overheat. It will help avoid a build-up of risks to financial stability should overly low interest rates encourage investors to take on excessively risky investments in a search for yield. It will put monetary policy in a better position to address whichever risks, whether to the upside or to the downside, are ultimately realized. Given my outlook, I don’t believe that removing accommodation calls for an increase in the fed funds rate at each meeting, but I do anticipate more than the one-increase-per-year seen in the past two years. In addition, as we continue to make progress on our goals, I think that it’s important for the FOMC to remain very vigilant against falling behind, especially given the low level of interest rates and the large size of our balance sheet. We know that monetary policy affects the economy with long and variable lags, so policy actions have to be taken before our policy goals are fully met. If we delay taking further normalization steps for too long and then find ourselves in a situation where the labor market becomes unsustainably tight, price pressures become excessive, and we have to move rates up steeply, we could risk a recession. This is a bad outcome that disproportionately harms the more vulnerable parts of our society. In addition to removing accommodation by raising interest rates, we also have to consider the Fed’s balance sheet. To address the financial crisis and Great Recession, the FOMC undertook several programs to purchase longer-maturity assets. These purchases aimed at putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates once the FOMC’s traditional policy tool, the fed funds rate, had been reduced to effectively zero. As a result of the purchases, the Fed’s balance sheet has grown from nearly $900 billion in assets in 2007 to about $4.5 trillion today, and its composition has changed from mainly short-term Treasury securities to agency mortgage-backed securities and longer-maturity Treasuries. 8 Currently, the FOMC is continuing to reinvest the proceeds of maturing Treasuries and principal payments from agency securities, essentially maintaining the balance sheet at its very large size. But normalizing the stance of policy also means taking steps to normalize the balance sheet. As indicated in the minutes of our March meeting, the FOMC is discussing its reinvestment policy, including when and how best to implement a change in reinvestments.3 Such a change should be done in a way that allows for a gradual and predictable reduction in the Fed’s asset holdings so that over time the balance sheet is reduced to the smallest size needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively.4 In my view, if economic conditions evolve as I anticipate, I would be comfortable changing our reinvestment policy this year, with clear communication in advance about how we plan to implement the change. My preference is that once we decide on a plan, we stay with it; the fed funds rate should be our main tool for responding to changes in the outlook during normal times, with purchases of longer-term assets reserved for nontraditional times, times when we have lowered our policy rate to near zero and we need to add more monetary policy stimulus because of a deterioration in economic and financial conditions. Ending reinvestments and beginning the journey toward a smaller balance sheet composed mainly of Treasury securities will be a welcome acknowledgment that the economy has entered normal times and policy is transitioning back to normal, too. It’s important to remind everyone that there are risks around the economic outlook, and because of that, monetary policy is not pre-set. In March, the FOMC began providing confidence bands around its economic and policy path projections.5 These are visual reminders to both the public and policymakers that there is always a lot of uncertainty around economic forecasts. Policy needs to remain systematic in 3 The Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14-15, 2017, pp. 2-3. 4 See “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” FOMC, September 17, 2014. 5 See the confidence band charts in the Summary of Economic Projections portion of the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14-15, 2017. 9 how it reacts to incoming information relevant to the outlook, but not be dogmatic should the outlook indeed materially change. Longer-Run Issues Astute listeners will have noticed that I didn’t tell you how large the balance sheet will be or how high the fed funds rate will be once we complete normalization. That is, I haven’t told you the end points. To answer those questions, we need to consider some longer-run issues. Monetary policy implementation framework Regarding the ultimate size of the balance sheet, we do know it will be larger than it was prior to the financial crisis for the simple reason that the public’s demand for currency is rising over time. But the balance sheet will also likely be considerably smaller than it is today. Just how much smaller depends on how the FOMC implements monetary policy in the future.6 Before the crisis, the FOMC kept the supply of bank reserves scarce. Making small changes in that supply by buying or selling short-term Treasuries, allowed the FOMC to ensure that the market-clearing interest rate at which banks lend reserves to each other overnight, the fed funds rate, was maintained at the FOMC’s target. But now, as a result of the Fed’s large-scale asset purchases, reserves are very abundant: indeed, banks are holding around $2.3 trillion in reserves, and more than $2.1 trillion of this amount is in excess of what is required by regulation. At these levels, small changes in the supply of reserves have little effect on the fed funds rate, and the FOMC brings the fed funds rate into its target range by adjusting the rate it pays on excess reserves. 6 For an accessible description of monetary policy implementation frameworks, see Jane E. Ihrig, El len E. Meade, and Gretchen C. Weinbach, “Rewriting Monetary Policy 101: What’s the Fed’s Preferred Post-Crisis Approach to Raising Interest Rates?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (Fall 2015), pp. 177-198. 10 Each of these systems has its strengths, and the FOMC has not yet decided which framework it will use in the long run and, therefore, what the size of the balance sheet will be at the end of the normalization process.7 However, because it will take several years to reduce the size of the balance sheet through asset run-off, the FOMC can end reinvestments before we have decided on the balance sheet’s ultimate size. Equilibrium fed funds rate In terms of where the fed funds rate will be in the longer run, one needs to consider what policy rate is consistent with maximum employment and stable inflation over the longer run. There is reason to believe that this equilibrium rate is lower now than it used to be. In fact, FOMC participants have been lowering their estimates of the longer-run fed funds rate over time. For example, in March 2014, the median estimate was 4 percent. Now it is 3 percent. The equilibrium rate is determined by the long-run rate of the growth of consumption and, therefore, of output. So where the fed funds rate will be after normalization depends on the longer-run potential growth rate of the economy. Potential growth and productivity growth The key determinants of the economy’s longer-run growth rate are structural productivity growth – how effectively the economy combines its labor and capital inputs to create output – and labor force growth. Over the past five years, labor productivity, measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector, has grown at an annual rate of only about a half of a percent; over the entire expansion it has averaged 1 percent. This is a step down from the 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent pace seen over the prior two expansions. Some of the slowdown in productivity growth likely reflects the difficulty in measuring productivity in the service sector. Some of the slowdown is likely cyclical, reflecting persistent effects of 7 For discussions of the pros and cons of different monetary policy implementation frameworks, see George A. Kahn, “Monetary Policy Under a Corridor Operating Framework,” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Fourth Quarter 2010; Todd Keister, “Corridors and Floors in Monetary Policy,” Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April 4, 2012; and Ben S. Bernanke, “Should the Fed Keep its Balance Sheet Large?” Brookings Institution Blog, September 2, 2016. 11 the Great Recession, which has retarded investment spending. As the expansion continues and investment expands, it is reasonable to assume that the cyclical impediments will abate and we’ll see somewhat stronger productivity growth. But structural factors are likely weighing on productivity growth, as well. One such factor is a reduced level of economic dynamism. An enviable aspect of the U.S. economy around the globe is our spirit of innovation, entrepreneurship, ease of business entry and exit, and labor market flexibility. This dynamism has contributed to economic growth and well-being in the U.S. by allowing resources to be reallocated from less-productive to more-productive businesses and allowing workers to move up the career ladder. But the degree of dynamism in the U.S. economy has been declining for some time. On average, over the 1990s and until the Great Recession, business start-ups accounted for about 3 percent of total employment per year.8 Since then, this share has fallen to around 2 percent.9 Since 2000, key innovative sectors like high-tech have seen a sharp slowing in the rate of start-ups.10 The decline in business and labor market dynamism is a structural factor that may be contributing to the slowdown we’ve seen in productivity growth.11 Labor force growth, the other key determinant of long-run economic growth, is projected to be considerably slower than it has been in recent decades. In the 1970s, the labor force grew about 2-1/2 8 See John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Who Creates Jobs? Small Versus Large Versus Young,” Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (May 2013), pp. 347-361. 9 My calculations are based on the firm age table from the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Dynamics Statistics, Firm Characteristics Data Tables (http://www.census.gov/ces/dataproducts/bds/data_firm.html). 10 See John Haltiwanger, “Top Ten Signs of Declining Business Dynamism and Entrepreneurship in the U.S .,” paper written for the Kauffman Foundation New Entrepreneurial Growth conference, August 2015. 11 Haltiwanger (2015), p. 9. 12 percent per year, on average, as baby boomers and women entered the work force. Labor force growth has slowed since then, rising at slightly more than 1/2 percent per year over 2010-2016. Demographic factors, including the aging of the population and a lower birth rate, suggest slow growth at about that pace will continue.12 So, longer-run output growth will likely remain below the 3 to 3-1/2 percent rate seen over the 1980s and 1990s.13 My own estimate is that longer-run growth will be about 2 percent, but I acknowledge that such estimates have wide confidence bands around them and economists hold different views about the future growth prospects of the U.S. economy.14,15 The difference in views largely stems from different assessments of the prospects for investments in technology and human capital. New technologies Those pessimistic about the future don’t expect to get large productivity gains from today’s innovations such as robotics, artificial intelligence, and computers, and believe that technological advances have been slowing since the 1970s. Other observers note that it is very difficult to predict where future technology is going, and they are much more optimistic that computerization, nanotechnology, genome mapping, and 12 According to the latest available projections, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that, as baby boomers retire, annual growth in the labor force over 2014-2024 will average 1/2 percent. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Economic Projections – 2014-24, December 8, 2015, Table 1. 13 The Congressional Budget Office currently estimates that potential GDP growth averaged 3.4 percent per year over 1982-1990 and 3.3 percent per year over 1991-2001; it projects that potential growth will average 1.8 percent per year over 2017-2027. See Congressional Budget Office, The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027, January 2017, Table 2.3. 14 Those pessimistic about the future growth prospects of the U.S. economy include Robert Gordon . (See Robert J. Gordon, “Secular Stagnation: A Supply-Side View,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 5, May 2015, pp. 54-59, and Robert J. Gordon, “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 19895, February 2014.) 15 Optimists include Joel Mokyr, Barry Eichengreen, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Andrew McAfee. (See Joel Mokyr, “The Next Age of Invention,” City Journal, Winter 2014; Barry Eichengreen, “Secular Stagnation: The Long View,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 5, May 2015, pp. 66-70; and Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies , New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 2014.) 13 other advances in biology will have impacts not yet fully harnessed.16 For example, a recent article in The New Yorker describes how machine learning is being used to accurately diagnose malignancies, with the potential to displace the doctor as diagnostician – a fundamental change in the practice of medicine.17 Changes in technology with widespread applicability can lead to higher levels of productivity growth and output growth, but because adapting to the changes takes time, it will take longer to see those positive effects.18 In fact, the disruption caused by technology can have negative effects at first. Workers need to retrain and some industries may be pushed out by the new technology. As the economy adapts, eventually there are gains, but not all people, industries, and communities will automatically share in the benefits. Human capital Human capital and technology are intricately linked. For technology to enhance productivity, workers need to have the abilities and knowledge to apply it. So, technological change can induce higher investments in human capital. But the reverse is true, too. Investment in human capital may spur investment in innovation because firms are more likely to develop and adopt a new technology if they are more certain they will be able to hire workers with the requisite skills to use it. Many studies have documented the importance of investment in human capital to a nation’s economic growth and well- being.19 And at the individual level, better education is correlated with higher wages and lower levels of 16 See Mokyr (2014), and Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014). 17 See Siddhartha Mukherjee, “A.I. Versus M.D.,” The New Yorker, April 3, 2017. 18 Barry Eichengreen distinguishes between two dimensions of technology: the range of applicability and the range of adaptation. A technology that has only a limited range of applicability won’t have a large effect on productivity and growth because it is used only in a narrow range of sectors or activities. A technology that requires a large range of adaptation of other processes in the economy will take longer to have a positive effect on productivity and growth. See Eichengreen (2015). 19 For a discussion of educational attainment and its contributions to economic growth, see J. Bradford DeLong, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Sustaining U.S. Economic Growth,” in Henry J. Aaron, James M. Lindsay, and Pietro S. Nivola, eds., Agenda for the Nation (Washington: Brookings Institution Press, 2003). The importance 14 unemployment. Moreover, research suggests that technological change is driving the rising skill premium and is affecting how work is organized. Medium-skill jobs that are more likely to involve routine, non- physical work are being handled by computers.20 This shift in the distribution of jobs helps to explain the wider gap in wages for highly skilled vs. lower skilled workers, and the increasing return to gaining the education required to obtain those skills. Globalization Globalization in the form of lower barriers to trade is another phenomenon that influences productivity growth. Free trade enhances productivity growth by allowing countries to focus resources on their comparative advantage and by spurring competition. Globalization and technological change are linked: globalization allows new technologies to be deployed more broadly and quickly and, by increasing competition, can drive firms to create and develop new and more productive technologies. While globalization leads to long-run improvements in the standard of living in the aggregate, similar to technological change, it can be disruptive in the short run as production shifts to the industries in which the country has a comparative advantage and workers in the contracting sectors need to retrain or relocate to find jobs. of education to economic well-being can even be found at the state level. For example, Cleveland Fed researchers found that over a 75-year period, education levels were consistently one of the most reliable indicators for each state’s per capita income growth. See Paul W. Bauer, Mark E. Schweitzer, and Scott A. Shane, “Knowledge Matters: The Long-Run Determinants of State Income Growth,” Journal of Regional Science 52, 2011, pp. 240-255, and “Altered States: A Perspective on 75 Years of State Income Growth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2005 Annual Report. 20 The data suggest that since 2000, jobs have become “polarized,” meaning that while high-skill and low-skill occupations have seen job growth, medium-skill occupations have experienced job losses. See Daron Acemoglu and David Autor, “Skills, Tasks, and Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4B, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 2011, pp. 1043-1171. For an accessible explanation of the polarization hypothesis, see Rob Valletta, “Higher Education, Wages, and Polarization,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, 2015-02, January 12, 2015. Also see Valletta (2015) and Jaison R. Abel and Richard Deitz, “Job Polarization and Rising Inequality in the Nation and the New York-Northern New Jersey Region,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 18, 2012. 15 Economic policy Monetary policy cannot affect the economy’s long-term growth rate. But other government policies, if they are well-designed and focused on spurring productive investments in human and physical capital, R&D, and innovation, would be helpful, and could, with sufficient time, lead to a somewhat higher longer-run growth rate.21 Policies can also help to ensure that the aggregate longer-term gains from technological change and globalization are better distributed, and that households, industries, and communities that are negatively affected are provided with some cushion to help ease the transition. Policies and programs that enable people to gain the skills needed to be productive members of the modern workforce are part of such a cushion. On the technology side, in addition to public-private ventures for developing technological innovations, a good case can be made for expanded government support of basic science and R&D, a building block for higher productivity growth. Basic R&D has a public good aspect to it because its benefits can be widely applied throughout various parts of the economy, while an individual firm might be deterred from such investment as it cannot fully capture the returns. Finally, we should recognize that immigrants make up over 16 percent of the U.S. workforce today.22 Given U.S. demographics, immigrants will become an increasingly important source of labor supply for the U.S. This suggests that a well-thought-out immigration policy that attracts labor to the U.S. is also a necessary ingredient to support longer-run growth. It is important for the country to tackle these longer-run issues in order to improve the economic health of individuals and communities and to maintain and enhance our future standard of living. 21 See the discussion in Loretta J. Mester, “A Serenity Prayer for Monetary Policymakers,” remarks at the Global Interdependence Center Central Banking Series, Singapore, February 20, 2017. 22 See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Foreign-Born Workers: Labor Force Characteristics – 2015,” May 19, 2016. 16 One of my favorite composers, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, was known for writing beautiful music but he was also an avid letter writer. In one letter, he quoted his great-grandfather, who said: “It is a very great art to talk eloquently and well, but an equally great one is to know the right moment to stop.” In looking at the clock, I fear I have not succeeded in either art today. So on that note, let me end here. I am happy to take your questions.
