1 Presentation to the Bishop Ranch Forum San Ramon, California By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on Feb. 8, 2012 The Federal Reserve and the Economic Recovery Good morning. I want to thank Alex and all of you for coming to the forum this morning. I get to travel all over the world to give talks, but I’ll admit it’s nice to be able to just jump in my car and not have to go through airport security and delays to be with you today. The subject of my talk is the economy and what the Federal Reserve is doing to encourage economic growth while keeping inflation low. This morning, I’ll review the events of recent years, with a special eye on how the boom and bust in housing affected the recession and the economic recovery. I’ll talk about the measures the Federal Reserve has taken to combat the financial crisis and to bolster the economy. That leads naturally to the current economic situation and my forecast of where things are going from here. I’ll focus on the progress we’re making toward the two goals Congress has assigned the Fed: maximum employment and stable prices. I’ll conclude with a few words about the current stance of Fed policy. I should stress that I’m expressing my own views and not those of anybody else in the Federal Reserve System. The good news is that the U.S. economy has been growing for the past two-and-a-half years. The unemployment rate has fallen about three-quarters of a percentage point in the past four months, and is now at its lowest level in nearly three years. Nonetheless, we are still suffering from the aftereffects of the worst recession of the post-World War II period. Compared to the pattern seen in past recessions, the economic recovery has been weak. And, despite relatively strong job gains in recent months, the unemployment rate remains very high. As I will 2 explain in a few minutes, I expect the pace of economic growth to be frustratingly slow and the unemployment rate to remain high for years to come. So, why isn’t our economy doing better? What’s holding us back? To answer these questions, we need to look back at events during the housing boom when the problems plaguing us today got started. Let me take you back to the early 2000s, when the housing market took off. As house prices rose, people felt wealthier and began spending money more freely. Buyers rushed into the housing market, confident that prices would keep going up and up. Meanwhile, lenders became convinced that home prices would stay on the escalator up, and they thought the risk of a major housing downturn was remote. Mortgages became easier and easier to get, and the terms became more and more generous. Amidst all this, the subprime mortgage market mushroomed. After all, if prices are rising, lending to a borrower with less-than-sterling credit looks safe. Financial engineers sliced and diced all these mortgages into securities that few could understand, and they sold those securities to investors around the world. Lenders threw caution to the wind, knowing they could sell even the riskiest mortgages to investors hungry for slightly higher interest rates. Even people who lacked the income to make monthly payments could just sign their name and walk away with a mortgage. They didn’t even have to make a down payment. Add to that a dash of fraud and a dollop of weak regulation, and you have a recipe for a bubble of historic proportions. Everything appeared just dandy as long as house prices kept rising—and rise they did. Ordinary folks found themselves sitting on tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars in home equity, which could be turned into cash to buy an SUV or a new dining room set. Despite all the risky lending, home loan delinquencies were low. As long as home prices rose, 3 everybody was happy. Financial institutions had plenty of capital—at least on paper—and made lots of money. Tragically though, the boom contained the seeds of its own destruction. By one measure, house prices were about 70 percent overvalued at their peak in 2006. Since then, of course, house prices have plunged—by about 30 percent nationwide, and even more in places such as Las Vegas, Phoenix, and Florida. As prices tumbled, many borrowers behaved exactly the way you would expect—they stopped making payments . Foreclosures surged, and home sales plummeted. It turned into a free fall of catastrophic dimensions. Problems first surfaced in subprime mortgages, but they soon spread far beyond. At one point, nearly 10 percent of all mortgages were in serious trouble or in foreclosure. As delinquencies and foreclosures skyrocketed, lenders and other financial institutions that had placed big bets on the mortgage market posted massive losses. Financial institutions became fearful of lending money to anybody, including other financial institutions. That choked off the flow of funds that financial institutions depend on to finance their day-to-day operations. It culminated in 2008 in an enormous financial panic that destroyed some of the biggest players in the financial industry and came close to bringing down the global financial system. Think back to the fall of 2008. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, institutions central to the American system of home finance, had become insolvent and were taken over by the government. A major investment bank, Lehman Brothers, went bankrupt. WaMu, the nation’s largest savings and loan, failed. AIG, the nation’s largest insurance company, was on the brink of failure because of bets it had made on the mortgage market. Money market funds were threatening to impose losses on customers who had thought their investments were rock solid. 4 No one knew how big the problem was or which companies would survive. The result was panic, with everyone trying to run for cover at the same time. This kind of massive financial panic could have ushered in a major depression. Indeed, it was for just this reason that the Federal Reserve System was created nearly 100 years ago. Back in the second half of the 19th and the early 20th centuries, financial panics wiped out banks and other financial institutions, large and small. Credit is the lifeblood of our economy. During those repeated panics, loans became almost entirely unavailable to households and businesses. Those episodes were marked by widespread bankruptcy and economic depression. In late 2008, we were facing just such a panic, teetering on the edge of an abyss. If the panic had been left unchecked, we could well have seen an economic cataclysm as bad as the Great Depression, when 25 percent of the workforce was out of work. Why then didn’t we fall into that abyss in 2008 and 2009? The answer is that a financial collapse was not—I repeat, not—left unchecked. The Federal Re serve did what it was supposed to do. The Fed is the nation’s government-chartered central bank, charged by law with safeguarding the financial system. Among other things, that means acting as lender of last resort during periods of panic. One of the Fed’s jobs is to supply emergency loans to financial institutions when normal funding isn’t available. At the same time, the Fed and other federal agencies set up an array of special programs to support vital financial markets. For example, the Fed backstopped the market that corporations use to get short-term funding to finance payrolls, inventories, and the like. Now there are many myths associated with these emergency programs. I would like to take this opportunity to dispel a few of them. First, these programs were not “secret.” The fact is that all of these programs were publicly announced and reported on regularly. Indeed, the 5 amounts lent in each program were shown on Fed financial documents made public every week. The only thing that wasn’t disclosed at the time was the names of specific borrowers and the amounts lent to them. Second, this lending did not put taxpayer money at significant risk. All of the lending was backed by good collateral and the vast majority of it has been fully repaid. In fact, these emergency lending programs alone generated an estimated $20 billion in interest income. That income, like all the net income the Fed generates after its expenses, went to the U.S. Treasury. Third, borrowers did not get below-market interest rates. Many of our programs charged penalty rates so that borrowers would want to go back to the private markets as soon as they opened up again. Fourth, the Fed is audited. Our books are subject to a stringent reporting process and regularly reviewed by Congress.1 The Fed’s actions, along with those of the U.S. Treasury and other agencies, succeeded in stemming the panic. I recognize that some of these actions have not been popular, especially at a time when so many people are suffering. But, in the midst of a financial panic, they were essential to stabilizing the financial system and saving the economy. There’s no doubt that these programs helped us avert a depression. But the damage done by a burst housing bubble and a financial crisis was great, and we couldn’t escape a very painful recession. The lingering effects of those dramatic events are still with us today in the form of a recovery that’s unusually slow and weak. Almost 13 million Americans are still out of work. It’s astonishing that nearly a third of them have been without a job for a year or more. I’d like to turn to why the recovery has been so weak. The answer is that the bursting of the housing bubble and the resulting financial crisis unleashed at least four powerful forces that have sapped the recovery of its vigor: First, it destroyed household wealth. Second, it left the 1 For more information on audits of the Federal Reserve, see the website http://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/about_12784.htm. 6 housing market in a deep depression. Third, it made credit hard to get. And, fourth, it left a legacy of uncertainty that clouds the future. Let’s consider those in order. The collapse of house prices contributed to a decline in the wealth of households of some six-and-a-half trillion—that’s tr illion with a “T”—dollars. And, with the financial system and economy on the brink, the stock market plummeted. This one-two punch deprived households of both the means and the will to spend. So it’s hardly surprising that consumer spending has been subdued. What about housing? Past recoveries typically got a jump-start from home construction and spending on household goods, such as furniture, appliances, and the like. This time though the housing market is mired in a historic state of depression. We still see millions of homes in foreclosure, and millions more on the verge. With the housing market so distressed, there’s little sign that prices are poised to rise. Meanwhile, about one in four home mortgages are currently under water, meaning that borrowers owe more than the homes are worth. No wonder that construction and new home sales are still near the lowest levels recorded since the early 1960s. Weak consumer spending and depressed housing are closely related to a third powerful force holding back the recovery—t ight credit. It’s the nature of a financial crisis that the pendulum swings from loose credit, when it’s easy to borrow, to tight credit, when loans are hard to get. This time, that swing was breathtaking. In today’s mortgage market, customers without excellent credit scores and cash for a hefty down payment find it tough to borrow. Likewise, many small businesses are shut out of the loan market because they may not be able to use residential or commercial real estate as collateral. Anecdotal reports and surveys suggest that credit conditions have been easing. Indeed, corporations that can sell securities in the financial markets have great access to capital. But, for households, the going can still be tough. And 7 small businesses find that many of the community banks they relied on are too weak to open the credit spigots. The final force I want to mention is the depressing effect on spending and investment caused by uncertainty. By almost any measure, uncertainty is high. Businesses are uncertain about the economic environment and the direction of economic policy. Households are uncertain about job prospects and future incomes. Political gridlock in Washington, D.C., and the crisis in Europe add to a sense of foreboding. I repeatedly hear from businesspeople that these uncertainties are prompting them to slow investment and hiring. Yet, even in the face of these obstacles, the economy continues to grow. Prospects are that it will continue to do so. This is a testament to the natural resilience of our economic system. As I mentioned, credit conditions are slowly improving. Little by little, households are repairing their finances. Businesses are gradually increasing production and hiring extra hands. The housing market is no longer falling, and home construction eventually will recover to levels consistent with a growing population. The broadest barometer of economic conditions is gross domestic product, which measures the nation’s total output of goods and services. My forecast calls for GDP to rise about 2¼ percent this year and 2¾ percent in 2013. That’s an improvement from 2011, when GDP grew only a little over 1½ percent. Unfortunately, such moderate growth will not be enough to keep taking big bites out of unemployment. The unemployment rate is currently 8.3 percent. I expect it to remain over 8 percent well into next year and still be well over 7 percent at the end of 2014. But, that’s a forecast, and things could obviously turn out differently than I expect. One risk in particular could cause the economy to perform much worse than this forecast. That’s the 8 situation in Europe. The governments of several countries that use the euro as their currency have been struggling to pay their debts. Greece in particular appears unable to meet its obligations. At the same time, countries such as Italy have been forced to pay what might be unsustainably high interest rates. This has raised questions about the health of European financial institutions that invest in government bonds. European leaders have been working to solve this problem and they may be able to muddle through. But, if they fail, all bets are off. The agreement binding together the countries that use the euro could break up, sending shock waves through financial markets around the world. Under such circumstances, the United States could hardly escape unscathed. So what does the story I’ve told mean for Federal Reserve policy? The Fed has taken extraordinary action to boost growth and keep inflation low. That effort is ongoing. The Fed sets policy with an eye on the two goals Congress has assigned it: maximum employment and stable prices. Clearly, with unemployment at 8.3 percent, we are very far from maximum employment. And I expect inflation to run somewhat below the 2 percent level that we at the Fed are aiming for. In this situation, it’s vital that the Fed use all the tools at its disposal to achieve its mandated employment and price stability goals. The Fed influences the economy through its ability to affect interest rates. When the economy is overheating, we raise interest rates, which dampens economic activity. When the economy is not performing well, like today, we lower interest rates, which stimulates activity. Our usual tool is the federal funds rate, which is what banks pay to borrow from each other on overnight loans. The federal funds rate serves as a benchmark for other short-term interest rates and it indirectly influences longer-term rates as well. In this way, the Fed has a broad ability to affect the level of interest rates throughout the economy. 9 The Fed’s monetary policy body is called the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. Back in December 2008, in response to the deepening recession, the FOMC lowered the federal funds rate close to zero. The Committee has kept the funds rate near zero since then. In fact, given the weakness in the economy, standard monetary policy benchmarks indicate that the federal funds rate should have gone deep into negative territory. But, of course, it’s not possible for interest rates to go much below zero. So the Fed has had to look for alternative or “unconventional” ways to stimulate the economy. For example, we’ve purchased over one-and-three-quarters trillion dollars of longer- term securities issued by the U.S. government and mortgage agencies. This policy works through the law of supply and demand. When we buy large quantities of securities, we increase demand for those securities, which causes their prices to rise. This translates into lower interest rates. As the yields on longer-term Treasury securities come down, other longer-term interest rates also tend to fall. That reduces the cost of borrowing on everything from mortgages to corporate debt. Our securities purchases are an important reason why longer-term interest rates are at or near post-World War II lows. In addition, we’ve publicly stated that we expect to keep the federal funds rate exceptionally low at least through late 2014. This guidance has helped lower longer-term interest rates, like those on home mortgages, car loans, and corporate bonds, by letting investors know that short-term interest rates are likely to stay low for a long time. It’s important to emphasize that this is not a promise or commitment to keep rates near zero. Instead, it’s our best collective judgment about the likely future course of policy. And, of course, it will change if the economic outlook changes. 10 In addition to these policy actions, we have been hard at work on improving our communication of the Fed’s monetary policy strategy and plans. We’ve recently taken a number of steps in this direction. First, we released a statement of our longer-run goals and strategies— essentially, a statement of our monetary policy principles.2 That statement noted that we view a 2 percent inflation rate as most consistent with our mandates. It also emphasized that we will continue to carefully balance our dual goals of maximum employment and price stability in making our policy decisions. This statement is the latest in a series of Fed initiatives toward greater openness and accountability. Second, we now regularly report our views about the probable course of short-term interest rates over the next few years. Unemployment is high, of course, and it’s likely that inflation will be below our 2 percent objective for years to come. In those circumstances, most Fed policymakers expect that we will keep short-term interest rates at their current very low levels into 2014 or later. Releasing the views of policymakers in this fashion should reduce public uncertainty about our plans for monetary policy. And that, in turn, improves the effectiveness of our policies. We at the Fed are doing everything we can to move the economy forward. We recognize that monetary policy cannot perform magic. Lower interest rates alone can’t fix all the economy’s problems. But they do help. Conditions are far better today than they would be if the Fed hadn’t administered such strong medicine. Looking ahead, we may still need to provide more policy accommodation if the economy loses momentum or inflation remains well below 2 percent. Should that occur, restarting our program of purchasing mortgage-backed securities would likely be the best way to provide a boost to the economy. 2 For more information, see http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120125c.htm. 11 The policy actions the Fed takes from here will depend on how economic conditions develop, and they will change as economic circumstances change. I want to assure you that the Fed will do its level best to achieve the goals of maximum employment and stable prices. Thank you very much.

1 Presentation to the Marian Miner Cook Athenaeum, Claremont McKenna College Claremont, California By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on Feb. 13, 2012 The Federal Reserve’s Mandate and Best Practice Monetary Policy Good evening and thank you for coming tonight. It is a great honor to be part of the Marian Miner Cook Athenaeum Lecture series. I saw that Allan Meltzer spoke at an Athenaeum luncheon a few weeks ago. Allan wrote what many consider to be the definitive history of the Fed. So, many of you have already embarked on an intensive course in money and banking this semester. I hope my remarks, on top of the wisdom you heard from Allan, will contribute to a better understanding of monetary policy. This evening, I’ll try to give you a real sense of how I, and many central bankers, think about monetary policy. We must make difficult decisions in the face of intense pressures and conflicting demands. For example, at any given time, should we worry more about unemployment or inflation? What are the most dangerous risks to the economy and how can we defuse them? My aim is to explain some of the ways we analyze such questions. This is a particularly compelling subject now, more than two-and-a-half years into a lackluster recovery marked by weak demand and a still very high unemployment rate. I’ll start my talk by describing the mission Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve, often described as our dual mandate. I’ll describe how the Fed interprets the mandate and the ways in which our goals may reinforce each other and when they may conflict. That will lead to 2 a discussion of how we carry out policy operationally, what might be called “best practices” monetary policy. And I’ll close with a brief description of our current policy stance. I should stress that I am speaking entirely for myself and not for anybody else in the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve’s mandate Let me start with the Fed’s mission. It’s often said that Congress assigned the Federal Reserve a dual mandate: maximum employment and stable prices. But, that’s not quite accurate. In fact, the Fed has a triple mandate. Section 2A of the Federal Reserve Act calls on the Fed to maintain growth of money and credit consistent—and I quote—“with the economy’s long-run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.”1 These are excellent and desirable aspirations. However, they fall short in providing specifics. After all, what does it mean to say “maximum” employment or “stable prices”? Is a 4 percent interest rate moderate? Six percent? Ten percent? Moreover, what do we do if these goals are in conflict with each other? To answer these questions, let’s take a closer at each individual goal in turn. Let me start with the goal of stable prices. Now, taken literally, stable prices would seem to imply that the costs of all goods and services should be frozen in time. But, that can’t be right. After all, prices fluctuate all the time in response to shifts in supply and demand. For example, a deep freeze in 1 See Slide 1. A copy of the Federal Reserve Act is provided online by the Federal Reserve Board of Governors at http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/fract.htm . It is interesting to note that the Federal Reserve’s legal mandate has evolved over time in response to economic events and advances in understanding of how monetary policy and the economy function. For example, in the original Federal Reserve Act of 1913, the Fed had no mandate for macroeconomic stabilization and was only charged with providing an “elastic currency” and to act as a lender of last resort for banks. The quote here originates in the Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977 and remains in place today. See Judd and Rudebusch (1999) for some discussion and more details. 3 Florida sends orange juice prices soaring. Flat panel TV prices tumble as production becomes more efficient. These kinds of relative price movements are beyond the control of a central bank like the Fed. The Fed can’t do anything about the weather or the development of new TV manufacturing technologies. Nor should it. Relative price movements—with some prices going up and others going down—are a natural part of a well-functioning market economy. It’s the way markets signal which goods are scarce and which are relatively abundant. Instead, the Fed looks at price stability in an overall, or average, sense. We strive to make sure that the average prices of a comprehensive set of consumer goods and services don’t change much from month to month or year to year. The well-known consumer price index is one measure of average prices. We at the Fed tend to focus more on the somewhat broader personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, price index, which is reported along with the GDP data. What objective should we seek for the rate of increase of average prices? Should we strive for no change at all, that is, zero inflation? At first blush, that seems sensible. But, there are a number of reasons why aiming for zero inflation would be too low and inconsistent with our maximum employment mandate. Here I’ll mention two. First, a small amount of inflation can help grease the wheels of the labor market. There is considerable evidence that nominal wages don’t easily fall even when demand is weak, something economists call downward wage rigidity.2 In other words, it’s unusual for workers to have the dollar value of their wages reduced. In this regard, wages are very different from, say, airline ticket prices, which are quickly discounted when seats can’t be filled. Weak labor demand may necessitate a reduction in real wages, that is, wages adjusted for inflation. Even if the nominal, or dollar value, of wages won’t budge, the real wage will fall as prices rise. As a 2 See Dickens et al. (2007). 4 result, a little bit of inflation can help the labor market adjust to negative shocks and, in this way, help keep employment closer to its maximum level.3 Second, a small amount of inflation gives the Fed a little more maneuvering room to respond to negative shocks to the economy.4 The problem is that nominal interest rates can’t go below zero. Economists refer to that limit as the zero lower bound. Let me define terms. The nominal interest rate can be divided into its two components: the real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rate; and expected inflation. A little bit of inflation tends to raise nominal rates on average in order to provide a positive yield to investors. That gives the Fed more room to lower interest rates in a recession before hitting the zero lower bound. The more we can lower interest rates when appropriate, the more we can stimulate the economy and boost employment when needed. That helps us keep closer to our maximum employment goal. Research on this question has found that an inflation objective of 2 percent or higher generally provides plenty of maneuvering room for the Fed, except in the most severe recessions.5 So a little bit of inflation may be desirable. But, of course, too much inflation would be inconsistent with our price stability mandate. Moreover, high inflation carries with it considerable costs in terms of economic efficiency. Weighing these considerations, my fellow Fed policymakers and I have concluded that a 2 percent inflation rate—as measured by the personal consumption expenditures price index—is most consistent, over the longer run, with our mandate. It represents the best compromise between having inflation close to zero, but not so low that downward nominal wage rigidity or the zero lower bound pose significant problems for the economy. The Federal Reserve’s policy body, the Federal Open Market Committee, or 3 See Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996). 4 See Summers (1991) for an early exposition on this point. 5 See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) and Williams (2009). 5 FOMC, officially announced this objective of 2 percent inflation in a statement entitled “Longer- Run Goals and Policy Strategy” released following our most recent meeting in January.6 What about the second component of the Fed’s mandate—maximum employment? The dictionary defines “maximum” as “the greatest quantity possible.” Once again, that goal can’t be taken too literally. It’s absurd to interpret the law to mean that every man, woman, and child in the nation should be working three full-time jobs, 24 hours a day, 365 days a year! Child labor laws and the human needs for food, rest, and recreation make it plain that maximum employment must mean something far short of nonstop work. Nor does maximum employment suggest we should be aiming for an unemployment rate of zero. A more reasonable and practical interpretation is that maximum employment is the level that’s consistent with the other aspects of the mandate. To make this clear, I’ll need to delve into economic theory about the relationship between inflation and employment. Imagine that the economy was stronger than it is today and that the rate of unemployment was low. What would happen if the Fed tried to stimulate the economy further and drive employment even higher? It would be harder for employers to find and keep qualified workers. Employers would have to offer hefty increases in pay and benefits, driving up labor costs rapidly. Since labor costs make up around 60 percent of the cost of producing U.S. goods and services, employers would feel rising pressure to boost prices or accept narrower profit margins. In other words, if the Fed attempted to drive unemployment too low, labor costs and prices would eventually spiral upwards. And that would run smack into our mandate to promote stable prices. 6See Board of Governors (2012). Other central banks have generally chosen inflation goals of around 2 percent as well, presumably for much the same reasons as I laid out here. See Kuttner (2004). 6 Economists speak of the Phillips curve, which describes how, in the short run, inflation tends to rise as unemployment falls below a certain level. And inflation tends to fall when unemployment is high. The level of unemployment at which there are no upward or downward pressures on inflation is called the natural rate of unemployment. Importantly, if the central bank were to try to push unemployment consistently below its natural rate, the result would be an uncontrollable upward spiral of wages and prices. In the end, such a policy would fail to drive unemployment below its natural rate anyway!7 The logic of the Phillips curve tells us that literally maximum employment—or minimum unemployment—is inconsistent with the price st ability mandate. To strike a balance between these conflicting objectives, we need to interpret our employment mandate as the goal of achieving maximum sustainable employment. By sustainable, we think of a level of employment that doesn’t create pressure for inflation to rise or fall—that is, one consistent with the unemployment rate equaling the natural rate of unemployment. But what actually is the natural rate of unemployment, that is, the level that creates neither upward nor downward pressure on inflation? Clearly, it’s not a zero unemployment rate. Even in an ideal economy, it takes time to search for work and actually get hired, just the way it takes time to find a mate using a computer dating service. We use the word “frictions” to describe the things that make finding a job—or a spouse—time consuming. Because of these frictions, the natural rate of unemployment is a positive number that depends on the dynamics of the labor market. In this regard, the Fed’s maximum employment goal fundamentally differs from the price stability goal. In the long run, inflation is determined by the actions the central bank takes—in other words, by monetary policy. So we Fed policymakers can set an inflation target we think 7 See Friedman (1968) and Phelps (1968) for early expositions of this principle. 7 best. But the natural rate of unemployment is not determined by the central bank. Rather, the natural rate reflects market forces and tends to shift as labor market frictions change. According to the FOMC statement that I mentioned before, quote, “The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market,” and “These factors may change over time.” Unfortunately, there is no way to know exactly what the natural rate of unemployment is. It’s not a number you can look up in a statistical table. In fact, the natural rate is the subject of intensive economic research and debate. Economists must estimate it using economic or statistical models. In addition, because it fluctuates over time due to changes in labor force demographics and other factors, economists must regularly refine these estimates as new data come in. As a result, each FOMC participant estimates the natural rate of unemployment for him or herself, and makes policy judgments accordingly. Typical estimates of the current natural rate of unemployment tend to range between 6 and 7 percent.8 These estimates are higher than usual because of the damage the recent recession did to the efficient functioning of the labor market. Slide 2 shows estimates of the natural rate of unemployment computed by the staff of the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank, along with the actual unemployment rate. Since 2008, the unemployment rate has been far above our estimates of the natural rate. In fact, the gap between unemployment and our natural rate estimates has been larger than at any time in the past 25 years. Economists generally expect the natural rate of unemployment to decline somewhat over the next decade as the effects of the recession on the labor market diminish. In the Federal Reserve’s recent statement, most FOMC participants’ longer-run estimates of the natural rate of unemployment range from 5 to 6 percent. 8 For other estimates of the natural rate of unemployment, see Weidner and Williams (2011), Daly et al. (2011), and the Congressional Budget Office (2012). 8 Now, let’s turn to the third part of the Fed’s mandate, the injunction to promote moderate long-term interest rates. This goal receives the least attention of the Fed’s three mandates. And justifiably so. That’s because it’s a natural corollary of the price stability goal. To see this, it’s helpful to break down an interest rate into two parts: the inflation-adjusted, or real, rate; plus expected inflation. Slide 3 shows the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds and the rate of inflation from 1960 to 2010. It also shows a survey measure of 10-year expected inflation, which starts in 1980. As you can see, expected inflation was high in the early 1980s, when inflation was high. It has been much lower and more stable over the past decade, when inflation has been low. There’s no question that Fed policy affects long-term interest rates in the economy. But monetary economists have long known that the Fed cannot permanently affect the first part of the interest rate equation—the re al interest rate. In the long run, real interest rates depend primarily on real returns to investments in productive capital, such as plant and equipment. The Fed has little ability to control long-term trends in the productivity of investment in the U.S. economy. However, we can and do affect long-term interest rates through our influence over the second part of the equation—long-term inflation e xpectations. If we succeed in keeping these expectations low, then, all else being equal, long-term interest rates should be moderate on average. In this way, the Fed’s mandate to achieve moderate long-term interest rates is simply a reaffirmation of its mandate to keep inflation low and prices stable. And that’s the reason most people speak of the Fed having a dual mandate, rather than a triple mandate. Best practice monetary policy So far, I’ve translated the broad mandate that Congress gave us in terms of two more- concrete goals. First, aim for an average inflation rate of 2 percent. And, second, try to keep the 9 unemployment rate near our best estimate of the natural rate of unemployment. To a great extent, these goals are harmonious and monetary policy is pretty straightforward. Sometimes though, we face tradeoffs between our goals. And that’s when difficult policy choices are unavoidable. Let me quote again from the FOMC statement: “the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level,” end quote. If the Committee judges that these goals are in conflict in the short run, then, quote, “it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate,” end quote. In other words, we look at how much unemployment and inflation are deviating from ideal levels. And we consider how long it is likely to take them to return to ideal levels. Let me elaborate. A large literature argues that monetary policymakers should set the policy interest rate in such a way as to bring the expected future paths of unemployment and inflation as close to their goals as possible. 9 Technically, a simple way to capture this idea is for monetary policymakers to formulate a plan for interest rates and any other monetary policy instruments that minimizes a loss function. I’m going to leave the equations to an extended footnote.10 What I want to stress here is that such a technical exercise provides a clear summary of the kind of real-world choices Fed 9 See Woodford (2003). 10 A simple way to capture this idea mathematically is for monetary policymakers to formulate a plan for interest rates and any other monetary policy instruments that minimizes a loss function. The following equation has several parts. min ሼ௜೟ሽ ௧ ∗ሻଶሿ ஶ ௧ୀ௧బ 10 policymakers must make. Unemployment and inflation typically fluctuate around the longer-run levels consistent with our mandates because of various economic shocks. Sometimes they veer very far from the levels consistent with our mandates. Certainly, that’s the case now with unemployment. Given these fluctuations, it’s impossible for the FOMC to achieve a perfect outcome. Instead, we must try to do the best we can, given that monetary policy affects output and inflation with substantial lags. Let me give an example from before the financial crisis to drive home this point. Let’s suppose that the economy is hit by a large increase in oil prices. This has all the features of a classic supply shock. It causes both the unemployment rate and the inflation rate to increase. Our employment and price stability goals may be in conflict. Easing policy would help bring unemployment back to its natural rate. But that would imply that it would take longer to get back to 2 percent inflation. Even worse, it might mean that 2 percent inflation wouldn’t be attainable at any reasonable time horizon! Conversely, tightening monetary policy would bring inflation back to 2 percent more quickly. But unemployment would take longer to get back to its natural rate. In this example, the extent to which monetary policy should ease or tighten depends on many factors. It would partly depend on the relative weight we assign to economic losses caused by unemployment and excess inflation. Other important considerations would be how quickly The minimization operator in front denotes that policymakers are trying to minimize the loss function to the right by choosing the optimal interest rate plan, {it}, where t ranges over all future dates and the plan for interest rates or other monetary policy instrument it will typically be a function of the realizations of shocks and new information that come to light as time progresses. The expectations operator E means that there is uncertainty about the loss function, and policymakers are trying to minimize the expected value, or average of that loss function, across all possible uncertain outcomes. The sum is over all future dates t, and the quantity δ < 1 describes the rate at which policymakers, on behalf of society, discount the future relative to the present. The variable πt denotes the inflation rate at each future date t, and π* denotes the mandate-consistent inflation rate of 2 percent per year. The variable ut denotes the unemployment rate at each future date t, and ௧ ∗ denotes the natural rate of unemployment, which might vary over time. The parameter λ represents the relative weight that policymakers place on stabilizing unemployment vs. stabilizing inflation around their mandate-consistent levels. It is important to note that both the deviation of inflation from its mandate-consistent level and the deviation of unemployment from its natural rate are squared— that is, the loss function penalizes us for letting unemployment or inflation get too low as well as too high. 11 unemployment and inflation would be expected to return to levels consistent with our mandate. And we would want to estimate the relative sizes of the effects of monetary policy actions on unemployment and inflation. But, whatever the specific policy choices, the important point is that both inflation and unemployment would eventually return to levels consistent with our goals. The current stance of monetary policy What does this tell us about where monetary policy should be now? Inflation in 2012 and 2013 is likely to come in around 1½ percent, below the FOMC’s 2 percent target. And clearly, with unemployment at 8.3 percent, we are very far from maximum employment. At the San Francisco Fed, our forecast is that the unemployment rate will remain well over 7 percent for several more years. This is a situation in which there’s no conflict between maximum employment and price stability. With regard to both of the Fed’s mandates, it’s vital that we keep the monetary policy throttle wide open. This will help lower unemployment and raise inflation back toward levels consistent with our mandates. And we want to do so quickly to minimize total economic damage. The longer we miss our objectives, the larger the cumulative loss to the economy. What does this mean in practice? Our ability to affect the economy is rooted in our influence over interest rates. In the simplest terms, when the Fed raises interest rates, that tends to damp economic activity and lower inflation. By contrast, cutting interest rates spurs economic activity and allows inflation to rise. Our standard tool is the federal funds rate, which is what banks pay to borrow from each other on overnight loans. We have substantial control over the federal funds rate through what are called open market operations, that is, buying and selling U.S. Treasury securities to inject or withdraw money from the banking system. The federal funds rate serves as a benchmark for 12 other short-term interest rates, and it indirectly influences longer-term rates as well. In this way, the Fed has a broad ability to affect the level of interest rates throughout the economy. We have pushed the federal funds rate close to zero because of the severe recession of 2007 through 2009, and the weak recovery since. We’ve said we expect to keep the federal funds rate extremely low at least through late 2014. Meanwhile, with the fed funds rate near zero, we’ve used some unconventional monetary policy tools to try to push down longer-term interest rates further. Our policy initiatives are a major reason why interest rates across the entire yield curve are at or near record low levels for the post-World War II period. This is truly an extraordinary time for monetary policy. I’ve talked about some of the tradeoffs central bankers face. But I don’t see such tradeoffs today. Now is one of those moments when everything points in the same direction. The Fed is committed to achieving maximum employment and price stability. And we’re doing everything in our power to move towards those goals. Thank you very much. 13 14 References Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry. 1996. “The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation.” Brookings Paper on Economic Activity, 1996(1), pp. 1–59. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2534646 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012. “Press Release,” January 25. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120125c.htm Congressional Budget Office. 2012. The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2012 to 2022. Washington, DC, January. http://cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=12699 Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, Aysegul Sahin, and Robert Valletta. 2011. “A Rising Natural Rate of Unemployment: Transitory or Permanent?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2011-05. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2011/wp11-05bk.pdf Dickens, William T., Lorenz Goette, Erica L. Groshen, Steinar Holden, Julian Messina, Mark E. Schweitzer, Jarkko Turunen, and Melanie E. Ward. 2007. “How Wages Change: Micro Evidence from the International Wage Flexibility Project.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(2), pp. 195– 214. 15 Friedman, Milton. 1968. “The Role of Monetary Policy.” American Economic Review 58, pp. 1–17. http://www.aeaweb.org/aer/top20/58.1.1-17.pdf Judd, John, and Glenn Rudebusch. 1999. “The Goals of U.S. Monetary Policy.” FRBSF Economic Letter 1999-4. www.frbsf.org/econrsrch/wklyltr/wklyltr99/el99-04.html Kuttner, Kenneth. 2004. “A Snapshot of Inflation Targeting in its Adolescence.” In The Future of Inflation Targeting, Conference Volume. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia. http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/confs/2004/kuttner.pdf Phelps, Edmund S. 1968. “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium.” Journal of Political Economy 76, pp. 678–711. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1830370 Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams. 2000. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low- Inflation Era.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(4, part 2, November), pp. 936–66. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2601151 Summers, Lawrence. 1991. “Panel Discussion: Price Stability. How Should Long-Term Monetary Policy Be Determined?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 23(3), pp. 625–31. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1992697 Weidner, Justin, and John C. Williams. 2011. “What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-05, February 14. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-05.html Williams, John C. 2009. “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Lower Bound.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009(2, Fall), pp. 1–37. http://www.jstor.org/stable/25652727 Woodford, Michael. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

1 Presentation to the Monetary Policy Forum New York, N.Y. By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on February 24, 2012 Discussion of “Housing, Monetary Policy, and the Recovery”1 It’s a pleasure to participate in this year’s Monetary Policy Forum. I am particularly pleased to be discussing today’s paper. The authors have done an excellent job of analyzing and illuminating a key sector that has had profound effects on the economy, effects that policymakers have been wrestling with. I appreciate the opportunity to offer some thoughts on these issues. The paper makes a compelling case that the housing boom and bust are central for understanding both the depth of the recession and the slow recovery. Indeed, the housing bust has led to a persistent shortfall in aggregate demand, through a variety of channels.2 The authors also argue that problems in housing have affected the transmission of monetary policy. In my comments today, I will focus on two issues. First, I will argue that, although the collapse in home prices and residential construction has been an important part of the story, it has not been the only factor weighing on aggregate demand. In particular, the sluggish recovery has not been limited to regions hard-hit by the housing downturn. Instead, fallout from the broader financial crisis also reduced aggregate demand through a variety of nonhousing channels. Second, the resulting large and persistent output gap is national in scope, which calls 1 I would like to thank John Fernald, Fred Furlong, John Krainer, and Sam Zuckerman for assistance in the preparation of this presentation. 2 See Williams (2012). 2 for strong countercyclical monetary policy.3 After saying that, I should make clear that I am speaking for myself and not for others in the Federal Reserve System. The title of the paper is “Housing, Monetary Policy, and the Recovery.” The discussion and figures in the first half of the paper are, indeed, focused on housing and the recovery. But the authors then shift to quantifying that the downturn was more severe in states that had larger declines in home prices. This analysis, along with Amir Sufi’s work with Atif Mian and others,4 sheds light on the important role of housing in exacerbating the downturn. But the authors do not say much about the recovery phase, which has been anomalous compared with recoveries from past deep recessions. This distinction matters. The link between house prices and regional economic activity is much clearer in the downturn than in the recovery. That point comes through in the next two figures, one looking at house prices and employment, and the other housing starts. Figure 1 shows the evolution of the cross-sectional correlation between state-level employment growth and changes in house prices. The blue line shows the monthly correlation across states between the 12-month change in employment and the 36-month change in home prices. The red line also uses the 12-month change in employment, but measures the change in home prices relative to a fixed starting point at the end of 2005. Both lines tell the same story. States with larger declines in home prices also had larger declines in employment during the downturn. But this correlation 3 One issue that I do not have time to cover is what caused the housing and associated credit bubble in the first place and what role monetary policy should have in combating bubbles. For further discussion of these issues, see Williams (2011a, b). 4 See, for example, Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011). 3 has largely vanished during the recovery. In 2011, the pace of employment growth was similar for states that had large home price declines and those that did not. We see the same pattern in housing starts. The downturn was more severe in states that had larger home price declines. But starts have been more similar during the recovery. The two bars on the left of Figure 2 show the states that had higher-than-average home price declines. The blue bar shows the downturn, measured as the level of starts in the second quarter of 2009 relative to the fourth quarter of 2005; the red bar, the recovery, measured as starts in the fourth quarter of 2011 compared with the second quarter of 2009. The right bars do the same for states with smaller price declines, or, in a few cases, increases. During the recession, starts plunged everywhere. But the contraction was larger in high- price-decline states, where starts fell by a factor of five. Moreover, from 2009 to 2011, there was only limited recovery anywhere. In fact, the recovery was actually slightly stronger in the hardest-hit states. Thus, housing was important in explaining regional differences during the downturn. But once the downward adjustments took place, the disappointing pace of recovery has been similar across regions, suggesting broad-based factors have been at work. This evidence supports the view that house-price declines were not the entire story behind the deep recession and slow recovery. Following on that point, the analysis in this paper is best viewed in the context of the financial crisis more generally. Certainly, few would dispute that the housing collapse was a critical factor in triggering the broader financial crisis. For example, Gary Gorton and others have argued for the central role of concerns about the valuation of private-label MBS.5 And, housing-related losses at financial institutions impaired credit 5 See Gorton (2008). 4 availability. But these and other dimensions of the financial crisis caused broad additional effects on aggregate demand. These effects went beyond those due simply to reduced spending by overleveraged households. This point is illustrated by a careful examination of the timing of the downturn. Figure 3 shows that house prices peaked in 2006 and had fallen about 20 percent by the time Lehman Brothers failed in September 2008. Housing starts had already fallen sharply, but effects on nonhousing indicators were relatively modest. The stock market, though off its highs, was still about where it had been when home prices peaked. And the economy was bearing the housing crash reasonably well. In many ways, it looked like a replay of the recession following the dot- com bust. In contrast, after Lehman, the stock market and the real economy both went into free fall. We saw a massive flight to quality, increased demand for liquidity, greater uncertainty and compensation for risk, and widespread impairment in financial market functioning. These financial market effects have been important factors in the economy’s performance during the recession and recovery. And, of course, the current European crisis is certainly not the result of overleveraged U.S. households, at least not directly. In this regard, it is interesting to look at analysis of the housing market presented to the Federal Open Market Committee back in June 2005.6 In my presentation at that meeting, I used the Board of Governors FRB/US model to examine the effects of a 20 percent decline in home prices. The model did not explicitly incorporate the types of deleveraging and credit constraint 6 See presentation materials by Williams (2005). See also Mishkin (2007) for a more detailed discussion of these issues and FRB/US model simulations. 5 channels highlighted by the paper. However, I did include additional spillovers to aggregate demand and bond premiums to get at some of the imbalances present at the time. The model simulation implied that the downturn would be relatively modest, though requiring a sizeable monetary response. For example, with a Taylor rule, the fed funds rate would fall about three percentage points and the unemployment rate would rise by about one percentage point following the shock. Until Lehman, the predictions of that model held up reasonably well. For example, in August 2008, home prices had fallen almost exactly 20 percent from their peak. The fed funds rate had been cut from 5¼ percent to 2 percent, and the unemployment rate had risen a little more than one percentage point to 6.1 percent. According to this analysis, if the housing crash had not ignited the financial crisis, the macroeconomic effects would not have been disastrous. Then came the financial crisis. The economy plunged into nearly the worst recession since World War II. Of course, the model simulations did not foresee the global financial crisis, with its demand for safety and liquidity, the seizing up of markets, and the effects of these developments on confidence and aggregate demand. And it is the aftereffects of those events that are playing a major role in restraining the recovery even today. In looking at the relative role of the decline in house prices versus the broader downturn following the financial crisis, it is important to note that the downturn was severe even in places with smaller house-price declines. Housing starts and employment fell everywhere. Even today, the unemployment rate in every state remains higher than it was before the Great Recession, as shown in Figure 4. The unemployment rate rose more in states with above-average house-price declines. But the increases were also substantial in most states that had smaller-than-average house-price declines. 6 Not only did almost every state suffer from the downturn, but the recovery has been fairly similar across regions. Figure 5 depicts a measure of dispersion from state coincident indexes of economic activity.7 The red line shows that, in the Great Recession, the standard deviation across states rose substantially. But, since the recovery began, the standard deviation has been relatively low. Other indicators, such as employment growth, do not show unusual dispersion across states. This evidence suggests that there hasn’t been a significant difference in growth between high- and low-price-decline states during the recovery. The slow pace of recovery since 2009 has been widespread, which reflects common obstacles to growth across all states. Some of these headwinds are clearly related to housing and household balance sheets. Others are only indirectly related, including tight credit, pervasive economic uncertainty, and weak global conditions. What about monetary policy then? The paper’s executive summary notes that current “headwinds…may require a more aggressive monetary response than in normal downturns.” I entirely agree. A notable policy challenge is that the reduction in household and business demand has pushed us to the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate. A range of monetary policy rules suggest that the target nominal funds rate should have been substantially negative in recent years.8 Another challenge is that the monetary transmission mechanism is partially clogged. Credit market frictions make refinancing and other housing activity less responsive to changes in interest rates. Fortunately, the monetary transmission mechanism doesn’t work solely through its 7 See Crone and Clayton-Matthews (2005) and Stock and Watson (1989). 8 See, for example, Rudebusch (2009) and Chung et al. (2012). 7 effects on housing, or even through balance sheets and collateral constraints more generally. Monetary policy also affects the economy through wealth effects, household intertemporal substitution, the user cost of capital generally, and exchange rates, among other mechanisms.9 But suppose monetary policy is less powerful than usual. That suggests we need to move our monetary instruments even more than usual to achieve our employment and price-stability objectives. The paper hints at a potential caveat to this argument: sector- or region-specific capacity constraints. For example, because of the different housing markets, monetary policy might be potent in Kansas, but less so in Nevada. By attacking a big output gap in one region, we could be overheating other regions. This concern is largely hypothetical. It’s not the case that some areas are overheating and others are languishing. Every region is facing substantial common headwinds.10 Now, the partially clogged transmission mechanism could suggest that you don’t do more of everything across the board, but concentrate on policies that affect particular problem areas. For example, purchases of mortgage-related securities appear to have reduced mortgage rates significantly, making them particularly useful given the weakness in the housing sector.11 In addition, as discussed in the paper, fiscal policies could directly address the housing-related 9 See, for example, Reifschneider, Tetlow, and Williams (1999) and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). 10 Even conceptually, this concern doesn’t entirely vitiate the “do-more” conclusion. Suppose the central bank’s loss function is in terms of a weighted average of squared gaps across regions. If one area has a large negative gap then, when you square it, the loss is very costly. The central bank would then be willing to tolerate the opening up of modestly positive gaps in other regions in exchange for decreasing the very large negative gap. 11 Hancock and Passmore (2011) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) find significant effects of MBS purchases. Stroebel and Taylor (2009), by contrast, do not. 8 headwinds, potentially yielding two benefits—a stronger housing recovery and more powerful effects from the existing monetary stimulus.12 To conclude, housing is a major factor in the deep downturn and sluggish recovery we’ve experienced in recent years. It’s not the only headwind. But it’s one of several factors weighing on aggregate spending by consumers, businesses, and government. An aggregate-demand shortfall is something monetary policy can be, should be, and is addressing. Thank you. 12 See Board of Governors (2012) and Bernanke (2012). 9 Employment and home prices less related -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 2007 2010 Source: CoreLogic, BLS Figure 1: Correlation between Employment Growth and Changes in Home Price Indexes (HPI) Correlation of 12-month growth rates in state employment and log changes in state HPI from 2005.12 (red) Correlation of 12-month growth rates in state employment and 3-year log changes in state HPI (blue) Starts and home prices 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 High (greater than average) decline in HPI Low (average or below) decline in HPI Source: Haver Analytics and CoreLogic States grouped by percent change in home price index 2005.12 to 2011.12 Figure 2: Housing Starts in Downturn and Recovery Ratio Downturn (average starts 2009:Q2)/(average starts 2005:Q4) Recovery (average starts 2011:Q4)/(average starts 2009:Q2) 10 After Lehman, stock market/economy in free fall 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Source: Haver Analytics;CoreLogic. Home price index includes distressed properties. Stock price index is the monthly average of daily index values. All series are nominal and not seasonally adjusted. Figure 3: Equity and Home Price Indexes CoreLogic HPI (Left Axis) S&P 500 (Right Axis) Lehman bankruptcy 11 Recovery similar (slow) across states -0.15 -0.1 -0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 -0.15 -0.1 -0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 1979 1983 1987 1991 1995 1999 2003 2007 2011 Source: Haver Analytics Annualized 3-month rolling average Figure 5: Economic Activity Indexes Across States Standard Deviation Average (weighted by GSP) The FRB Philadelphia's Coincident Indexes of Economic Activity Index for the 50 states are based on four indicators: nonfarm payroll employment, the unemployment rate, average hours worked in manufacturing and wages and salaries. The trend for each state's index is set to the trend for gross state product. References Bernanke, Ben S. 2012. “Housing Markets in Transition.” Speech at the 2012 National Association of Homebuilders International Builders’ Show, Orlando, FL, February 10. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20110210a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve. 2012. “The U.S. Housing Market: Current Conditions and Policy Considerations.” White paper, January 4. http://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/other- reports/files/housing-white-paper-20120104.pdf Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin. 2010. “How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved Over Time?” Chapter 8 in Handbook of Monetary Economics 3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-53238-1.00008-9 Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams. 2012. “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44(s1, February), pp. 47–82. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2011/wp11-01bk.pdf Crone, Theodore M., and Alan Clayton-Matthews. 2005. “Consistent Economic Indexes for the 50 States.” Review of Economics and Statistics 87(4, November), pp. 593-603. http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/003465305775098242 Feroli, Mike, Ethan Harris, Amir Sufi, and Ken West. 2012. “Housing, Monetary Policy, and the Recovery.” Presentation to the 2012 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24. 12 Gorton, Gary. 2008. “The Panic of 2007.” In Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System, Proceedings of the 2008 Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. http://kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2008/Gorton.03.12.09.pdf Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore. 2011. “Did the Federal Reserve’s MBS Purchase Program Lower Mortgage Rates?” Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-01 http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2011/201101/201101abs.html Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming. Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump.” Presentation at American Economics Association meetings, Atlanta, GA, January 8, 2012. Mishkin, Frederic. 2007. “Housing and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism.” In Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy, Proceedings of the 2007 Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. http://www.kc.frb.org/Publicat/Sympos/2007/PDF/Mishkin_0415.pdf Reifschneider, David, Robert Tetlow, and John C. Williams. 1999. “Aggregate Disturbances, Monetary Policy, and the Macroeconomy: The FRB/US perspective.” Federal Reserve Bulletin (January), pp. 1–19. http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/1999/0199lead.pdf Rudebusch, Glenn. 2009. “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2009-17 (May 22). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2009/el2009-17.html Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. 1989. “New Indexes of Coincident and Leading Economic Indicators,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1989(4), pp. 351–394. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c10968.pdf Stroebel, Johannes C., and John B. Taylor. 2009. “Estimated Impact of the Fed’s Mortgage-Backed Securities Purchase Program.” NBER Working Paper 15626. http://www.nber.org/papers/w15626.pdf Williams, John C. 2005. “Monetary Policy Implications of a House Price Bubble.” Federal Open Market Committee presentation materials, Appendix 1, June 29. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20050630material.pdf Williams, John C. 2011a. “Monetary Policy and Housing Booms.” International Journal of Central Banking 7(1, March), pp. 345–354. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb11q1a15.htm Williams, John C. 2011b. “Monetary Policy in an Era of Crises.” Presentation to the International Monetary Fund Annual Research Conference, Washington, DC, November 11. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2011/john-williams-1111.html Williams, John C. 2012. “The Federal Reserve and the Economic Recovery.” Presentation to the Bishop Ranch Forum, San Ramon, CA, February 8. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2012/john-williams- 0208.html

Presentation to the CFA Hawaii Seventh Annual Economic Forecast Dinner Honolulu, Hawaii By John C. Williams, President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on March 1, 2012 The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy1 Thank you. It’s a pleasure to participate in this event and to enjoy the beauty and hospitality of the wonderful state of Hawaii. Sadly, this is my first visit here in 25 years. In fact, the last time I was here was back when I worked for a small business in the San Francisco Bay Area after I graduated from college. The business owner sent me on an all-expenses-paid, week- long vacation as a reward for hard work. Throughout my career at the Federal Reserve, I’ve tried to convince my bosses of the productivity-enhancing benefits of such an enlightened management practice. Unfortunately, I never succeeded. Now, as President of the San Francisco Fed, it is my pleasant duty to visit all nine states in the 12th Federal Reserve District. I plan to be diligent in fulfilling that duty. So, I assure you, it won’t be another 25 years till I’m back. In my remarks this evening, I’m going to talk about the current state of the economy, where it’s headed, and what the Federal Reserve is doing to boost growth while keeping inflation low. My remarks represent my own views and not those of others in the Federal Reserve System. It’s been over two-and-a-half years since the end of the worst recession of the post-World War II period. The economy is growing, and the recent economic news has been increasingly 1 1 I would like to thank John Fernald, Rob Valletta, and Sam Zuckerman for assistance in the preparation of these remarks. positive. This is very welcome progress, but it’s brought us only part of the way back. Unemployment remains a huge problem, and that means real hardship for millions of Americans. The severe recession and subdued recovery have prompted the Fed to carry out a series of extraordinary policy actions to restore the economy to health. Most notably, we’ve kept our benchmark short-term interest rate near zero for over three years. This aggressive Fed response is an important reason why the economy has moved to more solid ground. But, as I’ll explain, the Fed’s job is not over yet. Far from it. Congress has assigned the Fed two goals: maximum employment and stable prices. We have lots of work to do before we can say we’ve met those goals. Looking at past deep recessions, you would have expected the economy to be doing much better than it is by now. Why has this recovery has been so lackluster? The reason has everything to do with what took place beforehand. We’ve had a wild ride—first a housing boom of epic proportions, then a housing bust, a near-collapse of the financial system, and a terrible recession. Let’s go back to 2006, right before the recession hit. That marked the peak of an unprecedented run-up in U.S. home prices. But the bubble burst. Home prices plunged by over 30 percent nationwide, and even more in states such as Nevada, Arizona, and Florida. As the housing market went into a tailspin, about a quarter of borrowers found themselves owing more than their homes were worth. Delinquencies and foreclosures surged. With millions of mortgages going sour, financial institutions that had placed big bets on home loans posted massive losses. It was like an epidemic. No one knew which financial institutions were infected with toxic assets. Everyone was suspect. Financial institutions were afraid to lend money to anybody, including each other. That choked off the flow of funds that 2 financial institutions and businesses depend on for their day-to-day operations. The result was a worldwide financial crisis. If left unchecked, this kind of financial panic could have ushered in an economic cataclysm like the Great Depression, when 25 percent of the workforce was out of work. Why didn’t we plunge into the abyss? A key reason was that the Federal Reserve did what it was supposed to do. The Fed is the nation’s government-chartered central bank. And one of the most important duties of a central bank is to safeguard the financial system. In a crisis, that means acting as lender of last resort, supplying emergency loans to financial institutions when normal funding isn’t available. The U.S. Treasury Department and other federal agencies were also doing all they could to shore up the financial system. Now, I know that this financial support to big banks and Wall Street firms made many people irate, especially when so many Americans were losing their jobs or their homes. We should remember, though, that ordinary people suffer terribly when the financial system breaks down. The ultimate goal of our programs was to avert a major depression and much higher unemployment. Because of these programs, we were able to avoid a meltdown of the financial system and head off a depression. But we couldn’t prevent a terrible recession. The shock waves from the burst housing bubble and the financial crisis were simply too great. As it happens, it’s normal that severe recessions and sluggish recoveries follow financial crises.2 Research at the San Francisco Fed and other places shows that downturns following financial crises are much more severe when the preceding expansions had unusually rapid 3 2 Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). growth of credit and leverage.3 When the credit pendulum swings, it takes many years for household and business spending to return to normal. And, in fact, there was extraordinary credit growth before the recession. Between 1999 and 2006, housing debt more than doubled.4 So it’s not so surprising that we got an anemic rebound. The financial crisis unleashed powerful forces that have damped spending and sapped the recovery of its vigor. I’ll mention three. First, it destroyed a huge amount of household wealth. Second, it flattened the housing market. Third, it made it hard for businesses and households to get credit. Let’s look at each of these. First, when house prices collapsed, the wealth of American households plunged by about six-and-a-half trillion dollars. That equals more than 40 percent of the total size of the U.S. economy. Many people went from feeling rich to feeling poor, with neither the means nor the will to spend. Instead, they became intent on repairing their finances by increasing their saving and trimming their debt. In other words, they deleveraged. During the recession, the household saving rate climbed to about 6 percent of income from about 1 percent. It’s still about 4-1/2 percent. In the long run, higher saving is healthy. But, in the near term, it puts a brake on spending and slows growth. Second, the depressed housing market has been a drag on growth. Home construction plays an important role in the economy, of course. When you add in items that often go with a new home—things such as furniture, carpets, and appliances—you’re talking about a significant 4 3 Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2011). 4 Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2010). fraction of overall economic activity.5 Today, there are still millions of homes in foreclosure, and millions more on the verge. All those distressed properties are acting like a weight keeping home prices from rising. The result is that new home construction and sales are still near the lowest levels recorded since the early 1960s. Tight credit is a third powerful force holding back the recovery. Lenders who were too quick with a loan in 2006 have turned very cautious. Consumers who lack gold-plated credit scores and cash for a hefty down payment find it tough to get a mortgage. That limits home sales and refinancing. Fortunately, there are signs that credit conditions are easing a bit. Already, corporations that can sell securities have great access to capital. These three forces—household finances, housing, and credit—are likely to hold down spending growth for some time. But let me emphasize, though—overall, things are getting better. You can sense greater optimism out there—albeit cautious optimism. Let’s look then at the positive side of the ledger. Little by little, households are repairing their finances. Businesses are gradually increasing production and hiring. The housing sector appears to have stabilized and is showing some signs of life. Consumer spending, which represents close to 70 percent of all economic activity, hasn’t been growing fast, but it’s been growing steadily. More motor vehicles were sold in January than in any month in nearly four years. The growth in consumer spending is also evident here in Hawaii. Last year was the best for tourist visits since 2007. Exports have consistently been a bright spot for the economy over the past few years. Overseas demand for American products continues to grow. This increase has been rapid to our 5 5 See, for example, Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011) and Feroli et al. (2012) for analysis of the effects of the housing crash on the economy. North American trading partners, and also to emerging economies of East Asia, including China. Indeed, exports are one reason U.S. manufacturers have been creating jobs at a pace not seen since the 1990s. Gross domestic product, or GDP, measures the nation’s total output of goods and services. After adjusting for inflation, GDP grew at less than a 1 percent annual rate in the first half of 2011, dragged down by temporary factors, including the surge in oil prices, and the Japanese tsunami. Growth picked up to about 2¼ percent in the second half of 2011 as those temporary factors receded. My forecast calls for GDP to rise about 2¼ percent this year and 2¾ percent in 2013. That’s not rip-roaring by any means. But it’s an improvement. I’m especially encouraged by the good news from the job market. In the past four months, the unemployment rate has fallen about three-quarters of a percentage point. It’s now at its lowest level in nearly three years. All the same, the kind of moderate economic growth I forecast won’t keep bringing the unemployment rate down quickly. That rate is currently 8.3 percent. I expect it to remain over 8 percent into next year and still be well over 7 percent for several years to come. If my forecast is correct, the unemployment rate will have stayed at or above 8 percent for more than four years. Such a long period of unemployment above 8 percent has not happened in over 70 years. For its part, inflation has been relatively contained. The prices of oil and other commodities did surge early last year in the face of strong global demand. This caused the overall inflation rate to rise above our 2 percent target. Oil prices have run up again recently, and have returned to their peak levels from last spring. As far as other commodity prices are concerned, we haven’t seen a similar surge. With the economy still underperforming and wage 6 growth modest, inflation should remain subdued. I expect inflation to be about 1¾ percent this year and to be about 1½ percent next year, down from about 2¾ percent in 2011. There’s a risk the economy could do worse than this moderate forecast. The main threat is the debt crisis in Europe. The latest news from that continent is somewhat reassuring, although more severe turmoil is still possible. Once again, European leaders have found a short- term fix to Greece’s problems. Hopefully, that will prevent the situation from spinning out of control and igniting a wider financial crisis in Europe. In addition to the actions of European political leaders, central banks have been actively supplying liquidity to the European banking system. The Fed set up temporary currency swap lines with several foreign central banks last November. These lines allow those central banks to borrow dollars and, in turn, lend those dollars to banks in their countries. In addition, the European Central Bank has provided hundreds of billions of euros in three-year loans to European banks. These actions have defused concerns about the ability of European banks to renew credit when their debts come due. In this way, Europe has avoided what could have been a massive credit crunch as banks pulled back lending sharply. I don’t need to remind you that, in today’s interconnected world, financial turmoil in Europe would definitely hurt our economy as well. Even if the European crisis doesn’t flare up again, growth is slowing in many parts of the world. Many European countries already appear to be in recession, and there is a danger that this situation could worsen significantly as governments put in place austerity measures. Turning to Asia, growth in China has also slowed as that country has tightened monetary and credit policies to reduce inflation. Indeed, the list of countries that are still experiencing solid growth is getting 7 shorter all the time. If China’s economy has a hard landing, there really aren’t many sources of strength left in the global economy. Let me move now to what this all means for Fed policy. As I noted earlier, our statutory mandate is to achieve maximum employment and price stability.6 We are far short of maximum employment. And I expect inflation to fall this year below the 2 percent level that we view as consistent with our mandate. This is clearly a situation in which we have to keep applying monetary policy stimulus vigorously. The Fed’s monetary policy body is called the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. As you know, the Fed influences the economy through its ability to affect interest rates. In December 2008, when the recession was hitting with full force, the FOMC lowered the federal funds rate, the rate banks pay to borrow from each other on overnight loans, close to zero. It’s been there ever since. Given the weakness in the economy, standard monetary policy guidelines indicate that the federal funds rate should have gone deep into negative territory. But, of course, it’s not possible for interest rates to go much below zero. So the Fed has had to look for alternative ways to stimulate the economy. For example, we’ve purchased over one-and-three-quarters trillion dollars of longer-term securities issued by the U.S. government and mortgage agencies. This raises the prices on these securities, which lowers their yields. And lower yields on longer-term Treasury securities tend to push down other longer-term interest rates. That reduces the cost of borrowing across the board, from mortgages, to business loans, to corporate debt. Our securities purchases are an important reason why longer-term interest rates are at or near post-World War II lows. 8 6 See Williams (2012) for a discussion of the Fed’s mandate and the implications for the conduct of monetary policy. In addition, we’ve publicly announced that we expect to keep the federal funds rate exceptionally low at least through late 2014. This guidance tells investors that short-term interest rates are likely to stay low for a long time, which then gets passed through to longer-term rates. Of course, our statements are not an absolute commitment to keep rates near zero. It’s simply the FOMC’s current judgment about the best future course of policy. If the economic outlook changes, then the guidance could change too. Let me emphasize that the unusually stimulatory monetary policy now in place won’t last forever. Eventually we will cut back the size of our securities holdings and raise our unusually low interest rate target. We’ve thought hard and communicated frequently about how to exit from these special conditions.7 The key point is that the economy currently needs an extraordinarily supportive policy. But we’ll reverse course when the time comes to remove this support. We’ve also taken two steps to improve our communication of the Fed’s monetary policy strategy and plans. First, we released a statement of our longer-run goals and strategies— essentially, a declaration of our monetary policy principles.8 That statement noted that we view a 2 percent inflation rate as most consistent with our mandates. It also emphasized that we will continue to balance our goals of maximum employment and price stability in making policy. Second, we now regularly report our views about the probable course of short-term interest rates over the next few years. Under current economic circumstances, most Fed policymakers judge that near-zero short-term interest rates will be appropriate well into 2014. In 9 7 See the discussion of exit strategy in the minutes for the June 2011 FOMC meeting (Board of Governors 2011). 8 For more information, see Board of Governors (2012). this way, our interest rate forecasts reinforce our public guidance. Releasing the views of policymakers in this fashion should further reduce public uncertainty about our plans. And that, in turn, improves the effectiveness of our policies. We at the Fed are broadening our commitment to openness and accountability. And we’re doing all we can to carry out the mission Congress gave us. The Fed’s powers are limited. Lower interest rates alone can’t fix all the economy’s problems. But monetary accommodation is indispensible. The economy would be in much worse shape if the Fed weren’t acting so energetically. Looking ahead, we may need to do more if the recovery falters or if inflation stays well below 2 percent. If the economy does need more stimulus, restarting our program of purchasing mortgage-backed securities would probably be the best course of action. The policy actions the Fed takes will depend on how economic conditions develop. If circumstances change, our policies will adapt. No matter the circumstances, I assure you that we at the Fed are doing everything we can to achieve the goals of maximum employment and stable prices. Thank you very much. 10 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2011. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” June 21–22. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20110622.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012. “Press Release,” January 25. http:// www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120125c.htm Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2010. “Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit.” August. http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/national_economy/householdcredit/DistrictReport_Q22010.pdf Feroli, Michael E., Ethan S. Harris, Amir Sufi, and Kenneth D. West. 2012. “Housing, Monetary Policy, and the Recovery.” Presentation to the 2012 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24. http://research.chicagobooth.edu/igm/usmpf/2012/download.aspx Jordà, Òscar , Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2011. “When Credit Bites Back: Leverage, Business Cycles, and Crises.” NBER Working Paper 17621. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17621 Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump.” Presentation at American Economics Association meetings, Atlanta, GA, January 8, 2012. http://www.aeaweb.org/aea/2012conference/program/meetingpapers.php Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Williams, John C. 2012. “The Federal Reserve’s Mandate and Best Practice Monetary Policy.” Presentation to the Marian Miner Cook Athenaeum, Claremont McKenna College, February 13. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2012/john-williams-0213.html 11

1 Presentation to the University of San Diego School of Business Administration San Diego, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on April 3, 2012 Monetary Policy and the Slow Recovery: It’s Not Just About Housing Thank you. It’s a particular pleasure to be with you this morning. The subject of my talk today is the outlook for the economy and Federal Reserve policy. I’ll start with a look at the national economy, focusing on why the recent recession was so severe and why the recovery has been relatively anemic. I’ll then talk about prospects for growth, employment, and inflation. Finally, I’ll discuss what the Federal Reserve is doing to bolster the recovery. My remarks represent my own views and not those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Let me begin by saying that I’m encouraged by recent signs of a stronger, self-sustaining recovery. I’m especially glad to see that the economy is adding jobs at a pretty decent clip. Still, we have a long way to go. The Fed’s mandate from Congress is to promote maximum employment and stable prices. 1 Inflation generally has been subdued over the past few years. But, more than four years after the recession began, the unemployment rate is still 8.3 percent, leaving us far short of our employment goal. The Fed has acted vigorously to boost the economy. It’s critical that we keep doing so in order to achieve our statutory mandate. I’d like to start with a little bit of history. We are in the aftermath of the worst financial crisis and economic downturn since the Great Depression. The downturn came in the wake of an unprecedented run-up in housing prices, followed by a traumatic collapse. Although the recession started with this burst housing bubble, the economy’s problems over the past few years 1 Williams (2012b). 2 have extended well beyond housing. In the broad sense, what we’ve seen has been a sharp fall in household and business demand for goods and services. That has caused the economy to perform well below its potential. Let’s look at this in more detail. The housing boom was a classic financial bubble, fueled by speculative excess. Buyers kept bidding up prices, convinced they could sell for more than they paid. Lenders enabled this behavior by offering excessively easy terms. The growth in house prices outstripped anything that could be supported by market fundamentals, such as household incomes or rental rates on comparable properties. The inevitable crash landed with a resounding thud. Beginning in 2006, home prices plummeted. Eventually they fell by about a third nationally. About a quarter of borrowers found themselves under water, owing more than their homes were worth. Large chunks of the wealth of tens of millions of Americans vanished. Overall, the destruction of net worth from housing equaled more than 40 percent of the value of annual U.S. production. When wealth is destroyed on such a vast scale, the economic effects are severe. During the boom, higher house prices helped fuel consumption as people tapped home equity to buy cars, boats, vacations, and the like. When house prices did a U-turn, households hunkered down. They cut spending and salted away more savings to rebuild lost wealth. And that wasn’t the housing bust’s only depressing effect. By early 2009, home construction had plunged by over 75 percent from its 2006 high. It’s remained near historical lows since. That’s put a lid on demand for construction materials and home furnishings. And it’s kept millions of carpenters, plumbers, and others in construction and real estate out of work. 3 It’s impossible to understand the economy of the past few years without taking into account these housing effects.2 Consider the difference in economic performance between states hit hard by the housing bust and states that got off relatively lightly. Figure 1 shows price declines by state. The hardest hit states, including Nevada, Arizona, California, and Florida, are shown in red. Prices in these states plunged by 40 percent or more from their peaks. By contrast, the states shown in green posted price declines of less than 15 percent. In one green state, North Dakota, prices actually increased. Figure 2 shows the drop in employment during the downturn by state, using the same color coding as Figure 1. For example, in the hard-hit states, shown in red here, employment fell by 8 percent or more. The overlap with the pattern of house price declines is striking. The states where home prices fell most were generally among those that suffered the worst job losses during the recession. In states where prices fell less, employment declined less.3 To be sure, this overlap was not perfect. Employment fell in all but North Dakota and Alaska, with sharp declines registered even in some states where the housing bust wasn’t harsh. Examples include Indiana, Ohio, and South Carolina. One reason this happened is the tight web that binds economic activity in far-flung places in the modern world.4 When under water homeowners in the Central Valley put off buying new cars, auto workers in Indiana may lose their jobs. But, what is fascinating, and perhaps surprising, is this: The close relationship between the fall in home prices and state economic activity has largely disappeared during the recovery.5 2 See, for example, Mian and Sufi (2011), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011), and Feroli et al. (2012). 3 Williams (2012a). 4 Mian and Sufi (2011). 5 Williams (2012a). 4 Figure 3 shows state employment gains during the rebound. There’s almost no systematic relationship between employment growth and home price declines. Figure 4 reinforces this. The blue line measures the gap in employment growth rates between states where the job market has been relatively stronger and states where it has been weaker. This gap grew sharply during the recession, reflecting in part the uneven effects of the housing bust. But, during the recovery, the gap has been smaller than at any time since the mid- 1970s. In other words, across the country, state-level employment growth has become quite balanced. These comparisons indicate that the economy faces obstacles that are national in scope. The slow pace of expansion has affected all regions of the country. During the recovery, states where house price declines have been relatively mild have not done noticeably better than states where housing got hammered. Powerful forces have kept us stuck in a slow-growth pattern. Some of those forces reflect the direct effects of the housing collapse on household finances. The connection with housing is less direct for other forces holding back the economy. I’ll highlight three of those forces: tight credit, uncertainty, and government contraction. Tight credit was clearly a product of the housing bust. But it took on a life of its own when fallout from housing almost brought down the global financial system in 2008. The repercussions of those dramatic events still affect markets today. Let me explain how this played out. When home prices crashed, mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures surged. Exposure to risky U.S. subprime mortgages was spread globally through investments held by financial institutions. Those mortgages had been repackaged to create financial instruments of mind- bending complexity. When the music stopped, it was hard to tell who was left with all those 5 toxic assets. Financial institutions became afraid to lend money to anybody, including other financial institutions. The result was a massive credit crunch that choked off the flow of funds financial institutions and nonfinancial businesses depend on for their day-to-day operations. Many financial institutions that had placed big bets on housing posted massive losses. Some of them failed. Thankfully, central banks and governments around the world stepped in to provide emergency loans and other support. Those interventions prevented complete financial collapse. In the United States, the financial system has healed to a very considerable extent. The Fed recently conducted a series of tests on the largest U.S. banks. We found that most of them would have adequate capital even if the economy went through another extreme downturn. As financial institutions have regained their footing, access to credit has improved. Nevertheless, we haven’t returned to normal. Many small businesses and consumers still struggle to get loans. For example, to get a mortgage, a borrower must have a top-notch credit rating and the cash to make a substantial down payment. Uncertainty is a second factor holding back the recovery. Businesses, investors, and households remain skittish, even in the face of better economic news. Many of my business contacts say they remain cautious about expanding because they’re unsure about future conditions. Ordinary Americans worry about job prospects and future income. Everybody is unsettled by the highly charged political environment. Financial turmoil in Europe has added another dimension to the unease here. The imminent threat of European financial meltdown has diminished. But the underlying problem of countries with unsustainable debt has not been resolved. Over the next few years, the total debt load among countries that use the euro will grow larger. I’ve heard Europe’s policy described as 6 kicking the can down the road. But the risk is that Europe might be rolling an ever-growing snowball down a hill. Government cutbacks are a third obstacle to growth. Typically, government spending rises when the economy turns down. That’s because the cost of safety net programs, such as unemployment insurance, go up. And sometimes governments deliberately boost spending to stimulate the economy. But the federal government’s long-term budget problems loom large. And state and local government finances are reeling from the economic downturn. As a result, government stimulus has been unusually limited. Figure 5 compares recent inflation-adjusted spending by state and local governments with past periods. The red line represents the most recent recession and recovery. The shaded region portrays the range of outcomes over the eight previous recessions and recoveries, with the average displayed in black. During the current period, the housing bust has cut into the revenue of state and local governments, forcing them to slash spending.6 That contrasts with comparable periods in the past, when such spending typically increased. I don’t see government spending turning around soon. Indeed, spending at the federal level is set to contract sharply at the end of this year as several temporary programs end. Some of those programs may be extended. But, overall, we can expect federal spending trends to weigh on near-term economic growth. However, things are getting better as far as tight credit and uncertainty are concerned. Improvements in credit, and rises in business and consumer confidence, have helped the economy gain real traction. We can see the improvement in the data. Consumer spending hasn’t been growing fast, but it’s been growing steadily. Car sales have surged and nearly reached pre- 6 Feroli et al. (2012). 7 recession levels in February. The rebound in car sales and strong exports of other goods have helped U.S. manufacturers create jobs at the fastest pace since the mid-1990s. Real gross domestic product measures the nation’s total output of goods and services adjusted for inflation. During the first half of 2011, real GDP expanded at just under a 1 percent annual rate. Then, in the second half, it shifted into higher gear, rising at nearly a 2½ percent pace. My forecast calls for GDP growth to pick up further to about 2½ percent this year and 2¾ percent in 2013. That’s not overdrive, but it does represent improvement. As I said earlier, the news from the labor market has been heartening. The jobless rate has fallen about three-quarters of a percentage point since August and is now at its lowest level in three years. Unfortunately, the kind of moderate economic growth I expect won’t sustain such rapid progress. The February unemployment rate held steady at 8.3 percent. I expect unemployment rates to remain around 8 percent through year-end. And we’re still likely to be around 7 percent at the end of 2014. We haven’t had such a long period of high unemployment in the United States since the Great Depression. And this phenomenon is widespread. Compared with December 2007, when the recession began, the unemployment rate is up in all 50 states. That’s true even in North Dakota and Alaska, the two states where total employment grew during the recession. Economists have been debating why unemployment has been so high during this recovery. Broadly speaking, they fall into two camps. One group argues that changes in the structure of the economy are pushing up the unemployment rate. The other group maintains that high unemployment is the result of a severe downturn, which significantly cut demand for goods and services. 8 Those who favor a structural explanation point out that many job seekers lack the skills employers need. For example, computer industry employers are having a hard time finding qualified workers. But they’re not likely to find such employees in the ranks of jobless construction workers. If such labor market mismatches are widespread, they could be boosting the unemployment rate. To put this in perspective, I’m going to introduce the concept of the natural rate of unemployment. The natural rate is basically an equilibrium jobless rate that pushes inflation neither up, nor down. Before the recession, most economists thought this rate was around 5 percent. Today though, economists in the structural camp argue that the natural rate has risen substantially, largely because of the labor market mismatches I described. The idea is that a lot of people are unemployed not because jobs are lacking, but because those jobs require skills unemployed workers don’t have. If this were correct, then our 8.3 percent unemployment rate might not be that far above the natural unemployment rate. In other words, we might not really be so far from the Fed’s goal of maximum sustainable employment. I’m not convinced. Research at the San Francisco and New York Feds suggests that job mismatches are limited in scope. The difficulty some Silicon Valley companies find hiring software engineers is not enough to fundamentally transform the labor market. Now, other factors besides skill mismatches may also have helped push up the natural unemployment rate. Over the longer term, mismatches and other labor market inefficiencies may have raised the natural unemployment rate from about 5 percent to around 6 to 6½ percent. 7 So, in my view, the nation remains far from the Fed’s goal of maximum sustainable employment. 7 See, for example, Daly et al. (2012) and Weidner and Williams (2011). 9 The Fed’s other goal is to keep prices stable. I would say that we’ve succeeded pretty well on that score. Inflation overall has been well-contained. Taking a long view, over the past 15 years, the overall inflation rate has averaged almost exactly 2 percent, which is the Fed’s target rate of inflation. The same is true of the past five years, a tumultuous period of crisis, recession, and recovery. Now, it’s true that inflation picked up to 2½ percent last year as the prices of oil and other commodities surged in the face of strong global demand. Oil prices have run up again recently in response to geopolitical concerns. But other commodity prices have not generally followed suit. I expect inflation to be near our 2 percent target this year and edge down a bit toabout 1½ percent in 2013. Let me summarize where the Fed stands in terms of achieving its congressionally mandated goals. We are far below maximum employment and are likely to remain there for some time. The housing bust and financial crisis set in motion an extraordinarily harsh recession, which has held down consumer, businesses, and government spending. By contrast, inflation is contained and may even fall next year below our 2 percent target. Under these circumstances, it’s essential that we keep strong monetary stimulus in place. The recovery has been sluggish nationwide, not just in states hit hard by the housing bust. High unemployment, restrained demand, and idle production capacity are national in scope. These are just the sorts of problems monetary policy can address. And we don’t need to worry that our stimulative monetary policy could fuel regional imbalances. Monetary policy works by raising and lowering interest rates. The Fed’s policymaking body is the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. In December 2008, when the recession’s full force hit, the FOMC slashed its benchmark interest rate close to zero. It’s been 10 there since. Standard monetary policy guidelines tell us this rate should have gone deep into negative territory. But that’s not possible.8 So the Fed has had to find other ways to stimulate the economy. One measure we’ve adopted has been to buy large quantities of longer-term securities issued by the U.S. government and mortgage agencies. Our purchases have raised demand for these securities, lowering their yields. And that has put downward pressure on other longer-term interest rates, making it cheaper for households, businesses, and governments to borrow. These policy actions have been effective. For example, recent gains in automobile sales have a lot to do with cheap financing. And our securities purchases have helped drive longer- term interest rates near to post-World War II lows. In particular, our purchases of mortgage- related securities appear to have lowered home loan rates significantly.9 Low mortgage rates have been crucial in stabilizing home sales and construction. I should emphasize that our unusually stimulative monetary policy won’t last forever. Eventually, as recovery picks up, we will trim our securities holdings and raise our interest rate target. We’ve planned in detail for this, and we’re confident we can do it in a timely and effective fashion.10 But, that time is still well off in the future. We’ve passed through extraordinary economic times that have required extraordinary responses from the Fed. We’re not miracle workers. Lower interest rates alone can’t instantly put the economy right. But things would be much worse if we hadn’t acted so forcefully. We 8 See Rudebusch (2009) and Chung et al. (2012) for discussion of the effects of the zero bound on interest rate policy in the recession, and Swanson and Williams (2012) for estimates of the effects of constrained monetary policy. 9 Hancock and Passmore (2011) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) find significant effects of mortgage-backed securities purchases. Stroebel and Taylor (2009), by contrast, do not. 10 See, for example, the discussion of exit strategy in the minutes for the June 2011 FOMC meeting (Board of Governors 2011). 11 were vigilant in 2008 and 2009 when the economy was in dire straits. We remain vigilant now, when the economy is showing real signs of improvement, sharply focused on our goals of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Thank you very much. 12 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2011. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee.” June 21–22. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20110622.htm Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams. 2012. “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44(s1, February), pp. 47–82. Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta. 2012. “A Rising Natural Rate of Unemployment: Transitory or Permanent?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming. Feroli, Mike, Ethan Harris, Amir Sufi, and Ken West. 2012. “Housing, Monetary Policy, and the Recovery.” Presentation to the 2012 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24. http://research.chicagobooth.edu/igm/usmpf/2012/download.aspx Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore. 2011. “Did the Federal Reserve’s MBS Purchase Program Lower Mortgage Rates?” Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-01. http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2011/201101/201101abs.html Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming. Mian, Atif R., Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump.” Working paper. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1961211 Mian, Atif R., and Amir Sufi. 2011. “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate Demand Channel.” Working paper. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1961223 Rudebusch, Glenn D. 2009. “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2009-17 (May 22). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2009/el2009-17.html Stroebel, Johannes C., and John B. Taylor. 2009. “Estimated Impact of the Fed’s Mortgage- Backed Securities Purchase Program.” NBER Working Paper 15626. http://www.nber.org/papers/w15626 Swanson, Eric, and John C. Williams. 2012. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-02. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2012/wp12-02bk.pdf Weidner, Justin, and John C. Williams. 2011. “What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-05 (February 14). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-05.html 13 Williams, John C. 2012a. Discussion of “Housing, Monetary Policy, and the Economy.” Presentation to the Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2012/john-williams-0224.html Williams, John C. 2012b. “The Federal Reserve’s Mandate and Best Practice Monetary Policy.” Presentation to the Marian Miner Cook Athenaeum, Claremont McKenna College, Claremont, California, February 13. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2012/john-williams-0213.html Home prices fell more in some states than others Figure 1 Home Price Decline Note: Percentage decline in CoreLogic home price index from pre-recession peak to post-recession trough or latest month (identified separately for each state). AL AZ AR CA CO FL GA ID IL IN IA KS LA ME MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA SC SD TN TX UT WA WV WI WY VA KY AK HI VT NH DC MD DE NJ CT RI MA >=40% 25-40% 15-25% <15% 14 Job losses mirrored home price decline Figure 2 Note: Percentage decline in BLS nonfarm payroll employment from pre-recession peak to post-recession trough (identified separately for each state). Employment Decline (Recession) AL AZ AR CA CO FL GA ID IL IN IA KS LA ME MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA SC SD TN TX UT WA WV WI WY VA KY AK HI VT NH DC MD DE NJ CT RI MA >= 8% 6-8% 4-6% < 4% Job growth in recovery unrelated to housing bust Figure 3 Employment Growth (Recovery) Note: Percentage growth in BLS nonfarm payroll employment from post-recession trough to Feb 2012 (identified separately for each state). AL AZ AR CA CO FL GA ID IL IN IA KS LA ME MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA SC SD TN TX UT WA WV WI WY VA KY AK HI VT NH DC MD DE NJ CT RI MA < 1% 1-2% 2-3% >= 3% 15 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 1977 1981 1985 1989 1993 1997 2001 2005 2009 Note: Standard deviations of BLS payroll employment growth (12-month percent change) across states (including DC), weighted by state shares of national employment. Grey bars denote NBER recession dates. Dispersion of Employment Growth across States Percent 2/12 Total job changes have evened out across states Figure 4 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 Note: Series are real (inflation adjusted) state and local governmentconsumption and gross investment spending. Sources: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and Haver Analytics. State, Local Expenditures in Recessions and Recoveries Quarters from recession end Index (100 at recession end) Current Average (last 8 before current) Range of last 8 recessions before current State and local governments cut spending Figure 5

1 Presentation to the SPUR Business Breakfast Series San Francisco, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on April 4, 2012 President Williams presented similar remarks to the University of San Diego School of Business Administration in San Diego, California, on April 3, 2012. Monetary Policy and the Slow Recovery: It’s Not Just About Housing Thank you. It’s a particular pleasure to be with you this morning. We live in a rapidly changing and ever-more-competitive global economy. It’s vital that every region understand and leverage its special attributes and competitive advantages. SPUR has long been on the forefront of thinking about these questions for San Francisco. We’re very lucky to have such a far-sighted group working to keep our city successful. Of course, it’s not possible to make sense of what happens in the Bay Area without considering the larger economic environment in which we are situated. So this morning, I’m going to talk about that broader economic context. I’ll start with a look at the national economy, focusing on why the recent recession was so severe and why the recovery has been relatively anemic. I’ll then talk about prospects for growth, employment, and inflation. Finally, I’ll discuss what the Federal Reserve is doing to bolster the recovery. My remarks represent my own views and not those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Let me begin by saying that I’m encouraged by recent signs of a stronger, self-sustaining recovery. I’m especially glad to see that the economy is adding jobs at a pretty decent clip. Still, we have a long way to go. The Fed’s mandate from Congress is to promote maximum employment and stable prices. 1 Inflation generally has been subdued over the past few years. 1 Williams (2012b). 2 But, more than four years after the recession began, the unemployment rate is still 8.3 percent, leaving us far short of our employment goal. The Fed has acted vigorously to boost the economy. It’s critical that we keep doing so in order to achieve our statutory mandate. I’d like to start with a little bit of history. We are in the aftermath of the worst financial crisis and economic downturn since the Great Depression. The downturn came in the wake of an unprecedented run-up in housing prices, followed by a traumatic collapse. Although the recession started with this burst housing bubble, the economy’s problems over the past few years have extended well beyond housing. In the broad sense, what we’ve seen has been a sharp fall in household and business demand for goods and services. That has caused the economy to perform well below its potential. Let’s look at this in more detail. The housing boom was a classic financial bubble, fueled by speculative excess. Buyers kept bidding up prices, convinced they could sell for more than they paid. Lenders enabled this behavior by offering excessively easy terms. The growth in house prices outstripped anything that could be supported by market fundamentals, such as household incomes or rental rates on comparable properties. The inevitable crash landed with a resounding thud. Beginning in 2006, home prices plummeted. Eventually they fell by about a third nationally. About a quarter of borrowers found themselves under water, owing more than their homes were worth. Large chunks of the wealth of tens of millions of Americans vanished. Overall, the destruction of net worth from housing equaled more than 40 percent of the value of annual U.S. production. When wealth is destroyed on such a vast scale, the economic effects are severe. During the boom, higher house prices helped fuel consumption as people tapped home equity to buy cars, boats, vacations, and the like. When house prices did a U-turn, households hunkered down. 3 They cut spending and salted away more savings to rebuild lost wealth. And that wasn’t the housing bust’s only depressing effect. By early 2009, home construction had plunged by over 75 percent from its 2006 high. It’s remained near historical lows since. That’s put a lid on demand for construction materials and home furnishings. And it’s kept millions of carpenters, plumbers, and others in construction and real estate out of work. It’s impossible to understand the economy of the past few years without taking into account these housing effects. 2 Consider the difference in economic performance between states hit hard by the housing bust and states that got off relatively lightly. Figure 1 shows price declines by state. The hardest hit states, including Nevada, Arizona, California, and Florida, are shown in red. Prices in these states plunged by 40 percent or more from their peaks. By contrast, the states shown in green posted price declines of less than 15 percent. In one green state, North Dakota, prices actually increased. Figure 2 shows the drop in employment during the downturn by state, using the same color coding as Figure 1. For example, in the hard-hit states, shown in red here, employment fell by 8 percent or more. The overlap with the pattern of house price declines is striking. The states where home prices fell most were generally among those that suffered the worst job losses during the recession. In states where prices fell less, employment declined less.3 To be sure, this overlap was not perfect. Employment fell in all but North Dakota and Alaska, with sharp declines registered even in some states where the housing bust wasn’t harsh. Examples include Indiana, Ohio, and South Carolina. One reason this happened is the tight web that binds economic activity in far-flung places in the modern world.4 When under water 2 See, for example, Mian and Sufi (2011), Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2011), and Feroli et al. (2012). 3 Williams (2012a). 4 Mian and Sufi (2011). 4 homeowners in the Central Valley put off buying new cars, auto workers in Indiana may lose their jobs. But, what is fascinating, and perhaps surprising, is this: The close relationship between the fall in home prices and state economic activity has largely disappeared during the recovery.5 Figure 3 shows state employment gains during the rebound. There’s almost no systematic relationship between employment growth and home price declines. Figure 4 reinforces this. The blue line measures the gap in employment growth rates between states where the job market has been relatively stronger and states where it has been weaker. This gap grew sharply during the recession, reflecting in part the uneven effects of the housing bust. But, during the recovery, the gap has been smaller than at any time since the mid- 1970s. In other words, across the country, state-level employment growth has become quite balanced. These comparisons indicate that the economy faces obstacles that are national in scope. The slow pace of expansion has affected all regions of the country. During the recovery, states where house price declines have been relatively mild have not done noticeably better than states where housing got hammered. Powerful forces have kept us stuck in a slow-growth pattern. Some of those forces reflect the direct effects of the housing collapse on household finances. The connection with housing is less direct for other forces holding back the economy. I’ll highlight three of those forces: tight credit, uncertainty, and government contraction. Tight credit was clearly a product of the housing bust. But it took on a life of its own when fallout from housing almost brought down the global financial system in 2008. The 5 Williams (2012a). 5 repercussions of those dramatic events still affect markets today. Let me explain how this played out. When home prices crashed, mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures surged. Exposure to risky U.S. subprime mortgages was spread globally through investments held by financial institutions. Those mortgages had been repackaged to create financial instruments of mind- bending complexity. When the music stopped, it was hard to tell who was left with all those toxic assets. Financial institutions became afraid to lend money to anybody, including other financial institutions. The result was a massive credit crunch that choked off the flow of funds financial institutions and nonfinancial businesses depend on for their day-to-day operations. Many financial institutions that had placed big bets on housing posted massive losses. Some of them failed. Thankfully, central banks and governments around the world stepped in to provide emergency loans and other support. Those interventions prevented complete financial collapse. In the United States, the financial system has healed to a very considerable extent. The Fed recently conducted a series of tests on the largest U.S. banks. We found that most of them would have adequate capital even if the economy went through another extreme downturn. As financial institutions have regained their footing, access to credit has improved. Nevertheless, we haven’t returned to normal. Many small businesses and consumers still struggle to get loans. For example, to get a mortgage, a borrower must have a top-notch credit rating and the cash to make a substantial down payment. Uncertainty is a second factor holding back the recovery. Businesses, investors, and households remain skittish, even in the face of better economic news. Many of my business contacts say they remain cautious about expanding because they’re unsure about future 6 conditions. Ordinary Americans worry about job prospects and future income. Everybody is unsettled by the highly charged political environment. Financial turmoil in Europe has added another dimension to the unease here. The imminent threat of European financial meltdown has diminished. But the underlying problem of countries with unsustainable debt has not been resolved. Over the next few years, the total debt load among countries that use the euro will grow larger. I’ve heard Europe’s policy described as kicking the can down the road. But the risk is that Europe might be rolling an ever-growing snowball down a hill. Government cutbacks are a third obstacle to growth. Typically, government spending rises when the economy turns down. That’s because the cost of safety net programs, such as unemployment insurance, go up. And sometimes governments deliberately boost spending to stimulate the economy. But the federal government’s long-term budget problems loom large. And state and local government finances are reeling from the economic downturn. As a result, government stimulus has been unusually limited. Figure 5 compares recent inflation-adjusted spending by state and local governments with past periods. The red line represents the most recent recession and recovery. The shaded region portrays the range of outcomes over the eight previous recessions and recoveries, with the average displayed in black. During the current period, the housing bust has cut into the revenue of state and local governments, forcing them to slash spending.6 That contrasts with comparable periods in the past, when such spending typically increased. I don’t see government spending turning around soon. Indeed, spending at the federal level is set to contract sharply at the end of this year as several temporary programs end. Some 6 Feroli et al. (2012). 7 of those programs may be extended. But, overall, we can expect federal spending trends to weigh on near-term economic growth. However, things are getting better as far as tight credit and uncertainty are concerned. Improvements in credit, and rises in business and consumer confidence, have helped the economy gain real traction. We can see the improvement in the data. Consumer spending hasn’t been growing fast, but it’s been growing steadily. Car sales have surged and nearly reached pre- recession levels in February. The rebound in car sales and strong exports of other goods have helped U.S. manufacturers create jobs at the fastest pace since the mid-1990s. Real gross domestic product measures the nation’s total output of goods and services adjusted for inflation. During the first half of 2011, real GDP expanded at just under a 1 percent annual rate. Then, in the second half, it shifted into higher gear, rising at nearly a 2½ percent pace. My forecast calls for GDP growth to pick up further to about 2½ percent this year and 2¾ percent in 2013. That’s not overdrive, but it does represent improvement. As I said earlier, the news from the labor market has been heartening. The jobless rate has fallen about three-quarters of a percentage point since August and is now at its lowest level in three years. Unfortunately, the kind of moderate economic growth I expect won’t sustain such rapid progress. The February unemployment rate held steady at 8.3 percent. I expect unemployment rates to remain around 8 percent through year-end. And we’re still likely to be around 7 percent at the end of 2014. We haven’t had such a long period of high unemployment in the United States since the Great Depression. And this phenomenon is widespread. Compared with December 2007, when the recession began, the unemployment rate is up in all 50 states. That’s true even in North Dakota and Alaska, the two states where total employment grew during the recession. 8 Economists have been debating why unemployment has been so high during this recovery. Broadly speaking, they fall into two camps. One group argues that changes in the structure of the economy are pushing up the unemployment rate. The other group maintains that high unemployment is the result of a severe downturn, which significantly cut demand for goods and services. Those who favor a structural explanation point out that many job seekers lack the skills employers need. For example, computer industry employers are having a hard time finding qualified workers. But they’re not likely to find such employees in the ranks of jobless construction workers. If such labor market mismatches are widespread, they could be boosting the unemployment rate. To put this in perspective, I’m going to introduce the concept of the natural rate of unemployment. The natural rate is basically an equilibrium jobless rate that pushes inflation neither up, nor down. Before the recession, most economists thought this rate was around 5 percent. Today though, economists in the structural camp argue that the natural rate has risen substantially, largely because of the labor market mismatches I described. The idea is that a lot of people are unemployed not because jobs are lacking, but because those jobs require skills unemployed workers don’t have. If this were correct, then our 8.3 percent unemployment rate might not be that far above the natural unemployment rate. In other words, we might not really be so far from the Fed’s goal of maximum sustainable employment. I’m not convinced. Research at the San Francisco and New York Feds suggests that job mismatches are limited in scope. The difficulty some Silicon Valley companies find hiring software engineers is not enough to fundamentally transform the labor market. Now, other factors besides skill mismatches may also have helped push up the natural unemployment rate. 9 Over the longer term, mismatches and other labor market inefficiencies may have raised the natural unemployment rate from about 5 percent to around 6 to 6½ percent.7 So, in my view, the nation remains far from the Fed’s goal of maximum sustainable employment. The Fed’s other goal is to keep prices stable. I would say that we’ve succeeded pretty well on that score. Inflation overall has been well-contained. Taking a long view, over the past 15 years, the overall inflation rate has averaged almost exactly 2 percent, which is the Fed’s target rate of inflation. The same is true of the past five years, a tumultuous period of crisis, recession, and recovery. Now, it’s true that inflation picked up to 2½ percent last year as the prices of oil and other commodities surged in the face of strong global demand. Oil prices have run up again recently in response to geopolitical concerns. But other commodity prices have not generally followed suit. I expect inflation to be near our 2 percent target this year and edge down a bit to about 1½ percent in 2013. Let me summarize where the Fed stands in terms of achieving its congressionally mandated goals. We are far below maximum employment and are likely to remain there for some time. The housing bust and financial crisis set in motion an extraordinarily harsh recession, which has held down consumer, businesses, and government spending. By contrast, inflation is contained and may even fall next year below our 2 percent target. Under these circumstances, it’s essential that we keep strong monetary stimulus in place. The recovery has been sluggish nationwide, not just in states hit hard by the housing bust. High unemployment, restrained demand, and idle production capacity are national in scope. These are 7 See, for example, Daly et al. (2012) and Weidner and Williams (2011). 10 just the sorts of problems monetary policy can address. And we don’t need to worry that our stimulative monetary policy could fuel regional imbalances. Monetary policy works by raising and lowering interest rates. The Fed’s policymaking body is the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. In December 2008, when the recession’s full force hit, the FOMC slashed its benchmark interest rate close to zero. It’s been there since. Standard monetary policy guidelines tell us this rate should have gone deep into negative territory. But that’s not possible.8 So the Fed has had to find other ways to stimulate the economy. One measure we’ve adopted has been to buy large quantities of longer-term securities issued by the U.S. government and mortgage agencies. Our purchases have raised demand for these securities, lowering their yields. And that has put downward pressure on other longer-term interest rates, making it cheaper for households, businesses, and governments to borrow. These policy actions have been effective. For example, recent gains in automobile sales have a lot to do with cheap financing. And our securities purchases have helped drive longer- term interest rates near to post-World War II lows. In particular, our purchases of mortgage- related securities appear to have lowered home loan rates significantly.9 Low mortgage rates have been crucial in stabilizing home sales and construction. I should emphasize that our unusually stimulative monetary policy won’t last forever. Eventually, as recovery picks up, we will trim our securities holdings and raise our interest rate 8 See Rudebusch (2009) and Chung et al. (2012) for discussion of the effects of the zero bound on interest rate policy in the recession, and Swanson and Williams (2012) for estimates of the effects of constrained monetary policy. 9 Hancock and Passmore (2011) and Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011) find significant effects of mortgage-backed securities purchases. Stroebel and Taylor (2009), by contrast, do not. 11 target. We’ve planned in detail for this, and we’re confident we can do it in a timely and effective fashion.10 But, that time is still well off in the future. We’ve passed through extraordinary economic times that have required extraordinary responses from the Fed. We’re not miracle workers. Lower interest rates alone can’t instantly put the economy right. But things would be much worse if we hadn’t acted so forcefully. We were vigilant in 2008 and 2009 when the economy was in dire straits. We remain vigilant now, when the economy is showing real signs of improvement, sharply focused on our goals of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Thank you very much. 10 See, for example, the discussion of exit strategy in the minutes for the June 2011 FOMC meeting (Board of Governors 2011). 12 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2011. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee.” June 21–22. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20110622.htm Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams. 2012. “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44(s1, February), pp. 47–82. Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta. 2012. “A Rising Natural Rate of Unemployment: Transitory or Permanent?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming. Feroli, Mike, Ethan Harris, Amir Sufi, and Ken West. 2012. “Housing, Monetary Policy, and the Recovery.” Presentation to the 2012 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24. http://research.chicagobooth.edu/igm/usmpf/2012/download.aspx Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore. 2011. “Did the Federal Reserve’s MBS Purchase Program Lower Mortgage Rates?” Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-01. http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2011/201101/201101abs.html Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, forthcoming. Mian, Atif R., Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2011. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump.” Working paper. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1961211 Mian, Atif R., and Amir Sufi. 2011. “What Explains High Unemployment? The Aggregate Demand Channel.” Working paper. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1961223 Rudebusch, Glenn D. 2009. “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2009-17 (May 22). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2009/el2009-17.html Stroebel, Johannes C., and John B. Taylor. 2009. “Estimated Impact of the Fed’s Mortgage- Backed Securities Purchase Program.” NBER Working Paper 15626. http://www.nber.org/papers/w15626 Swanson, Eric, and John C. Williams. 2012. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-02. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2012/wp12-02bk.pdf Weidner, Justin, and John C. Williams. 2011. “What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-05 (February 14). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-05.html 13 Williams, John C. 2012a. Discussion of “Housing, Monetary Policy, and the Economy.” Presentation to the Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2012/john-williams-0224.html Williams, John C. 2012b. “The Federal Reserve’s Mandate and Best Practice Monetary Policy.” Presentation to the Marian Miner Cook Athenaeum, Claremont McKenna College, Claremont, California, February 13. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2012/john-williams-0213.html Home prices fell more in some states than others Figure 1 Home Price Decline Note: Percentage decline in CoreLogic home price index from pre-recession peak to post-recession trough or latest month (identified separately for each state). AL AZ AR CA CO FL GA ID IL IN IA KS LA ME MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA SC SD TN TX UT WA WV WI WY VA KY AK HI VT NH DC MD DE NJ CT RI MA >=40% 25-40% 15-25% <15% 14 Job losses mirrored home price decline Figure 2 Note: Percentage decline in BLS nonfarm payroll employment from pre-recession peak to post-recession trough (identified separately for each state). Employment Decline (Recession) AL AZ AR CA CO FL GA ID IL IN IA KS LA ME MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA SC SD TN TX UT WA WV WI WY VA KY AK HI VT NH DC MD DE NJ CT RI MA >= 8% 6-8% 4-6% < 4% Job growth in recovery unrelated to housing bust Figure 3 Employment Growth (Recovery) Note: Percentage growth in BLS nonfarm payroll employment from post-recession trough to Feb 2012 (identified separately for each state). AL AZ AR CA CO FL GA ID IL IN IA KS LA ME MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA SC SD TN TX UT WA WV WI WY VA KY AK HI VT NH DC MD DE NJ CT RI MA < 1% 1-2% 2-3% >= 3% 15 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 1977 1981 1985 1989 1993 1997 2001 2005 2009 Note: Standard deviations of BLS payroll employment growth (12-month percent change) across states (including DC), weighted by state shares of national employment. Grey bars denote NBER recession dates. Dispersion of Employment Growth across States Percent 2/12 Total job changes have evened out across states Figure 4 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 Note: Series are real (inflation adjusted) state and local governmentconsumption and gross investment spending. Sources: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and Haver Analytics. State, Local Expenditures in Recessions and Recoveries Quarters from recession end Index (100 at recession end) Current Average (last 8 before current) Range of last 8 recessions before current State and local governments cut spending Figure 5
