The Economy’s Outlook, Challenges, and Way Forward By Eric S. Rosengren September 30, 2020 Webinar New England Conference Massachusetts Bankers Association Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share The Economy’s Outlook, Challenges, and Way Forward Key takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s Sept. 23 remarks Takeaway: Rosengren’s forecast for the economy is less optimistic than his peers for several reasons, including a concern that a second wave of COVID-19 infections this fall and winter is likely. This could cause some states to impose new restrictions on mobility and sap the willingness of consumers to spend and invest. Excerpt: “The biggest challenge to the economy, and the risk to a more optimistic forecast, continues to be our inability in the U.S. to achieve the public health progress on the virus seen in many other developed countries. … A full recovery probably requires the availability of vaccines and more effective treatments for the virus because until then, many businesses and households are unlikely to return to more normal spending habits.” Takeaway: Also, additional support to the economy from fiscal policy is very much needed but seems increasingly unlikely to materialize. Excerpt: “Additional fiscal policy is probably the more effective tool at this time, since it can directly allocate money to firms and businesses most impacted by COVID-19 without requiring them to take on additional debt.” Takeaway : If infection rates increase this fall, financial spillovers from businesses impacted by the virus are likely to become a more significant headwind. For instance, even conservatively underwritten properties will face challenges if consumers are afraid to shop in stores and stay in hotels, and that will also impact the financial institutions that hold their loans. Excerpt: I worry “about a ‘second shoe dropping’ that will particularly affect small and medium-sized banks, which provide a large share of commercial real estate loans and small business loans. A curtailment of credit resulting from such problems has caused serious headwinds to recoveries in the past, and may be a serious problem going forward.” Takeaway: Further improvement in the unemployment rate will be difficult to achieve until disruptions from the virus become less acute. The most likely labor market outcome is continued improvement, but with slower gains. Excerpt: “Employment still remains below where it was earlier this year, even in industries that have recovered more significantly, so the path for further reemployment will not be easy – particularly if a second wave of infections makes consumers reluctant to participate in activities where social distancing is difficult.” Takeaway: Continued monetary stimulus remains necessary, Rosengren says, and the recent Federal Open Market Committee statement indicates the Fed intends to keep interest rates low. Excerpt: “The statement highlighted that the federal funds rate range is expected to remain at the currently low level until three conditions are met. First, that the economy reaches maximum sustainable employment. Second, that inflation has risen to 2 percent. Third, that inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. These three conditions come with a caveat that no risks emerge that could impede the Fed achieving its dual mandate – such as increased financial instability.” Takeaway: The Fed’s Main Street Lending Program can play an important role in the recovery by providing “bridge loans” to support firms that were profitable before the pandemic and expect to be profitable following it. Bridge loans can be scarce during crises for small- and medium-sized firms, and the Fed’s program enables banks to help communities avoid layoffs and bankruptcies by keeping credit flowing to local markets. Excerpts: “The Federal Reserve recently provided new clarifying FAQs encouraging banks to focus on borrower status both before and after the pandemic when considering whether a borrower is appropriate for the program. We also published an FAQ that clarifies how the loan should be treated by bank supervisors, with all three federal regulators agreeing on the clarification. Hopefully, these developments will encourage some banks to more actively engage with borrowers impacted by the pandemic, using the Main Street program.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords COVID-19 , Pandemic , employment , fiscal policy , monetary policy , Main Street Lending Program , Recovery

Economic Fragility: Implications for Recovery from the Pandemic By Eric S. Rosengren October 8, 2020 Webinar Marburg Memorial Lecture Marquette University Economics Department Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Key takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s Oct. 8 remarks Watch the recording of the Remarks at the Marburg Memorial Lecture hosted by Marquette University Economics Department . Takeaway: The state of the economy as it encounters a shock or downturn – and the health of the financial system – can play important roles in recessionary dynamics, and how the recessionary burden is spread across the economy. Excerpt: “Highly levered firms and excessive concentrations of commercial real estate lending at some institutions would make the economy more vulnerable to a variety of disruptions, including a pandemic or other shock.” Takeaway: Many firms increased their leverage as the prevailing low-interest-rate environment provided more capacity to take on debt. This leverage magnifies returns in good times, and losses in bad times. Excerpt: “In an economic downturn, greater leverage – with its principal and interest repayment demands – may prove problematic for firms, or by extension the economy.” Takeaway: Increased risk-taking in the low-interest-rate environment that preceded the current economic downturn will likely make the recovery from the pandemic more difficult. Excerpt : “Abnormally low rates for a long period during times when economic slack is no longer a concern can result in excessive risk-taking, as businesses and firms take on additional debt and accumulate more risky assets in search of better returns – potentially bidding up asset prices to unsustainable levels. The financial pressures associated with such behavior build gradually, and only become clear in the next economic downturn . ” Takeaway: Losses due to financial shocks adversely affect a wide range of stakeholders – notably, workers; including those who are least able to endure an economic downturn. A wave of unnecessary bankruptcies resulting from such shocks can cause a spike in job loss and significant scarring of the labor market. Excerpt: “If the costs for taking on the extra risk were borne only by investors knowingly taking that risk, it might not be so problematic. … [But] a leveraged business is more likely to declare bankruptcy, permanently severing its many formal and informal contracts with customers, suppliers, and employees. … Excessive leverage can exacerbate job losses from temporary demand shocks, and make the recovery process slower and more painful than it would have been without the leverage.” Takeaway: An important mechanism that plays a role in recessionary dynamics is the tightening of credit terms and credit availability during an economic downturn. Excerpt: “In part, the importance of this channel is amplified by a low interest rate environment during the preceding economic expansion when households and firms accumulated loans, oftentimes in real estate. A prime example in the current downturn is commercial real estate, where the high leverage build-up before the crisis and the severe hit from the crisis have led to a noticeable tightening in credit conditions.” Takeaway: In the years preceding the pandemic, Rosengren and others raised questions about the need for accommodative interest rates when the economy was doing well, and emphasized the need to take more precautions against financial stability risks. Excerpt: “In the United States, we do not have a cohesive set of regulatory and supervisory tools to moderate risk build-ups. And while we do have the Financial Stability Oversight Council, we do not have a regulatory and supervisory body endowed with tools and structures that can be deployed to limit financial stability risks.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords financial stability , Risks , Commercial real estate , Economic recovery , COVID-19 , Public Health , Pandemic

Financial Stability Factors and the Severity of the Current Recession By Eric S. Rosengren November 10, 2020 Virtual UBS Eurpean Virtual Conference Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Key takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s Nov. 10 remarks Takeaway: Economic shocks happen, but the severity of the consequences depends on how fragile, or susceptible to financial instability, the economy was prior to the shock. In the U.S., excessive risk-taking behavior prior to COVID-19 is likely to delay the recovery, even though the initial response by fiscal and monetary policymakers was a prompt and substantial mitigant. Excerpts: “Excessive risk-taking during the previous recovery period is, unfortunately, likely to prolong the country’s economic distress – especially for those most disproportionately affected.” “Those economies that go into a recession in more fragile financial condition are likely to experience amplified economic problems that could have been ameliorated with more proactive financial stability steps, taken in advance.” Takeaway: The consequences of excessive pre-pandemic risk-taking are seen in the corporate sector, as firms that eventually defaulted after the onset of COVID-19 issued much more debt before the shock. This increased leverage appears to have affected their ability to survive the pandemic downturn. Excerpt: “Financial factors, including excessive leverage, can influence how severe the consequences of a shock will be, and how painful a recession becomes. Imbalances in the real economy and financial factors accelerating recession dynamics can make the effects of a shock, and the severity of a recession, much worse.” Takeaway: Sadly, the impact is tending to be greatest on workers that are least able to adjust and adapt. Workers who are women and minorities may not only be disproportionately impacted by excessive risk-taking by defaulted firms, they are more likely to leave the workforce altogether. Excerpt: “Those segments of the labor market most affected by amplified business cycles – when financial stability ‘guardrails’ are limited – can be populated by those workers who are most vulnerable and least able to adapt to the changed economic environment. That imbalanced human toll is a bad outcome for democracy as well as the economy.” Takeaway: The virus has had a deeper effect in economies that disproportionately involve services, which tend to require more personal interaction than the production and sale of goods. This is because service activities proved to be more affected by the need to social distance. Excerpt: “In the U.S., consumption of goods now exceeds what was consumed at the beginning of the year, while services consumption remains depressed. Americans have continued remodeling houses and buying durable goods, but things like traveling and recreational activities outside of the home are taking place at a lower rate.” Takeaway: This is a time to focus on preventing the buildup of financial imbalances, as many central banks are considering modifying how they respond during shocks. In the U.S., that implies more reluctance to raise interest rates until full employment and 2% inflation are achieved. Rosengren supports these goals, but says they should be accompanied by a more proactive supervisory and financial stability focus. Excerpts: “Easy monetary policy requires more guardrails protecting against rising financial instability risks. Without financial stability governance and tools, recessions have the potential to be more severe and fall disproportionately on those that can least afford it. And the recessions are likely to be deeper and longer, requiring more fiscal and monetary stimulus than would otherwise be necessary.” “Instead of pushing the unemployment rate below its natural rate, the focus should be on avoiding the subsequent large spikes of unemployment and slow recovery that occur when the downturn is made worse by a lead-up that involves excessive risk-taking and the associated imbalances, both real and financial.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords financial stability , Recovery , COVID-19 , Pandemic , Financial Imbalances , Shock
