PA CCE 1 SPEED LIMITS AND STALL SPEEDS: FOSTERING SUSTAINABLE GROWTH IN THE UNITED STATES Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco At the UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY SYDNEY Sydney, Australia June 26, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY INTRODUCTION It’s great to be with you today. In my travels, I often find myself in a debate about which is the greatest city in the world to live in. Naturally, Sydney and San Francisco always come out at the top of the list, owing to their natural beauty nestled on the water’s edge, rich cultural diversity, cosmopolitan lifestyles, and culinary excellence, not to mention sky-high real estate prices. All that’s true, but I would claim that we are kindred spirits at a much deeper level. We are steeped in a frontier spirit that bravely looks ahead toward a future of boundless possibilities. At a time when many around the world have become mired in pessimism and look longingly to the past, it’s important to reignite this spirit of unbridled optimism in seeing our way through the obstacles before us. Among our other commonalities is a mutual stake in the economic well-being of the other. Of the many exports and imports that flow between our two nations, one of my favorites is the great Australian rock band, AC/DC. One advantage of being a rock star is that you can live by the motto, “we’re just livin’ for today.” PA CCE 2 For those of us who aren’t rock stars, but are more concerned with r-star, well, we need to have an eye toward tomorrow. In the current context, that means turning our attention from getting the economy back on track to keeping it there, while guarding against the next calamity. In the United States, we have reached a turning point; a transition from recovery to ongoing economic expansion. The main goal of U.S. monetary policy is therefore to keep the expansion going as long as possible. That entails bringing monetary policy back to a more normal setting and taking actions to keep the economy on a path that neither exceeds its speed limit, nor stalls. This is what I will discuss with you today. And this is a good time to insert the usual Fed disclaimer that the views expressed are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. THE U.S. ECONOMY HAS RECOVERED First some context: The Federal Reserve is the central bank of the United States. It has a unique public-private structure, with some policymakers appointed by the President of the United States, and others, like myself, appointed by private boards. As President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, I lead one of the 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks. My District, which includes the western United States, covers about one-fifth of the U.S. population and economy. Among my responsibilities, I bring the perspectives of my region to the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC – the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy committee. I once had a T-shirt printed up that reminded folks that the decisions we make at the Fed are “data-driven,” and they are. Although we live in a hyper-political era, the Fed is strictly apolitical … and as one of America’s great exports, Lady Gaga, would say, we were “born this way.” Our enterprise is unique within the U.S. government in both function and structure, and our design allows us to make decisions independent of short-term political influence. We base our decisions on what’s best for the long-term health of the economy, rather than “living for today.” The U.S. Congress has mandated that our job is to keep the economy stable and on track, with a focus on two big goals: maximum employment and price stability. We want everyone who wants a job to be able to find one and for inflation to average 2 percent per year over the long run. PA CCE 3 Today, the U.S. economy is about as close to these goals as we’ve ever been. Among other things, we’ve fully recovered from the recession. When it comes to our employment goal, this is typically viewed in terms of the unemployment rate relative to the natural rate of unemployment – by this I mean the level consistent with an economy that is running neither too hot nor too cold. We can’t know precisely where this magic number is, but I put it at about 4¾ percent. Today, the U.S. unemployment rate is 4.3 percent – meaning that we’ve not only reached the full employment mark, we’ve exceeded it by a fair amount. Given the strong job growth we’ve been seeing in the United States, I expect the unemployment rate to edge down a bit further and remain a little above 4 percent through next year. Meanwhile, inflation has been running somewhat below the Fed’s goal of 2 percent for the past few years. In the past, this low rate of inflation was the product of a number of factors – the recession and the strength of the U.S. dollar being the two main ones. Recently, some special transitory factors have being pulling inflation down. But with some of these factors now waning and with the economy doing well, I expect we’ll reach our 2 percent goal sometime next year. RISK Now, I’d love to be able to tell you that the news is all rosy and that our work here is done. Unfortunately, they don’t call economics “the dismal science” for nothing. I’m paid to consider what potholes may be dotting the road ahead. For starters, the very strong labor market actually carries with it the risk of the economy exceeding its safe speed limit and overheating, which could eventually undermine the sustainability of the expansion. When you’re docking a boat in Sydney Harbour, the San Francisco Bay, or elsewhere, you don’t run it in fast towards shore and hope you can reverse the engine hard later on. That looks cool in a James Bond movie, but in the real world it relies on everything going perfectly and can easily run afoul. Instead, the cardinal rule of docking is: Never approach a dock any faster than you’re willing to hit it. Similarly, in achieving sustainable growth, it is better to close in on the target carefully and avoid substantial overshooting. GOLDILOCKS PA CCE 4 What this means is that we do not want our economy to run too hot or too cold.1 Like Goldilocks, we want our porridge to be just right. During the recession and recovery, jump-starting and speeding the recovery required historically low interest rates. Today, interest rates in the United States remain low – and this is even true after the most recent Fed action, which I’ll get to in a moment. I’m sometimes asked why we don’t just leave things as they are and not raise interest rates. After all, if things are going well, why change? The answer is that gradually raising interest rates to bring monetary policy back to normal helps us keep the economy growing at a rate that can be sustained for a longer time. If we delay too long, the economy will eventually overheat, causing inflation or some other problem. At some point, that would put us in the position of having to quickly reverse course to slow the economy. That risks stalling the expansion and setting us back into recession. My goal is to keep the economic expansion on a sound footing that can be sustained for as long as possible. The last thing any of us want is to undermine the hard-won gains we’ve made since the dark days of 2008 and 2009, when it seemed like the U.S. and world economies were on the verge of collapse. Therefore, we’re in the process of normalization. At our June meeting, the FOMC undertook the second ¼ percentage point increase in our main policy interest rate this year. And we announced that we expect that economic conditions will warrant further gradual increases in the future.2 Now, I know there has been some general concern that as we normalize our monetary policy in the United States, it could cause market turbulence in countries near and far. While my own primary focus as a U.S. policymaker is on what’s best for our domestic economy, I want to reassure you that we are cognizant of the fact that our domestic actions have a global impact. The last thing we want to do is fuel unnecessary or avoidable volatility or disruption – whether we’re talking about domestic markets or international markets. That’s one of the advantages of the gradual approach to normalization that we’re taking and why we’re being very clear, transparent, and open about how we’re making decisions. 1 Williams (2017). 2 Board of Governors (2017a). PA CCE 5 THE BALANCE SHEET My focus to this point has been on what we often call conventional monetary policy – that is, changes in short-term interest rates. We also made use of so-called unconventional policy actions over the past decade that will also need to be normalized. For those who might not be as familiar with this, let me offer some background: The period since the financial crisis and Great Recession of 2007 through 2009 has been extraordinary … and that’s an understatement. To save the U.S. economy from deeper recession and accelerate the economic recovery, the Fed purchased trillions of dollars of long-term Treasury and mortgage- backed securities. By reducing long-term interest rates and helping to stabilize financial markets during the crisis, the Fed helped the U.S. economy achieve the relatively healthy state that it’s in today.3 After making these purchases, we significantly increased the size of the Fed’s holdings. Right now, the Fed’s balance sheet is around $4.5 trillion. We are currently keeping it at that level by reinvesting any principal payments we receive. Now that the U.S. economy has fully recovered, the Federal Open Market Committee indicated earlier this month that it intends to gradually reduce these holdings by cutting back on the amount we reinvest every month.4 We said we would likely start this process of normalizing the balance sheet this year, assuming the economy evolves broadly as expected. At the outset, we’ll start nice and easy, letting our holdings of Treasury securities decline by $6 billion a month, and those of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $4 billion per month. Thereafter, we’ll increase these caps by $6 billion and $4 billion, respectively, every three months, until they reach $30 billion per month for Treasuries and $20 billion per month for MBS. From then on, we’ll leave these caps in place, and our securities holdings will continue to decline in a gradual and predictable manner.5 We’ll continue this process of letting the balance sheet gradually shrink until we get to the point that we’re holding no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. While we haven’t settled on what that exact number 3 Williams (2014) and Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). 4 Board of Governors (2017a). 5 Board of Governors (2017b). PA CCE 6 will be, it will definitely be a lot lower than it is now. With that said, it will be higher than before the financial crisis.6 We also affirmed that balance sheet management is to take place in the background. Indeed, our modus operandi throughout this process will be similar to that which we’ve adopted for normalizing conventional monetary policy: widely telegraphed, gradual, and – yes – boring. Of course, none of us have a crystal ball. The FOMC has made clear that it would be open to changing course if changes in the economic outlook were to warrant such a move.7 Most importantly, we will continue to use conventional monetary policy tools – raising and/or lowering interest rates – as the primary lever we operate to keep the economy from overheating or running too cold. 8 CONCLUSION To summarize, it’s been a long, hard road, but we in the United States have finally attained a recovery from the global financial crisis and the Great Recession. Because no good deed goes unpunished, monetary policymakers who worked very hard to help our economy recover are now faced with the challenges of protecting what we’ve gained and preparing for the next storm. Our goal, therefore, is to foster sustainable growth. This requires keeping our economy in the Goldilocks zone: not too hot, not too cold. It also necessitates bringing both conventional and unconventional monetary policy back to normal. The more public understanding, the less chance that said actions will fuel unnecessarily volatility in the markets. Therefore, our process has been widely telegraphed and it will continue to be gradual, predictable and transparent … or in a word, “boring.” I hope I’ll not be perpetuating an unfair stereotype about economists if I say that “boring” is a virtue. Indeed, my new mantra is, “Boring is the new exciting.” Thank you very much. 6 Board of Governors (2017b). 7 Board of Governors (2017b). 8 Board of Governors (2017b). PA CCE 7 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017a. “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement.” Press release, June 14. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170614a.ht m Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017b. “FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.” Press release, June 14. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170614c.ht m Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider. 2015. “The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005, January. https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2015/files/2015005pap.pdf Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/research/monetary-policy-at-the-zero- lower-bound-putting-theory-into-practice/ Williams, John C. 2017. “Keeping the Recovery Sustainable: The Essential Role of an Independent Fed.” Presentation to the Santa Cruz Chamber of Commerce, Santa Cruz, California. February 28. http://www.frbsf.org/our- district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2017/february/keeping- recovery-sustainable-essential-role-of-independent-fed/

1 THE GLOBAL GROWTH SLUMP: CAUSES & CONSEQUENCES Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco A Public Lecture Hosted By MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY Sydney, Australia June 27, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY INTRODUCTION It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to join you here today. We in the San Francisco Bay Area feel a special kinship to the people of Sydney. Our cities are two of the world’s great metropolises, known for their sweeping waterfronts, iconic bridges, and unique architecture. Also, both our cities are chilly in June and July – only you have the excuse at least that it’s winter here. Among our other commonalities is a mutual stake in the economic well-being of the other, and in the well-being of the broader community of nations in an increasingly interconnected world. In this regard, an important new trend is emerging. Even as countries make strides in recovering from the global financial crisis, growth remains lackluster. More specifically, as attention has been focused on combatting crises and economic downturns, shifting supply-side realities have been developing that are holding back growth across the globe. Demographic factors like slowing population and labor force growth and a global productivity slowdown are fundamentally redefining what is achievable and creating a new set of economic challenges. 2 These challenges have ramifications that extend beyond the next few months or years – they will define the economic landscape for the next decade and beyond. In a broader sense, they’re also about the next generation, and what sort of future we choose to create together. The focus of my remarks today will be on the causes and consequences of this global growth slump. Spoiler alert: When you look at the underlying demographic and productivity-related shifts, it becomes clear that a sea change is taking shape. What’s less clear is how global policymakers will respond to these shifts … whether they will make the necessary long-term investments in priorities like education, job training, science, and infrastructure that can break this slump … or whether they will allow this slump to break them. Before I go even one word further, it should be noted that the views expressed are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. CRISIS & RECOVERY The narrative of the past decade has been one of crisis and recovery. Today, many nations are still coping with the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the euro area crisis, and other events. Central banks remain engaged in the extraordinary policy actions they undertook to stabilize their economies and to support economic recovery. There are encouraging signs that we are approaching a turning point; a transition from recovery to ongoing economic expansion. The United States is a case in point. The U.S. economy has regained, and even surpassed, full employment benchmarks. Although our inflation rate is still somewhat below our 2 percent medium-term target, I and my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee expect us to reach that goal in the next year or so.1 As a result, we at the Federal Reserve are now in the process of gradually withdrawing the massive monetary stimulus put in place during the past decade. And we’re not alone in this improving outlook. When you look at the economic news coming out of Europe and Japan, for instance, you see economic indicators moving in the right direction. 1 Board of Governors (2017); see the median inflation projection. 3 But wait a second, isn’t this supposed to be a speech about the global growth slump? The big dichotomy of our times is that in country after country, the economic news is at once both encouraging and discouraging: encouraging that economies are expanding; discouraging that growth is disappointing, at least by historical standards. In the United States this dichotomy is profound. U.S. GDP growth has been almost as unimpressive as employment has been impressive. In the nearly eight years since the recession ended, real GDP growth has averaged only about 2 percent, well below former trends, while we’ve added an impressive 15 million jobs. How can both be true? SHIFTING WINDS As I said at the beginning of my remarks, a sea change in sustainable growth is under way, driven by fundamental shifts in demographics and productivity growth. I’ll start with demographics. Two powerful trends are evident: We are generally living longer but birth rates are declining. The good news is that people are living longer on average. Overall life expectancy in member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has increased from about 60 years in the 1950s to nearly 80 years today (Figure 1).2 And it is expected to grow even higher, eventually exceeding 90 years later this century. Despite this increase in longevity, population growth is slowing to a standstill owing to falling birth rates. Among the so-called advanced economies that belong to the OECD – which includes Australia – population growth averaged over 1 percent back in the 1950s and 1960s, but is now running under ½ percent per year, as shown in Figure 1.3 United Nations projections show population growth in this group of countries actually turning negative some 20 years from now. When it comes to productivity, the changes that are occurring in advanced economies across the world are no less dramatic. In the United States, the catchphrase is “productivity slowdown.” Labor productivity – the amount produced per worker 2 This is not true for all population groups; Case and Deaton (2017) document declining life expectancy for middle- aged, less-educated non-Hispanic whites in the United States since the year 2000. 3 United Nations (2015). 4 hour – in the United States has been growing a little over 1 percent per year over the past decade, well below half the rate of the prior decade (Figure 2). The recent pattern of subdued productivity growth is a throwback to that seen from the mid-1970s through the mid-1990s. And a major factor driving the slowdown in the two periods is the same: very slow growth in what economists call “total factor productivity,” or TFP for short (Figure 2). TFP is the measure of productivity that remains after one accounts for changes in the quality of the workforce and the amount of capital investment in the economy, and is often thought to be a measure of innovation and technology. Some commentators blame the apparent productivity slowdown on failures of economic statistics to keep up with changing times, pointing to the widespread adoption of mobile technology, social media, the gig economy, and so on. Careful study of this issue, however, reveals that these developments present no greater difficulties in measuring productivity than those from the past: that is, the productivity slowdown is real.4 The recent productivity slowdown is not confined to the United States, but rather is a global phenomenon. Averaging over 17 advanced economies—again, including Australia—productivity growth has fallen to below 1 percent per year over the past decade, less than half the pace seen over the prior 30 years (Figure 3).5 As in the United States, a key culprit in the slowdown is a sharp decline in TFP growth. SLUMPING GROWTH So what do these trend shifts in demographics and productivity mean for future economic growth? For that question, some math comes in handy. Over the medium term, the sustainable growth rate of the economy equals the sum of productivity growth and the growth rate of labor supply. Therefore, the slowdown in productivity growth translates one-for-one into a slowdown in sustainable GDP growth. Demographics are also holding back rather than boosting economic growth. The decline in population growth eventually implies slower labor force growth. In addition, longer life expectancy combined with more time in school means that people are spending a decreasing share of their lifetimes in the labor force. These two demographic waves are driving labor force growth toward zero, or even below that, in countries like Japan. Even the United States, which historically has enjoyed high rates 4 Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016). 5 Bergeaud, Cette, and Lecat (2016). Data available at: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/roiw.12185/suppinfo 5 of labor force growth, is expected to see labor force growth of only ½ percent per year over the next decade, a significant drop from the past.6 These global shifts in demographics and productivity tell us that the growth we have been seeing in recent years, and thinking of as “disappointing,” “anemic,” and “tepid” when compared to years past, is a harbinger of the future. Research by Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and myself aims to quantify the new normal for growth. The estimated trend growth rate for GDP for four economies—Canada, the euro area, the United Kingdom, and the United States—now stands at about 1½ percent, less than half what it was 30 years ago (Figure 4). The corresponding estimate for the United States alone is about 1½ percent, broadly consistent with other estimates.7 POLICY IMPLICATIONS So these are some of the causes of sluggish growth … what are some of the consequences? For starters, the demographic waves and slower growth have driven down the longer- term normal or “natural” real rate of interest – or r-star – to historic lows in country after country. Slower trend growth reduces the demand for investment, while longer life expectancy tends to increase household saving.8 This combination of lower demand and higher supply for savings, along with other factors, has pushed down the “price” of savings, or r-star. With open capital markets, global developments affect r-star in every country, irrespective of local economic conditions. There is mounting evidence of a sizable decline in r-star across economies. Estimates for the United States indicate that r-star has fallen to between 0 and 1 percent.9 The weighted average of estimates for Canada, the euro area, the United Kingdom, and the United States has declined to less than ½ percent. That’s 2 percentage points below the average natural rate that prevailed in the two decades before the financial crisis (Figure 4). Estimates for Japan are also near zero.10 These r-star estimates differ by economy, but in all cases the most recent estimates are among the lowest over the past 30 years.11 6 Congressional Budget Office (2017). 7 Fernald (2016). 8 Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016), Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), and Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins (2017). 9 Williams (2017b). 10 Fujiwara et al. (2016). 11 Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016). 6 A striking aspect of these estimates is that they show no signs of moving back to previously normal levels. Looking ahead, given the demographic waves and sustained productivity growth slowdown around the world, I do not expect r-star to revert to higher levels anytime soon. The dramatic decline in r-star presents significant challenges for monetary policy and financial stability. In particular, the global nature of the decline in r-star implies that central banks will face daunting challenges in stabilizing their economies in response to negative shocks when interest rates are not far above their lower bound.12 In a low r-star world, what were once called “extraordinary” policies – like zero or negative interest rates, forward guidance, and balance sheet policies – are likely to become the norm as central banks strive to achieve their macroeconomic goals. Therefore, policymakers around the globe need to prepare for the challenges of successfully navigating new realities.13 In the best of all worlds, fiscal and other policies would be put in place that propel long-run economic prosperity and boost r- star on a sustained basis. More on this in a moment. Absent such actions, monetary policy will be severely challenged to achieve stable prices, well-anchored inflation expectations, and strong macroeconomic performance in a low r-star world. Therefore, monetary policymakers will need to prepare for the next storm by taking appropriate actions in advance to design and commit to a more resilient monetary policy framework that is robust to a low r-star world. It’s imperative to study and debate these issues now rather than wait until the next storm hits. Another set of consequences of the global slump will be felt by fiscal and other public policymakers worldwide. Unless the trend lines improve, they will likely find that they are repeatedly being asked to do more with less; in some cases much less. Many will face dramatic increases in unfunded liabilities such as pensions and safety net programs. Countries that fail to act today will find their challenges getting even more severe tomorrow. With the sea change underway, we no longer have the luxury of taking a wait-and-see approach. This begs the question, what does said action look like? 12 Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2016) and Eggertsson et al. (2016). 13 Williams (2016, 2017a). 7 As a monetary policymaker, I wish I could tell you that it’s within the purview of central banks to solve all this; that the answer lies in raising or lowering interest rates. Reality, unfortunately, dictates otherwise. Our long-term challenges are going to require the sort of long-term investments that fiscal policymakers – and private investors – have within their own toolkits: Investments in education, job training, infrastructure, research and development … all the things that propel an economy and prosperity over the longer term. CONCLUSION My perspective is that of a statistician and economist rather than a politician or columnist: The data and the analysis tell the same story of a fundamental sea change in the global economy. While the causes of the global growth slump are well defined, the consequences are yet to be written – and they will ultimately be shaped by choices that policymakers are grappling with across the globe. And, ultimately, the choices made by any one of our nations will impact all of our nations. Thank you. 8 References Bergeaud, Antonin, Gilbert Cette, and Rémy Lecat. 2016. “Productivity Trends in Advanced Countries between 1890 and 2012.” Review of Income and Wealth 62(3), pp. 420–444. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017. “FOMC Projections Materials.” June 14. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20170614.htm Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf. 2016. “Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 109–157. https://www.brookings.edu/wp- content/uploads/2016/03/byrnetextspring16bpea.pdf Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2016. “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB.” Unpublished manuscript, March 11. http://socrates.berkeley.edu/~pog/academic/global_imbalances.pdf Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2016. “Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism.” European Economic Review 88, pp. 208–226. Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton. 2017. “Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, conference draft (March). https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/mortality-and-morbidity-in-the-21st- century/ Congressional Budget Office. 2017. “The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027.” Report, January. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/52370 Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins. 2017. “A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23093. Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, Sanjay R. Singh, and Lawrence H. Summers. 2016. “A Contagious Malady? Open Economy Dimensions of Secular Stagnation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 22299. 9 Fernald, John G. 2014. “A Quarterly Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-19. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working- papers/2012/19/ Fernald, John. 2016. “What Is the New Normal for U.S. Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-30 (October 11). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/october/new-normal-for-gdp- growth/ Fujiwara, Shigeaki, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo. 2016. “Developments in the Natural Rate of Interest in Japan.” Bank of Japan Review 2016-E-12 (October). https://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/rev_2016/data/rev16e12.pdf Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and J. David Lopez-Salido. 2016. “Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.080 Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2016. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-11, December. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working- papers/2016/11/ United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. 2015. World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables. New York: United Nations. https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/publications/files/key_findings_wpp_2015.pdf Williams, John C. 2016. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23 (August 15). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/august/monetary-policy-and-low-r- star-natural-rate-of-interest/ Williams, John C. 2017a. “Preparing for the Next Storm: Reassessing Frameworks and Strategies in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-13 (May 8). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2017/may/preparing-for-next-storm-price-level-targeting-in-low-r-star- world-speech/ 10 Williams, John C. 2017b. “Three Questions on R-star.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017- 05 (February 21). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2017/february/three-questions-on-r-star- natural-rate-of-interest/ 11 Figure 1 12 Figure 2 13 Figure 3 14 Figure 4

1 Monetary Policy’s Role in Fostering Sustainable Growth Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco At the Economic Club of Las Vegas Las Vegas, Nevada August 2, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY INTRODUCTION Thank you, Keith, for the kind introduction and your years of service as a member and Chair of our Los Angeles Branch Board. It’s great to be with all of you today. This is a critical juncture for the American economy. After years of hardship and struggle, we’ve managed to recover from the devastating effects of the housing crash, the foreclosure crisis, and the ensuing financial crisis and Great Recession. As the economy has transitioned from recovery to ongoing expansion, the role of monetary policy has shifted from getting America back to work to sustaining the expansion for as long as possible. That means gradually ratcheting back on monetary policy stimulus and trying to keep the economy on an even keel. But, even as we see daylight in today’s economy, we find ourselves in the shadow of daunting longer-term challenges to economic growth and shared prosperity. These include a sea change in demographic factors like slowing population and labor force growth and a downshift in productivity growth. 2 The theme of my talk is that monetary policy is reaching its limit as to what it can do to generate economic growth. Other actors—in both the private and public sectors— need to step up and take the lead in making the investments and enacting policies needed to improve the longer-term prospects of our economy and society. The outstanding question is whether we as a nation will rise to these challenges and define our economic future, or will we instead allow our economic future to define us. After that bold introduction, now is a good time to insert the usual Fed disclaimer that the views expressed are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. THE FEDERAL RESERVE’S GOALS: A SCORECARD The Congress has mandated that our job is to keep the economy stable and on track, with a focus on two big goals: maximum employment and price stability. That means we want everyone who wants a job to be able to find one and for inflation to average 2 percent per year over the long run. Today, the U.S. economy is about as close to these goals as we’ve ever been. Among other things, we’ve fully recovered from the recession. When it comes to our employment goal, this is typically viewed in terms of the unemployment rate relative to the natural rate of unemployment—by this I mean the level consistent with an economy that is running neither too hot nor too cold. We can’t know precisely where this magic number is, but I put it at about 4¾ percent. Today, the U.S. unemployment rate is 4.4 percent—meaning that we’ve not only reached the full employment mark, we’ve exceeded it. Given the strong job growth we’ve been seeing in the United States, I expect the unemployment rate to edge down a bit further this year and then remain a little above 4 percent through next year. Of course, the unemployment rate is only one metric of labor market health. The good news is that we have seen broad-based improvement in the labor market across a broad swath of indicators. To help provide a broader measure of underemployment, economists at the Federal Reserve have developed a useful summary measure of labor market slack called the Non-Employment Index, or NEI.1 Instead of debating whether or not to include one group or another as part of the “labor force,” they let the data do the talking. The 1 Hornstein, Kudlyak, and Lange (2014) and Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond (2017). 3 NEI includes all members of the non-working population based on their likelihood of taking a job. It’s currently at the same level as the peak in the labor market back in 2006, providing another clear signal that we have reached a full-employment economy. While we’ve reached our employment goal, we still have a ways to go in terms of inflation. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation has been running below our longer-term goal of 2 percent for quite a while now. In the past, this low rate of inflation was the product of a number of factors—the recession and falling prices of imported goods and services being the two main ones. In recent months, some special transitory factors—like sharp declines in prescription drug prices, airfares, and especially wireless service fees—have been pulling inflation down. To cut through the noise, it’s helpful to look at measures that strip out prices that fluctuate wildly. My favorite such measure is the trimmed-mean PCE inflation rate reported by the Dallas Fed. Over the past year through May, this measure is at 1.7 percent.2 As these transitory factors wane and with the economy doing well, I expect that we’ll reach our 2 percent goal in the next year or two. TRANSITIONING FROM RECOVERY TO SUSTAINED EXPANSION With the economy having reached full employment, the Fed’s job is to keep it there. That means managing the risk that the economy will get too hot and out of balance against the risk that the expansion will stall.3 During the recession and recovery, jump-starting and speeding the recovery required historically low interest rates. But today, with the recovery already complete, interest rates in the United States are still low. To keep the economy on a sustainable path of growth, we need to gradually reduce the monetary stimulus put in place during the recession and recovery. If we delay too long, the economy will eventually overheat, causing inflation or other imbalances to emerge. At some point, that would put us in the position of having to quickly reverse course to slow the economy. That risks stalling the expansion and setting us back into recession. As I said, my goal is to keep the economic expansion on a sound footing that can be sustained for as long as possible. The last thing any of us want is to undermine the 2 Speech text prepared prior to release of the June PCE inflation numbers. 3 Williams (2017b). 4 hard-won gains we’ve made since the dark days of the recession, when it seemed like the U.S. and world economies were on the verge of collapse. Therefore, we’re in the process of monetary policy normalization. For starters, over the past two years, we’ve moved interest rates up slowly in line with the improvement in the economy and the economic outlook. Even with those increases, rates remain low. So we’ve indicated that we expect that economic conditions will warrant further gradual increases in the future.4 SHRINKING THE FED’S BALANCE SHEET I’ve been talking about what’s known as conventional monetary policy—that is, changes in short-term interest rates. We also made use of so-called unconventional policy actions over the past decade that we need to normalize as well. In response to the recession and slow recovery, the Fed purchased trillions of dollars of long-term Treasury bills and mortgage-backed securities (MBS). By reducing long- term interest rates and stabilizing financial markets during the crisis, the Fed helped the U.S. economy achieve the relatively healthy state that it’s in today.5 After making these purchases, we significantly increased the size of the Fed’s holdings. Right now, the Fed’s balance sheet is $4.5 trillion. We are currently keeping it at that level by reinvesting the principal payments we receive. Now that the U.S. economy has fully recovered, the Federal Open Market Committee has said that it intends to gradually reduce these holdings by cutting back on the amount we reinvest every month.6 My own view is that it will be appropriate to start this process this fall. At the outset, we’ll start nice and easy, letting our holdings of Treasury securities decline by $6 billion a month, and those of MBS by $4 billion per month. Thereafter, we’ll increase these caps by $6 billion and $4 billion, respectively, every three months, until they reach $30 billion per month for Treasuries and $20 billion per month for MBS. From then on, we’ll leave these caps in place, and our securities holdings will continue to decline in a gradual and predictable manner.7 4 Board of Governors (2017a). 5 Williams (2014) and Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). 6 Board of Governors (2017b). 7 Board of Governors (2017b). 5 We’ll continue this process of letting the balance sheet gradually shrink until we get to the point that we’re holding no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. It should take about four years to get the balance sheet down to a reasonable size.8 While we haven’t settled on what that exact number will be, it will be quite a bit lower than today. Importantly, this process of shrinking our balance sheet will take place in the background. We will continue to use conventional monetary policy tools—raising or lowering interest rates—as the primary le ver we operate to keep the economy from running too hot or too cold. 9 SEA CHANGE IN SUSTAINABLE GROWTH So far I’ve focused on what’s going well. I’ll now shift gears and turn to some of the big challenges that are ahead of us even with the economy at full employment. The big dichotomy of our times is that the economic news is at once both encouraging and discouraging: encouraging that the economy is expanding; discouraging that growth is disappointing, at least by historical standards. In fact, growth of gross domestic product (GDP) has been almost as unimpressive as growth in employment has been impressive. In the eight years since the recession ended, real GDP growth has averaged only about 2 percent, well below former trends, while we’ve added an impressive 15½ million jobs. How can both be true? As I mentioned at the beginning of my remarks, a sea change in sustainable growth is under way, driven by fundamental shifts in demographics and productivity growth. Specifically, due to declining birth rates, the retirement of the baby boom generation, and other factors, the labor force is expected to grow only about ½ percent per year over the next decade.10 That’s less than one-third the pace of the 1980s. And productivity growth has slowed markedly from the surge in the mid-1990s and early 2000s. It has averaged only a little over 1 percent per year since 2005. This slowdown isn’t because of some failure of economic statistics to capture the latest breakthroughs in technology.11 Nor are there signs of a resurgence as the economy has recovered. 8 Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2017). 9 Board of Governors (2017b). 10 Congressional Budget Office (2017). 11 Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016). 6 Assuming that these trends continue, and I do, the growth rate of our economy’s potential is likely to be around 1.5 percent for the foreseeable future, the slowest pace in our lifetimes.12 The consequences of slow growth will be felt by monetary, fiscal, and other public policymakers.13 Unless these trend lines improve, they will likely find that they are repeatedly being asked to do more with less—in some cases much less— than they planned for. Those who fail to act today will find their challenges getting even more severe tomorrow. IF NOT MONETARY POLICY, THEN WHAT? This begs the question, what does said action look like? As a monetary policymaker, I wish I could tell you that it’s within the purview of central banks to solve all this, that the answer lies in raising or lowering interest rates. Reality, unfortunately, dictates otherwise. Our long-term challenges are going to require the sorts of long-term investments that fiscal policymakers—and private investors—ha ve within their own toolkits. We know that there is a range of things we currently underinvest in that have very high returns on investment, both for individuals and for nations as a whole. These include early childhood education and health, secondary and higher education, job training, infrastructure, basic research and development … all the things that propel an economy and prosperity over the longer term.14 With the sea change already under way, we no longer have the luxury of taking a wait- and-see approach. These policies and actions may be difficult and costly to implement, but our nation has successfully met such challenges in the past, and I am confident we can again. CONCLUSION To sum up, it’s been a long, hard road, but we have finally attained a recovery from the financial crisis and the Great Recession. Because no good deed goes unpunished, monetary policymakers who worked very hard to help our economy recover are now faced with the challenges of protecting what we’ve gained. Our goal, therefore, is to foster sustainable growth. This requires bringing both conventional and unconventional monetary policy gradually back to normal. 12 Fernald (2016). 13 See Williams (2016b, 2017a,c) for a discussion of the implications for monetary and fiscal policy. 14 Williams (2016a,b), Fischer (2017). 7 As I have emphasized, though, there is only so much that monetary policy can do. We face significant longer-term challenges that interest rates alone can’t solve. The choices are clear; what remains to be seen is whether the critical investments in our future will be made. These decisions have ramifications that extend beyond the next few months or years—they will define the economic landscape for the next decade and beyond. In a broader sense, they’re also about the next generation and what sort of future we choose to create together. Thank you very much. 8 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017a. “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement.” Press release, July 26. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170726a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017b. “FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.” Press release, June 14. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170614c.htm Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf. 2016. “Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 109–157. https://www.brookings.edu/wp- content/uploads/2016/03/byrnetextspring16bpea.pdf Congressional Budget Office. 2017. “The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027.” Report, January. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/52370 Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider. 2015. “The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005, January. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.005 Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2017. “Projections for the SOMA Portfolio and Net Income.” July update. https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/omo/SOMAPortfolioandIncomePr ojections_July2017Update.pdf Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. 2017. “Hornstein-Kudlyak-Lange Non-Employment Index.” Last modified July 17. https://www.richmondfed.org/research/national_economy/non_employment_index Fernald, John. 2016. “What Is the New Normal for U.S. Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-30 (October 11). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/october/new-normal-for-gdp-growth/ Fischer, Stanley. 2017. “Government Policy and Labor Productivity.” Speech at the “Washington Transformation? Politics, Policies, Prospects” forum sponsored by the Summer Institute of Martha’s Vineyard Hebrew Center, Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts, July 6. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/fischer20170706a.htm Hornstein, Andreas, Marianna Kudlyak, and Fabian Lange. 2014. “Measuring Resource Utilization in the Labor Market.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 10(1), pp. 1–21. https://www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/economic_quarterly/2014/q1/hornstein 9 Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/research/monetary-policy-at-the-zero-lower-bound-putting-theory- into-practice/ Williams, John C. 2016a. “The Health of Nations.” Presentation to the National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference, Los Angeles, California, February 10. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams- speeches/2016/february/health-of-nations-interagency-community-reinvestment-conference/ Williams, John C. 2016b. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23 (August 15). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/august/monetary-policy-and-low-r-star-natural-rate-of-interest/ Williams, John C. 2017a. “The Global Growth Slump: Causes and Consequences.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-19 (July 3). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2017/july/global-growth-slump-causes-consequences-speech/ Williams, John C. 2017b. “Keeping the Recovery Sustainable: The Essential Role of an Independent Fed.” Remarks to the Santa Cruz Chamber of Commerce, Santa Cruz, California. February 28. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams- speeches/2017/february/keeping-recovery-sustainable-essential-role-of-independent-fed/ Williams, John C. 2017c. “Preparing for the Next Storm: Reassessing Frameworks and Strategies in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-13 (May 8). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2017/may/preparing-for-next-storm-price-level- targeting-in-low-r-star-world-speech/
