Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York Share For over six years, the federal funds rate has, effectively, been zero. However it is widely expected that the rate will lift off before the end of this year, as the normalization of monetary policy gets underway. The approach of liftoff reflects the significant progress we have made toward our objectives of maximum employment and price stability. The extraordinary monetary policy accommodation that the Federal Reserve has undertaken in response to the crisis has contributed importantly to the economic recovery, though the recovery has taken longer than we expected. The unemployment rate, at 5.5 percent in February, is nearing estimates of its natural rate, and we expect that inflation will gradually rise toward the Fed's target of 2 percent. Beginning the normalization of policy will be a significant step toward the restoration of the economy's normal dynamics, allowing monetary policy to respond to shocks without recourse to unconventional tools. I would like to take this occasion to look back on some lessons learned during our time at the effective lower bound on the interest rate, and also to look forward. 1 Monetary Policy since the Crisis Let me first take a step back in time. Prior to the crisis, the financial system was more fragile than we realized. Key vulnerabilities included excessive leverage, overdependence on short-term funding, and deficiencies in credit ratings, underwriting standards, and risk management. Importantly, interconnections across financial institutions heightened the risk of contagion through cascading losses. Some of these interconnections emerged from the use of complicated financial instruments that created seemingly safe and liquid assets. At the time, it was common to say that risk was being dispersed and allocated to those best able to bear it. But rather than distributing risk widely, these instruments concentrated risk on the balance sheets of a relatively small number of highly levered financial institutions. As a result, as the subprime crisis developed, market participants pulled back from risk taking, leading to deleveraging spirals and fire sales. 2 The damage spread across the globe. Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers on September 15, international trade collapsed as panic and financial connections transmitted distress across borders. 3 Of course, the economy's vulnerabilities did not stem from the private sector alone: in the public sector, gaps in the regulatory structure allowed important financial institutions to escape comprehensive supervision, and regulators were insufficiently focused on the stability of the system as a whole. The Federal Reserve responded aggressively to the crisis. 4 By the end of 2008, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) had reduced the target federal funds rate from 5-1/4 percent to, effectively, zero. The Fed also acted forcefully as the lender of last resort--in its traditional role of providing short-term liquidity to depository institutions, and also by providing liquidity directly to borrowers and investors in key credit markets. 5 In addition, the worldwide scope of the crisis called for concerted international action. Because of the global nature of dollar funding markets, the Fed authorized dollar liquidity swap lines with major central banks, beginning in December 2007. In October 2008, central bankers coordinated reductions in policy rates and the Group of Seven agreed to use all available tools to prevent the failure of systemically important financial institutions. 6 The next month, the Group of Twenty announced a broad common strategy, including fiscal expansion. These steps likely prevented a second Great Depression, but they were not sufficient to avoid a severe global contraction. In the United States, with the federal funds rate at its effective lower bound by the end of 2008, the FOMC judged that it could not provide much additional accommodation via its conventional tool--reducing the federal funds rate. 7 Instead, the FOMC used two unconventional tools: large-scale asset purchases and enhanced forward guidance. To varying extents, foreign central banks have also been using these tools. The Fed's asset purchases did not have the conventional aim of increasing reserve balances to pull down short-term rates. 8 Rather, purchases of longer-term securities lowered longer-term yields through portfolio balance effects. The evolution of our asset purchases reflected a learning process for policymakers. In the early programs, the FOMC specified the expected quantities of assets to be acquired over a defined period. In contrast, with QE3 (the most recent round of quantitative easing, implemented from September 2012 to October 2014), the FOMC announced that we would continue to purchase securities at a certain monthly pace until the outlook for the labor market improved substantially in a context of price stability. Later, the FOMC noted that the pace of purchases was also data dependent, allowing the pace to be revised based on its assessment of progress toward its long-run objectives. With the federal funds rate near zero and the Fed creating and adjusting new asset purchase programs, it became difficult for the public to anticipate how the FOMC would likely conduct monetary policy and respond to changing economic conditions. Thus, the FOMC began to rely heavily on enhanced forward guidance to communicate its intentions. Forward guidance works in part because it also constrains the flexibility of decisionmakers when the time comes to make their future decisions. 9 Nonetheless, a number of potential costs might be associated with unconventional tools. When interest rates are extremely low, risks to financial stability might grow. In addition, elevated securities holdings could reduce the Fed's income and remittances to the U.S. Treasury when rates eventually rise. 10 Further, the Fed's quantitative easing appeared significantly to affect foreign asset markets, and to have contributed to a surge of capital inflows to emerging-market economies (EMEs). 11 Our asset purchase programs were even called a "currency war." However, eventually, most EMEs seemed glad to receive those flows. Interestingly, the asset purchases recently announced by the European Central Bank (ECB) appear to be putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates in the United States. In addition, the ECB's policy should increase growth in Europe, which will be beneficial for U.S. exports. Although some of these benefits may be offset by the recent appreciation of the dollar, much of that increase likely reflects other factors including the relatively strong performance of the U.S. economy. Looking back, there is ample evidence that supports the view that the Fed's asset purchases contributed to a stronger U.S. recovery, by raising the prices of the assets purchased and close substitutes, as well as those of riskier assets. 12 Our experience also shows that forward guidance helped better align market expectations of Fed policy with the Committee's policy intentions. 13 In brief, unconventional policies helped bring down long-term yields both by reducing term premia and by lowering the expected path of future short-term rates. The Recovery from the Financial Crisis Despite monetary stimulus, the recovery from the financial crisis has been even more sluggish than we had expected. The slow recovery provides more evidence that severe financial crises have long-lived effects, as Reinhart and Rogoff, and others, have documented. 14 The gradual pace of the recovery has likely reflected both demand and supply factors. With respect to aggregate demand, the economy faced several important headwinds: efforts by households and businesses to rebuild their balance sheets, persistently tight credit conditions, the extreme weakness of the housing sector, the significant drag from fiscal policy in the years from 2011 to 2013, and the growth slowdown in Europe and other parts of the world. Turning to aggregate supply, it appears that productivity growth has slowed. 15 One notable manifestation of slow productivity growth is that last year, unemployment fell significantly further than we had anticipated as of the start of the year--a pattern that occurred in the prior four years as well--whereas gross domestic product growth fell short of our expectations, as it had in three of the four prior years. However, productivity is extremely difficult to predict. For my part, I believe that the enormous gains in human welfare that the information technology explosion seems to be generating are likely to continue, and will perhaps eventually return measured productivity growth to its long-run historical pace. Conditions for Liftoff Although the recovery has been slow, there has been significant cumulative progress. An increase in the target federal funds range likely will be warranted before the end of the year. Liftoff should occur when the expected return from raising the interest rate outweighs the expected costs of doing so. In deciding when that time has come, we will continue to monitor a wide range of information regarding labor market conditions, inflation, and financial and international developments. We anticipate that it will be appropriate to raise the target range when there has been further improvement in the labor market and we are reasonably confident that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. Policy Normalization Full normalization of monetary policy would allow the Fed to rely on its traditional policy framework of adjustments to the federal funds rate. However, as long as our balance sheet remains sizable, we will not be able to implement monetary policy with our traditional tool of repurchases. It is important that, when we change the rate for the first time in a long time, we are certain that we have the operational tools to control the federal funds rate--and, accordingly, we have developed and tested new operational tools to control the federal funds rate. As discussed in the FOMC's statement titled Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, which was published following the September 2014 FOMC meeting, we will use the rate of interest on excess reserves (IOER) as our primary tool to control the federal funds rate. 16 We also plan to use an overnight reverse repurchase agreement (ON RRP) facility, as needed. In an ON RRP operation, counterparties may invest funds with the Fed at a given rate, possibly subject to a cap on the aggregate amount invested. Because ON RRP counterparties include many money market participants that are not eligible to receive IOER, the facility can be a powerful tool for controlling money market interest rates. Indeed, testing to date by the New York Fed suggests that ON RRP operations have generally established a soft floor for such rates. 17 However, an ON RRP program also has certain risks. For example, a large and persistent program could have unanticipated and adverse effects on the structure of money markets. In addition, in times of stress, demand for the safety and liquidity of ON RRPs with the central bank might increase sharply, potentially exacerbating disruptive flight-to-quality flows. 18 To mitigate these risks, the FOMC has agreed that it will use an ON RRP facility only to the extent necessary and will phase it out when it is no longer needed. In addition, the Fed has been discussing and testing other supplementary tools, such as term reverse repurchase agreements and term deposits, and can use these tools as needed to help support money market rates. With regard to balance sheet normalization, the FOMC has indicated that it does not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities. When the time comes, we plan to normalize the balance sheet primarily by ceasing reinvestment of principal payments on existing holdings. When the FOMC chooses to cease reinvestments, the balance sheet will naturally contract, with a corresponding reduction in reserve balances. This runoff of our securities holdings will also gradually remove accommodation, an effect that we will need to take into account in setting the stance of policy. During normalization, we will, no doubt, learn more about our different tools and make adjustments to our operating framework. In part because of this adaptability, I am confident that by using IOER and, as needed, these supplementary tools, we will be able to raise short-term interest rates when it becomes appropriate. Monetary Policy after Liftoff The focus of the great bulk of the discussion on monetary policy during the last few years, has been on liftoff--on the circumstances under which the FOMC will choose to raise the federal funds rate, on the date on which that will happen, and on the effect of the Fed's very large portfolio on how it will manage the liftoff process. Those questions are natural after more than six years during which the federal funds rate has been held at its effective lower bound. But as liftoff approaches, we need to think also about what will happen next. For liftoff is only the start of the process of normalization, and, going forward, the FOMC will once again be changing the federal funds rate as necessary, both up and down. Accordingly, discussion of monetary policy needs to begin to shift to the future path of interest rates, and thus to the basis on which the FOMC will set interest rates following liftoff. There has been a lively discussion of one element of the future path of the federal funds rate: whether liftoff should be sooner with a gradual rise in the rate, or whether liftoff should occur later and be followed by a steeper path of the rate. 19 These discussions are useful when considering the appropriate timing of the first increase in the federal funds rate. But what comes after the first increase? Standard interest rate projections might incline one to believe that the path of the federal funds rate after liftoff will consist of a steady rate of increase from zero to the longer-run normal nominal federal funds rate, which will be equal to the natural real rate of interest plus our 2 percent inflation goal. One might even look back to the period from 2004 to 2007 and conclude that the FOMC will raise the federal funds rate by 25 basis points every meeting, or every second meeting, or every third meeting, depending on the date of liftoff. I know of no plans for the FOMC to behave that way. Why not? Isn't that what the calculation of optimal control paths shows? Yes. But a smooth path upward in the federal funds rate will almost certainly not be realized, because, inevitably, the economy will encounter shocks--shocks like the unexpected decline in the price of oil, or geopolitical developments that may have major budgetary and confidence implications, or a burst of greater productivity growth, as the Fed dealt with in the mid-1990s. When shocks happen, as they do, policymakers will have to respond to at least some of them. Accordingly there is considerable uncertainty about the level of future interest rates--a degree of uncertainty that can be estimated statistically, and that should be taken into account by market participants and recognized by the FOMC when it discusses future levels of interest rates. The uncertainty about future levels of the federal funds rate can be represented in a "fan chart"--that is, a figure showing the expected path of the federal funds rate as well as a range representing the degree of uncertainty around that path. 20 The two sure elements of forward guidance that the FOMC will be able to offer after liftoff are that monetary policy will continue to be aimed at fostering the Committee's dual objectives, and that it will be data driven. As we move away from the zero lower bound, the data to which we will be responding will be driven less and less by the financial crisis and Great Recession, and increasingly by post-liftoff economic developments. Whatever the state of the economy, the federal funds rate will be set at each FOMC meeting on the basis of what the members of the FOMC believe will best enable us to meet our dual goals of maximum employment and price stability over the course of time. As the FOMC responds to incoming information, it will continue to be absolutely transparent in explaining its decisions and how and why they contribute to meeting the legally mandated dual goals of monetary policy. That transparency serves three purposes: First, it is required if we are to be accountable to the public; second, it is the best way of ensuring that monetary policy decisionmakers continue to follow sensible and rational policies; and third, it is the best way of informing the private sector of the basis on which monetary policy decisions are made and will continue to be made. With respect to forward guidance: its role has been and continues to be important in the long period in which eventual liftoff has been the key interest rate decision confronting the FOMC and the focus of market expectations. However, as monetary policy is normalized, interest rates will sometimes have to be increased, and sometimes decreased. Market participants will be able to form their expectations of future interest rates on the basis of three elements: first, the policy record of the FOMC, which might be approximated as a reaction function; second, their analysis of the current economic and financial situation and outlook; and, third, whatever guidance the FOMC will provide as to how it sees monetary policy decisions likely to unfold given the economic situation and outlook. It is likely that explicit long-term forward guidance will play less of a role in monetary policy after liftoff than it has during the past few years. Policymakers' behavior is sometimes summarized as a reaction function, which can be an algebraic description of how the interest rate is set--for instance, a Taylor-type rule in which the federal funds rate reacts simultaneously to the rate of inflation and expectations of inflation as well as to the rate of unemployment and expected changes in the level of unemployment. 21 However, a simple rule of that sort will, by necessity, leave out many factors that appropriately influence monetary policy, such as financial developments, temporary divergences in relationships between different measures of economic activity or inflation, and the like. A simple rule can provide the starting point for the decisions made by the FOMC, but in reaching their interest rate decision, members of the Committee will always have to use their judgment to identify the special circumstances confronting the economy, and how to react to them. To ensure that monetary policy operates in as stabilizing a way as possible, the FOMC will continue to set out, as clearly as it can, the basis of every decision that it makes, and to provide guidance on its expectations of future decisions. And on the basis of the information provided by the FOMC, of their understanding of the historical record of Fed policy decisions, and of their analysis and expectations of the state of the economy and, particularly, the financial markets, market participants will make the best decisions they can. References Ahmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (2014). " Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World? " Journal of International Money and Finance , vol. 48 (November), pp. 221-48. Bank of Canada, Bank of England, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, European Central Bank, Sveriges Riksbank, and Swiss National Bank (2008). " FOMC Statement: Federal Reserve and Other Central Banks Announce Reductions in Policy Interest Rates ," press release, October 8. Bernanke, Ben S. (2010). " Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble ," speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Atlanta, January 3. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014a). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans ," press release, September 17. ------ (2014b). " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 17-18, 2014 ," press release, July 9. ------ (2014c). " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 29-30, 2014 ," press release, August 20. ------ (2015). " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, January 27-28, 2015 ," press release, February 18. Bordo, Michael D., and Joseph G. Haubrich (2012). " Deep Recessions, Fast Recoveries, and Financial Crises: Evidence from the American Record (PDF) ," Working Paper 12-14. Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, June. Bowman, David, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2014). " U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Papers 1109. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Caballero, Ricardo J., and Alp Simsek (2013). " Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity ," Journal of Finance , vol. 68 (December), pp. 2549-87. Cerra, Valerie, and Sweta Chaman Saxena (2008). " Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery ," American Economic Review , vol. 98 (March), pp. 439-57. Chor, Davin, and Kalina Manova (2012). " Off the Cliff and Back? Credit Conditions and International Trade during the Global Financial Crisis ," Journal of International Economics , vol. 87 (May), pp. 117-33. Coulibaly, Brahima, Horacio Sapriza, and Andrei Zlate (2011). " Trade Credit and International Trade during the 2008-09 Global Financial Crisis (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Papers 1020. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). " Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply ," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 108 (May), pp. 425-48. Eggertsson, Gauti B. (2006). " The Deflation Bias and Committing to Being Irresponsible ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 38 (March), pp. 283-321. Engen, Eric, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). " The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Fernald, John (2014). " Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 2014-15. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June. Fischer, Stanley (1980). " Dynamic Inconsistency, Cooperation and the Benevolent Dissembling Government ," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol. 2 (February), pp. 93-107. Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). " On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 1557. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, June. Frost, Josh, Lorie Logan, Antoine Martin, Patrick McCabe, Fabio Natalucci, and Julie Remache (2015). " Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-010. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). " Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? " Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, vol. 17 (May), pp. 41-59. Gilchrist, Simon, David López-Salido, and Egon Zakrajšek (2014). " Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound ," NBER Working Paper Series 20094. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). " The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (February), pp. 3-46. Howard, Greg, Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2011). " Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different? (PDF) " International Finance Discussion Papers 1037. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott (1977). " Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans ," The Journal of Political Economy , vol. 85 (June), pp. 473-91. Lucas, Robert E., and Nancy L. Stokey (1983). " Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy in an Economy without Capital ," Journal of Monetary Economics , vol. 12 (1), pp. 55-93. Neely, Christopher J. (2011). " The Large-Scale Asset Purchases Had Large International Effects (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 2010-018C. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, January . Reifschneider, Dave, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2013). " Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-77. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November. Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). " The Aftermath of Financial Crises ," NBER Working Paper Series 14656. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Rogers, John H., Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright (2014). " Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison (PDF), " International Finance Discussion Papers 1101. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor (2012). " Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008 ," American Economic Review , vol. 102 (April), pp. 1029-61. Stein, Jeremy C. (2014). " Challenges for Monetary Policy Communication ," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, May 6. Svensson, Lares E.O. (1997). " Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets ," European Economic Review , vol. 41 (June), pp. 1111-46. Sveriges Riksbank (2015). " Current Forecast for the Repo Rate, Inflation and GDP ," webpage, February 12, figure ("Repo Rate with Uncertainty Bands"). Werning, Iván (2012). " Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy ," unpublished paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, March. Yellen, Janet (2011). " Unconventional Monetary Policy and Central Bank Communications ," speech delivered at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York, February 25. ------. " Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications ," speech delivered at the University of California, Berkeley, Haas School of Business, Berkeley, Calif., November 13. ------ (2013). " Challenges Confronting Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the 2013 National Association for Business Economics Policy Conference, Washington, March 4. 1. The views that I offer are my own and not necessarily those of any other member of the Federal Open Market Committee or of the Committee itself. Return to text 2. For a model in which fire sales can arise from uncertainty about the network of cross-exposures among banks, see Caballero and Simsek (2013). Return to text 3. The fallout from the crisis was large even in countries that had not experienced an acute financial crisis. As an example, in six Asian countries, including China and India, exports fell more than 30 percent by the beginning of 2009, and industrial production declined about 10 percent. See the discussion of China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Taiwan in Coulibaly, Sapriza, and Zlate (2011). Regarding the role of credit conditions in the collapse of international trade, see Chor and Manova (2012). Return to text 4. A key trigger for the crisis was the decline in housing prices, which began in 2006 and led to uncertainty about mortgage investments. In the summer of 2007, two large financial institutions--The Bear Stearns Companies, Inc., and BNP Paribas Group--suspended redemptions from certain investment funds, perhaps marking the beginning of the financial crisis. In 2008, the crisis intensified with the near collapse of Bear Stearns in March and the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings in September; a full-scale financial panic ensued across much of the global financial system. Return to text 5. In our role as lender of last resort, we worked closely with the Treasury Department and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). For example, to stem the run on money market funds, the Treasury provided a temporary guarantee and the Fed created a backstop liquidity program. In addition, the FDIC established the Temporary Liquidity Guarantee Program to guarantee certain unsecured liabilities of depository institutions and some bank holding companies. Return to text 6. On October 8, 2008, the Federal Reserve and five other major central banks jointly announced a reduction in policy interest rates. See Bank of Canada and others (2008). Return to text 7. A handful of central banks in Europe have recently set certain policy rates below zero. Specifically, the Danmarks Nationalbank, the European Central Bank, the Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank have set negative policy rates. In the United States, when the Federal Reserve sought to provide more accommodation despite the federal funds rate being, essentially, zero, we chose not to use negative rates, judging at the time that the small additional support for aggregate demand was not worth the accompanying risks to U.S. money markets and the intermediation of credit. Return to text 8. Indeed, the maturity extension program--also known as Operation Twist--did not increase reserves at all. Return to text 9. There is a long literature in monetary economics about time inconsistency. Time inconsistency is the notion that, to achieve good outcomes, a central bank may need to make commitments about how it will act in the future--commitments that must be credible but that, ex post, the central bank might find hard to follow through on. For canonical papers, see Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Lucas and Stokey (1983); see also Fischer (1980). The early literature focused on the inability of central banks, in normal times, to commit to high future interest rates and low inflation. Interestingly, at the zero lower bound, central banks may face nearly the opposite commitment problem: To escape a liquidity trap, a central bank may want to commit to keep interest rates low and accommodate an output boom even after the headwinds from a crisis have dissipated. See, for example, Eggertsson (2006) and Werning (2012). For additional discussion of Federal Reserve communications, see Yellen (2012) and Stein (2014). Return to text 10. For a discussion of the Federal Reserve's remittances, see Yellen (2013). Though it is likely that remittances to the Treasury will decline later in the decade as interest rates increase, such developments would not impair the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy, and it is highly likely that average annual remittances over the period affected by our asset purchases will be higher than pre-crisis norms. In addition, the asset purchases also affect Treasury revenue by lifting economic activity and thereby tax revenue, as well as by lowering interest rates and thereby debt service costs. Return to text 11. Regarding the effects on foreign asset markets, see Neely (2011); Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub (2013); and Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014). Regarding the effects on EMEs, it appears that both conventional and unconventional policies in the United States--among other factors--have driven capital flows into EMEs. See, for example, Ahmed and Zlate (2014) and Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014). Return to text 12. See, for example, D'Amico and King (2013); Gagnon and others (2011); Gilchrist, López-Salido, and Zakrajšek (2014); and Hamilton and Wu (2012). Return to text 13. See, for example, Yellen (2011). Return to text 14. See Cerra and Saxena (2008); Reinhart and Rogoff (2009); Schularick and Taylor (2012); Bordo and Haubrich (2012); and Howard, Martin, and Wilson (2011). Return to text 15. The slowdown in productivity growth may predate the recession and may have been exacerbated by it. See Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2013) and Fernald (2014). Return to text 16. See Board of Governors (2014a). Return to text 17. Policymakers have discussed the benefits and costs of an ON RRP facility. For further discussion on this topic, see, for example, the FOMC minutes for June 2014, July 2014, and January 2015; see Board of Governors (2014b, 2014c, 2015). Return to text 18. See Frost and others (2015). As the authors note, an ON RRP facility can also potentially contribute to financial stability by crowding out risky short-term borrowing by financial institutions and businesses. Return to text 19. For a discussion of the tradeoffs between the risks that would be associated with departing either earlier or later from the effective lower bound, see, for example, the FOMC minutes for January 2015; see Board of Governors (2015). Return to text 20. For example, the Sveriges Riksbank publishes a fan chart that displays a forecast for its policy repurchase agreement (or repo) rate, along with uncertainty bands based on historical forecast errors, showing the ranges in which the repo rate is forecast to fall with 50 percent, 75 percent, and 90 percent confidence. For the chart, see Sveriges Riksbank (2015). Return to text 21. Svensson (1997) notes that the reaction function might take the form of a "targeting rule" expressing how the policymaker's target variables are expected to move over time. Bernanke (2010) discusses the practical importance of targeting forecast, as opposed to realized, variables. Return to text Last Update: March 23, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Debt and Financial Stability--Regulatory Challenges" conference, the Bundesbank and the German Ministry of Finance, Frankfurt, Germany Share It is a pleasure to be here. My subject is the important role the nonbank financial sector plays in the United States financial system. As you know, the euro area financial system differs from the U.S. system in terms of the relative size and the role played by banks as compared with nonbank financial institutions. According to a recent report by the International Monetary Fund, banks in the euro area accounted for roughly 75 percent of total lending by banks and nonbanks that are part of the shadow banking system, whereas in the United States, banks accounted for just under half this measure of total lending in 2013. 1 The relatively large role played by nonbank financial institutions in the United States brings with it both economic benefits and risks to financial stability--risks that could be seen clearly during the Global Financial Crisis. The nonbank sector in the United States was not always so large. The U.S. financial system has changed significantly in recent decades, with nonbanks as a whole gaining share and also becoming more interlinked with banks. This evolution has produced material benefits: increased market liquidity, greater diversity of funding sources, and--it is often claimed--a more efficient allocation of risk among investors. However, the evolution has also increased threats to the stability of the overall financial system, as demonstrated by the recent financial crisis. To promote financial stability, our tools for monitoring, regulation, and crisis management have had to evolve in recent years, and they will need to continue to evolve in the years to come. Today I will describe how nonbank intermediation in the United States has changed, what regulations are in place, and what reforms are under way to address the risks to financial stability associated with the growth of the nonbank sector. The lessons we have learned about the U.S. nonbank financial sector may be of interest to regulators in other countries who are promoting or reacting to the changing composition of financing--away from banks and toward nonbanks and market-based intermediation. The Role of Nonbank Financial Intermediation in the U.S. Financial System I apologize for starting by reminding us of material we all know. First, the provision of credit to nonfinancial businesses and households is critical to a well-functioning economy. Indeed, Ben Bernanke's research on the Great Depression came to the conclusion that it was the collapse of credit growth, rather than the slow growth of the money supply, that was primarily responsible for the financial crisis of the 1930s. Second, the basic business model of a bank is straightforward: Banks take deposits from their customers and invest the proceeds in the economy via loans to businesses, households, and governments. Therefore, a bank's balance sheet typically has shorter-term, highly liquid deposits on the liability side and longer-term, illiquid loans on the asset side. This maturity transformation makes banks vulnerable to runs. In recognition of this vulnerability, bank deposits became insured and the lender of last resort function was extended to dealing with bank runs. Third, nonbank financial institutions also act as intermediaries. Their importance as lenders has increased dramatically over the past 35 years. Data from the Financial Accounts of the United States indicate that in 1980, banks accounted for about 60 percent of total credit market assets held by the domestic financial sector, while nonbanks held about 40 percent. 2 , 3 Certain nonbank financial institutions have long been important credit providers; for example, in 1980, life insurance companies were vital to corporate bond and commercial real estate markets, accounting for about one-third of the debt outstanding in those two markets combined. While insurance companies remained important, other types of nonbank financial institutions, such as GSEs (government-sponsored enterprises, primarily Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) and mutual funds, rose in prominence over the next few decades, so that total credit market lending by nonbanks greatly outpaced lending by banks over the 1980s and into the 1990s. By the late 1990s, nonbanks held around two-thirds of total credit market assets held by banks and nonbanks. Their share has stayed relatively stable since then. The nonbank financial system includes a diverse group of entities such as insurance companies, finance companies, government-sponsored enterprises, hedge funds, security brokers and dealers, issuers of asset-backed securities, mutual funds, and money market funds. They provide credit through markets--for example, by purchasing commercial paper and bonds--or by extending loans directly to businesses and to households. These financial institutions evolved alongside banks, and their activities are in many respects intertwined with those of banks. Indeed, for every activity conducted by banks--with the exception of taking government-insured deposits--a nonbank financial institution likely conducts a similar activity. In many cases, nonbanks engage in maturity and liquidity transformation and are levered, so they have vulnerabilities similar to those of banks, but lack the benefit of access to a lender of last resort. While banks may be more central to the payment system, nonbanks are also involved. Moreover, banks and nonbanks are interconnected in many ways--for example, through derivatives, lines of credit, and other services provided by banks to nonbanks--and many markets depend on banks that act as dealers or that provide other services. In addition, many nonbanks are owned by bank holding companies, which may provide capital and liquidity guarantees to nonbank subsidiaries. Not surprisingly, the growth of the nonbank sector has tended to increase the complexity of the financial system. When banks provide loans directly to households and businesses, the chain of intermediation is relatively short and simple. With the growth of nonbank lending, intermediation chains have lengthened, often involving both banks and other nonbank financial institutions. For example, in the old days, a bank would originate a mortgage and hold it in its portfolio. Today, a bank might originate the same mortgage, but instead of holding that loan on its balance sheet, it could securitize it--in effect, sell it--and the resulting security might be purchased with the help of short-term funding provided by a money market mutual fund. And the process might not end there: Next that mortgage-backed security might be sold and repackaged into several new securities, and so on. In such examples, the number of institutions that might be involved in the provision of a single mortgage credit can easily go from one (the originating bank) to at least five or more. And such long chains can create additional points of vulnerability in the financial system. Nonbanks also increase the amount of maturity transformation conducted in the financial system without the stability-enhancing backstops offered to banks. Although some nonbanks are eligible to obtain advances from the Federal Home Loan Bank System, nonbanks are not backed by federal deposit insurance, nor do they have direct access to a lender of last resort to stem runs on their short-term liabilities. As a result, their funding can dry up rapidly should counterparties begin to believe the nonbank is in financial distress. The failure of nonbank financial institutions could directly reduce the availability of credit and could cause fire sales of assets leading to impaired market functioning. In addition, because many nonbanks are connected to banks, a shock to the nonbank sector could in turn threaten the stability of the overall banking system--as happened in the unfolding of the Global Financial Crisis. Nonbanks and the Start of the Global Financial Crisis Before discussing the role of non-banks in the Global Financial Crisis, let me briefly mention a previous episode involving a non-bank--the failure of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM). The New York Fed, under the leadership of then President William McDonough, dealt successfully with the LTCM problem. However the episode was scary and a warning about problems that could arise in the nonbank financial system and spread wider. Now to the Global Financial Crisis: Although there were many dimensions to the financial crisis, the poor performance of subprime mortgages was one of the triggers. The fact that losses in what was a relatively small part of the mortgage market quickly spread through the rest of the financial system illustrates how the complex interconnections among banks and nonbanks can amplify shocks in significant and unanticipated ways. Some of the first cracks in the nonbank sector appeared in April 2007, when New Century Financial Corporation, at one point the second-biggest subprime mortgage lender, filed for bankruptcy after its creditors pulled back on fears about its losses. 4 A few months later, with subprime assets falling in value, money market investors refused to roll over the asset-backed commercial paper that had been funding many of these subprime assets. With this market shrinking dramatically, the banking sector was left on the hook to support entities that banks had sponsored or to which they had provided some form of credit or liquidity support. Around that same time, Bear Stearns, then one of the five largest investment banks, liquidated two of its hedge funds that invested in mortgage-based securities, including collateralized debt obligations, another link in the chain of transactions. In March 2008, some creditors stopped funding Bear Stearns, and forced asset sales put additional downward pressure on asset prices. By the dramatic month of September 2008, the chain of interconnections had helped spread the financial pain, and a broader range of firms were caught in the financial maelstrom. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac entered conservatorship. Lehman Brothers failed when its creditors ran from it as they had from Bear Stearns. American International Group, or AIG, had to be bailed out primarily because of its inability to post enough collateral to cover liabilities on credit protection it had sold on many entities (including Lehman) and because it lost funding in the securities lending market. The Reserve Primary fund, a money market mutual fund, "broke the buck" as a result of its holdings of Lehman securities. Banks were not immune to the financial market stress of this period, but they were far less involved in the unfolding of the crisis than were nonbanks--a phenomenon that highlighted the importance of the nonbank sector and the vulnerability of the financial system to its distress. When nonbanks pulled back, other parts of the system suffered. When nonbanks failed, other parts of the system failed. Regulatory Reforms Implemented in the Wake of the Financial Crisis A crisis as deep as the Global Financial Crisis was bound to produce widespread regulatory changes. It was clearly necessary to strengthen the banking system and to better analyze and understand the importance of the links between the banking sector and the nonbank financial sector. With respect to the nonbank financial sector, there was a clear need for greater transparency, less leverage, and more stable forms of liquidity transformation. One important change to the banking sector was the adoption of a macroprudential perspective to supervision and regulation. 5 Central bankers and bank supervisors in the United States now regulate and supervise large complex banks not only as standalone entities, but also with consideration of how their actions could affect other firms and activities in a highly connected financial system. Within the Federal Reserve, a tangible manifestation of this macroprudential approach is the LISCC--the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee--that was created specifically to coordinate the supervision of the largest banks and other systemically important institutions. 6 Other changes to the banking system in the United States include tighter than Basel III capital and liquidity requirements, heightened prudential standards for the largest banking firms, and stress tests. Accounting standards and prudential regulations have also been changed to require banks to recognize their links to nonbank entities, such as direct connections or provision of back-up support. Heightened prudential standards require the largest and most interconnected banks to meet capital surcharges and stricter risk-management standards than other banks. Stress tests evaluate banks' ability to remain solvent and liquid when under severe macroeconomic stresses and have incentivized better risk-management and information systems within banks. A variety of reforms have helped address risks in the nonbank sector as well. I will touch briefly on three of those reforms. First, the United States has an unusually large number of independent financial sector regulatory bodies. There is accordingly an especially great need for efficient cooperation and coordination among the various regulators that collectively oversee the financial system. In response to this need, the Dodd Frank Act created the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to help identify emerging risks and vulnerabilities to financial stability. The council's annual report on financial stability highlights risks and vulnerabilities for the entire financial system and reflects the council's own diverse nature: Only 3 of the 10 voting members of the council are banking sector supervisors, with the remainder supervising or having regulatory authority related to credit unions, broker-dealers, asset managers, and derivative market participants. Among its decisions, the FSOC has designated four U.S. nonbank financial institutions as systemically important financial institutions, which makes them subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve Board. 7 In addition, the Dodd Frank Act mandated the establishment of the Office of Financial Research in order to help promote financial stability through the measurement and analysis of risks, the conduct of essential research, and the collection and standardization of financial data. A second nonbank reform has been the Securities and Exchange Commission's (SEC) adoption of new rules for money market mutual funds. Specifically, the SEC will require prime money market funds sold to institutional investors to publish a floating net asset value and to restrict withdrawals through a system of gates and fees. These rules, while as yet untested, are designed to reduce the likelihood of runs on prime money market funds. The third nonbank reform I want to highlight relates to securitization, which I mentioned earlier as one way in which parts of the financial system can become interconnected. An important rule, finalized late last year, will require the securitizers of some assets to retain at least 5 percent of the credit risk of the assets that collateralize the securities. 8 With "skin in the game," the incentive to cut corners in extending loans is reduced, and the entire chain created when assets are securitized should be stronger. Transparency has also been enhanced with stronger disclosure requirements for securitizations. At this stage of the recovery, there are signs of reduced nonbank financial sector vulnerabilities. Leverage is quite low in parts of the sector and appears moderate overall. Leverage at hedge funds, while difficult to measure, is an exception and appears in aggregate to have trended upward in recent years. Market-level information on short-term wholesale funding--such as commercial paper and repurchase agreements--indicate subdued activity after its level fell dramatically during the crisis. While issuance of securitizations has been picking up, its levels remains moderate. The available data paint a picture of a nonbank sector that has generally reduced its vulnerability to the types of shocks that we saw during the crisis. However, the nonbank sector is evolving in response to new regulations, changes in investor preferences, and a multitude of other factors that are always influencing the financial system. For example, open-end mutual funds now hold a greater share of debt, and more derivatives are being cleared through central counterparties. These developments may ultimately prove to be stability enhancing, but as the system evolves, we must remain attentive to the possibility of changes that may be destabilizing. More Needs to Be Done To say that the nonbank sector today appears less vulnerable than it did during the Global Financial Crisis, is not to say that authorities in the United States have tamed the nonbank sector. Indeed, while progress has been substantial, areas for continued work remain, and I will briefly highlight three of them. Let me start with short-term wholesale funding markets. While there have been some improvements in the plumbing of money markets, many nonbank financial firms, including hedge funds and broker-dealers, continue to rely on secured short-term funding to finance their activities, many of which involve longer-term and illiquid assets. This maturity transformation remains a key vulnerability. Further, many of the firms that rely on this maturity transformation are highly levered and thus more vulnerable to threats to their solvency. The proposed international framework being developed by the Financial Stability Board for margins on securities financing transactions may be an important tool for limiting the pro-cyclicality and sharp deleveraging that can occur in these markets. Second, and more generally, we need to be alert to changes and trends in the financial system that may pose risks to financial stability, particularly those stemming from areas of the nonbank sector that are not subject to prudential supervision. For example, the asset management industry has both grown and evolved in recent years. Mutual funds and exchange-traded funds that track the returns of indexes of relatively illiquid assets have mushroomed in size. Examples include funds tracking the return on leveraged loans, credit default swaps, and other less liquid assets. These funds offer daily or even intraday liquidity to investors while holding assets that are hard to sell immediately, thus making the funds vulnerable to liquidity risk. Recently, the FSOC issued a notice seeking comment on the products and activities of the asset management industry. Third, there are also areas of the nonbank financial system into which we have only a limited view. While the data we have on hedge funds has improved, we still need to get a complete picture of the scope and size of hedge fund activities. Data coverage of the vast derivatives market could also be improved. The paucity of information in some areas limits the ability of supervisors and regulators to work effectively toward the stability of financial institutions and the financial system. For example, outside of the banking system, we have only limited information on leverage and maturity transformation rather than precise estimates for all types of nonbank entities. Conclusion To conclude, the U.S. financial system has changed a great deal over the past several decades. One of the most important changes has been the rapid growth of the nonbank sector. Many reforms have been adopted for both banks and nonbank financial institutions. But regulation is a cat and mouse game. Regulators need to respond to existing regulatory gaps and to keep pace with further changes. We hope we will succeed in doing so. But we know that we will never be able to identify in advance all the threats to stability that are out there, and that it is therefore all the more critical to maintain and strengthen the robustness of our financial institutions, and of the financial system as a whole. 1. Note that not all nonbank financial institutions are included in the International Monetary Fund definition of shadow banks. In particular, insurance companies and pension funds are excluded. See International Monetary Fund (2014), Global Financial Stability Report: Risk Taking, Liquidity, and Shadow Banking--Curbing Excess while Promoting Growth (PDF) (Washington: IMF, October) p. 67. Return to text 2. Credit market assets include commercial paper, Treasury securities, agency and GSE-backed securities, municipal securities, corporate and foreign bonds, consumer credit, mortgages, and other types of loans (issued by depository institutions) as well as other loans and advances. Banks and nonbanks held $37.9 trillion of credit market assets in 2014, with nonbanks holding $25.1 trillion and banks holding $12.8 trillion. For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), Statistical Release Z.1, " Financial Accounts of the United States " (March 12). Return to text 3. The domestic financial sector is defined here as domestic banks and nonbank financial institutions, excluding the monetary authority. Banks include U.S.-chartered depository institutions, foreign banking offices in the United States, banks in U.S.-affiliated areas, credit unions, and holding companies. Nonbanks include property and casualty insurance companies, life insurance companies, private pension funds, federal government retirement funds, state and local government retirement funds, money market mutual funds, mutual funds, closed-end funds, exchange-traded funds, government sponsored enterprises (GSE), agency- and GSE-backed mortgage pools, issuers of asset-backed securities, finance companies, real estate investment trusts, security brokers and dealers, and funding corporations. Return to text 4. New Century Financial Corporation was not the first failure linked to the subprime crisis, but it is one of the first large failures. For example, Ownit Mortgage Solutions, a California-based home lender partly owned by Merrill Lynch & Co., failed in December 2006. Return to text 5. There appear to be two meanings of the word "macroprudential." At first, it referred to a focus on systemic interactions within the financial system. It is in that sense that we are talking at this point. The second meaning is almost the opposite: It relates to regulatory but not monetary policy measures focused on some aspect of the financial system whose behavior is giving cause for concern. Return to text 6. The large firms whose supervision is coordinated by the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) are American International Group, Inc.; Bank of America Corporation; The Bank of New York Mellon Corporation; Barclays PLC; Citigroup Inc.; Credit Suisse Group AG; Deutsche Bank AG; General Electric Capital Corporation; The Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.; JP Morgan Chase & Co.; MetLife, Inc.; Morgan Stanley; Prudential Financial, Inc.; State Street Corporation; UBS AG; and Wells Fargo & Company. For more information, see the LISCC webpage on the Board's website. Return to text 7. The four nonbank institutions that have been designated by the FSOC are MetLife, Inc.; American International Group, Inc.; General Electric Capital Corporation, Inc.; and Prudential Financial, Inc. For more information and to access the FSOC annual report, see the FSOC's webpage on the U.S. Treasury's website. Return to text 8. In October 2014, six federal agencies--the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Securities and Exchange Commission--approved a final rule requiring sponsors of securitization transactions to retain risk in those transactions. The final rule generally requires sponsors of asset-backed securities (ABS) to retain not less than five percent of the credit risk of the assets collateralizing the ABS issuance. As required by the Dodd-Frank Act, the final rule defines a "qualified residential mortgage" (QRM) and exempts securitizations of QRMs from the risk retention requirement. The final rule aligns the QRM definition with that of a qualified mortgage as defined by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The final rule also does not require any retention for securitizations of commercial loans, commercial mortgages, or automobile loans that meet specific standards for high quality underwriting. For more information, see the press release on the Board's website. Return to text Last Update: March 27, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Central Banking in the Shadows: Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Postcrisis," 20th Annual Financial Markets Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Stone Mountain, Georgia Share It is an honor to speak at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's 20th Financial Markets Conference, and I am grateful to President Lockhart and the organizers for inviting me to do so. 1 This evening I would like to take stock of progress on financial reforms in the nonbank financial sector and highlight some principles for approaching prudential regulation of this sector to further strengthen financial stability. The nonbank sector includes firms with diverse business models and practices, many of which differ greatly from those of banks. Even so, nonbank firms and activities can pose the same key vulnerabilities as banks, including high leverage, excessive maturity transformation, and complexity, all of which can lead to financial instability. The reforms undertaken to date reflect both the differences and similarities between the nonbank and bank sectors. While there has been progress on the financial reform front, we should not be complacent about the stability of the financial system. Regulation often creates incentives for activity to move outside the regulatory perimeter, and market participants respond to incentives. Thus we should expect that further reforms will certainly be needed down the road. The Nonbank Sector Was an Important Source of Vulnerability in the Crisis As you know, the nonbank financial sector in the United States is larger, and plays a more important role, than it does in most other countries. In recent years, about two-thirds of nonfinancial credit market debt has been held by nonbanks, which includes market-based funding by securitization vehicles and mutual funds as well as by institutions such as insurance companies and finance companies. Nonbanks are involved in many activities within the financial system as well, such as securities lending. The nonbank sector has produced material benefits: increased market liquidity, greater diversity of funding sources, and--it is often claimed--a more efficient allocation of risk to investors. However, threats to the stability of the overall financial system have also increased, as was evident in the recent financial crisis. It is now eight years since major cracks in the financial system that led to the Global Financial Crisis first appeared in nonbank entities and activities. While the causes of the crisis were complex, I will start by telling part of the tale of how nonbank distress was transmitted to the broader financial system. The story begins with nonbank mortgage companies, which were important originators of subprime and prime mortgage loans, typically securitizing them or selling them to investment banks to be securitized. Rumors of troubles among these firms were circulating in 2006 as house prices started to decline, and a large firm filed for bankruptcy in December 2006. 2 Then New Century, at one point the second largest subprime lender, filed for bankruptcy in April 2007 because its funding had disappeared as a result of fears about losses. Many more followed in 2007 and 2008. Replacement of nonbank lenders' capacity to process mortgage applications and to fund mortgage loans occurred only partially and slowly. Next step: The distress in mortgage markets was amplified in the broader financial system in several ways, including something similar to a bank run but which instead occurred on asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) vehicles. These vehicles invested in private-label mortgage securitizations and other long-term debt securities but were funded with short-term commercial paper. Buyers of the commercial paper issued by the ABCP vehicles withdrew funding starting in the late summer of 2007. The volume of assets in the vehicles was large, about $700 billion, and after the run, the ability of the financial system to fund credit through many types of asset-backed securities became constrained. 3 The runs on ABCP also put considerable pressure on the banking system because of the liquidity backstops that banks had provided to the vehicles. 4 Some of the guarantors also insured mortgage-backed securities, and when doubts arose about the ability of the guarantors to pay claims on mortgage-backed securities, the credibility of their guarantees of municipal securities was also reduced. Municipalities then found it more difficult and costly to issue debt even though their activities were otherwise unrelated to subprime mortgages. 5 Next, the crisis spread to nonbank finance companies, which made a substantial fraction of consumer loans in the United States--for example, auto and credit card loans. As the crisis went on, the ability of such lenders to fund themselves through securitizations and commercial paper became increasingly constrained. For a period after the failure of Lehman Brothers, many investors were unwilling to buy commercial paper and asset-backed securities at any price, and, as a result, finance companies faced tight funding constraints. In turn, the finance companies cut credit availability, which sharply depressed purchases of consumer durables, including automobiles. These examples highlight five lessons. One is that the recent crisis first manifested itself in the nonbank sector and was worse for the nonbank sector than for banks. Almost all the examples of financial distress mentioned so far occurred before stress in the commercial banking system became acute, and in most cases well before. For example, only three commercial banks failed in the United States in 2007, and commercial bank distress did not peak until the end of 2008 and later. A second lesson is that nonbank distress can harm the real economy. Mortgages, auto loans, and credit through securities issuance became harder to obtain. Some of the slack was taken up by commercial banks, but credit contracted sharply, and millions of Americans suffered. Third lesson: Many of the problems at nonbanks were similar to the problems that plagued banks. These problems included insolvency, illiquidity (by which I mean the loss of access to funding even if the nonbank was solvent), and a general loss of confidence, in which counterparties of all kinds became reluctant to deal with some nonbanks. Fourth lesson: The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) can handle a bank insolvency by keeping the bank's functions running while it pays off depositors and finds buyers for the bank's assets. The Federal Reserve, as a central bank, can address bank illiquidity using its lender-of-last-resort authority. Bank supervisory agencies can address a loss of confidence by actions such as the stress tests conducted in the spring of 2009. However the lack of such powers for nonbanks made it much more difficult for the authorities to address the distress of nonbanks and its influence on the financial system. Before the crisis, the authorities had few policy levers to provide liquidity or to resolve failures of nonbanks in a way that would avoid serious spillovers. Liquidity was ultimately provided to some nonbank markets, such as the markets for securities backed by consumer and business assets, but the facilities were far from simple and took substantial time to create and implement. 6 Finally, nonbank distress can transmit to the banking sector through many channels, such as counterparty relationships, disruptions in funding markets, and knock-on effects of asset fire sales. The failure of Lehman provides a good example. It was a nonbank, and its failure both imposed direct losses on its many types of counterparties and disrupted many markets with negative effects on banks. Principles for Prudential Regulation of Nonbank Intermediaries and Activities It is widely understood that any regulation of nonbanks should fit their activities and the vulnerabilities they pose, which implies that not every nonbank financial institution or activity necessarily needs to be regulated. The two key principles for prudential regulation of nonbanks when it is warranted, are simple: First, we should be attentive to solvency and liquidity; second, we should recognize that the financial system will change over time, and thus close monitoring and analysis of the system are essential. Insolvency and illiquidity are classic financial stability concerns. And as mentioned, they were common themes of the distress at nonbanks that we observed during the crisis. Thus, we will not go far wrong if we begin by considering how to promote solvency and liquidity, taking into account the unique structures and activities of each type of nonbank. Liquidity challenges vary across nonbank firms and activities. In some, the issue is whether a firm can fund itself in a distressed situation. For example, a broker-dealer that relies heavily on short-term wholesale funding may find its funding evaporating at the first sign of trouble--a situation that could force the sale of assets at fire sale prices. One way to mitigate such problems is by having direct restrictions on the structure of liabilities, such as on their duration or on the use of wholesale funding. Analogously with banks, one could also imagine requiring some nonbanks to maintain buffers of highly liquid assets that are sized according to the risk that their liabilities will run off quickly in a stress situation. In other nonbanks, withdrawable liabilities are part of the structure of the entity or activity, and what varies is the degree of mismatch between the liquidity of assets and liabilities. For example, some open-ended mutual funds offer daily withdrawal privileges but invest in assets that take longer to sell and settle, giving investors an incentive to withdraw quickly when distress arises. The fire sales of assets that may result can depress asset prices and increase volatility, with knock-on effects on other institutions and markets. Concerns have grown about this liquidity mismatch as the aggregate value of less liquid assets in such funds has grown. In part because of this concern, in a December Federal Register notice last year, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) requested public comment on potential systemic risks posed by asset manager activities and products. To promote solvency, one could impose ratio-type capital requirements, such as leverage ratio requirements or risk-based requirements. An alternative is to require that firms perform regular stress tests to demonstrate that they can remain solvent and continue to lend even under stress. In the Fed's case, it has chosen to impose all of these requirements on banks, but these requirements cannot simply be applied, as is, to nonbanks. It is well known that solvency and liquidity can be difficult to separate during stress periods because fears about solvency, even if unfounded, can prompt a run. Thus, one could also imagine promoting both solvency and liquidity at some nonbanks by imposing restrictions on their structure or activities in ways that reduce the likelihood of runs. An example of this is recent changes by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in regulations for prime money market mutual funds. Starting in 2016, prime institutional money funds will be required to publish a floating net asset value rather than a stable value of $1 per unit. Stable-value funds, as we saw during the crisis, can be vulnerable to an unexpected "break the buck" event that leads to a run. Under the new rules, funds can also impose limitations on withdrawals of liabilities and can impose liability redemption fees. The SEC considered requiring money market funds to hold some capital but chose not to do so. Only time will tell whether the adopted reforms have the intended run-damping effects, but if they do, capital will be much less necessary. Some may raise concerns that increased regulation of nonbanks will only increase moral hazard and increase risk to the system on net. But moral hazard may already be present. Over the past 20 years and more, governments have sometimes acted to contain damage from distress at nonbanks because of the economic damage that might have resulted from a failure to act. We should always be mindful of moral hazard incentives and seek to contain them, but well-designed regulation might reduce rather than increase moral hazard. In the banking sector, bank regulators have focused on improving resolution planning at banks and enhancing the ability of the FDIC to manage the resolution of a systemically important firm in a way that mitigates spillovers to the economy. For example, proposals are now under consideration to require the largest and most interconnected banks to maintain a buffer of debt that could be converted to equity or that could otherwise absorb losses upon failure. Such proposals could be viewed as a form of solvency regulation and this form of loss-absorbing capital might be appropriate for some of the largest and most interconnected nonbanks as well. In addition, nonbank intermediation often involves complex chains of activity encompassing many entities and markets. Such chains tend to increase the web of interconnections in the financial system that, in some circumstances, can increase the likelihood or severity of systemic stress. For example, movements in collateral values can trigger margin calls and fire sales of assets, and thus activities that depend on market-valued collateral can be vulnerable. The Financial Stability Board is currently considering reforms for margins on securities financing transactions. Other interconnections involve exposures to counterparty default. The new regulatory regime for derivatives, which I will discuss in a moment, seeks to mitigate counterparty risk. It is often said that stronger regulation of the banking sector will cause activity to move outside the perimeter of regulation. This evolution also could lead to greater complexity, such as longer chains of interconnections, which makes it more difficult for market participants to understand the risks arising from their exposures. Examples of migration that have already occurred include the movement of many loans made to large corporations from banks to collateralized loan obligations, the securitization of many credit card receivables, and the securitization of mortgages. This kind of migration makes close monitoring by regulators particularly important. Authorities should monitor for changes that may arise in response to the new regulations or to changing economic and financial conditions. They will need information to do so, but for many nonbank entities, the flow of information is currently nonexistent or very limited and informal. Another force for evolution in the nonbank sector is the demand for safe money-like assets. Some argue that this demand for private money creation prompted the growth in "shadow banking" prior to the crisis. 7 Indeed, whenever shortages develop, we might expect the nonbank financial system to create assets that appear safe but that could in certain circumstances pose systemic risks. Progress to Date We have seen some progress in improving the regulation of the nonbank financial sector. Let me mention four areas of reform. The first is the Dodd-Frank Act's creation of the FSOC and the power it was given to designate individual nonbank firms as systemically important and thus subject to prudential regulation by the Federal Reserve. The FSOC has designated four nonbank firms as systemically important. 8 The FSOC is also a useful venue for regulators to collaborate on identifying emerging threats. And it is an important mechanism through which agencies can cooperate in responding to practices or firms that migrate outside of traditional regulatory perimeters. Second: securitization reform. A regulation that is now in the process of implementation requires securitizers to retain some of the risk of the securities that they create. That should incentivize them to structure securitizations in ways that better protect the holders of senior tranches from credit risk, although qualifying residential mortgages are exempt from the requirement. A third area is derivative reforms. To reduce complexity and pro-cyclicality, these reforms include moving standardized derivatives to central counterparties (CCPs) and requiring initial and variation margin for noncleared derivatives. Relatedly, as CCPs have gained prominence, regulators have become more focused on and concerned with their resilience, recovery, and resolution. In addition, regulators are working to improve the quality and standardization of data reported to swap data repositories, and are actively participating in international efforts to develop uniform identification standards to facilitate the aggregation of such data. 9 A key issue is to understand how and to what extent market participants who use derivatives are exposed to each other. Besides the new money market mutual fund rules that I have already mentioned, a fourth example is additional data collection on specific holdings of money funds, which has enhanced stability by providing investors with more information to better evaluate risks. In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act mandated the establishment of the Office of Financial Research in order to help promote financial stability through the measurement and analysis of risks, the conduct of essential research, and the collection and standardization of financial data. Data collection has begun for hedge funds and progress is being made in collecting data on repurchase agreements and securities lending. Nevertheless, some nonbank firms and activities--including concerning the volume and uses of derivatives--are still opaque. To sum up, much has been done to strengthen prudential regulation and supervision of the nonbank financial system, but more will need to be done. We must remain vigilant for changes in the system that increase systemic risk, and we should make appropriate changes to regulation and the structure of regulation as necessary. Recent regulatory changes, including a macroprudential approach on the part of U.S. regulators, should help us to do that. 10 But we should never forget the International Monetary Fund's all-purpose warning whenever it has been tempted to give an economy a clean bill of health: Complacency must be avoided. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. Ownit Mortgage Solutions, one of the top 20 subprime mortgage originators nationally, filed for bankruptcy on December 28, 2006. Virtually all such firms have since either failed or been acquired. Return to text 3. See Daniel Covitz, Nellie Liang, and Gustavo Suarez (2013), " The Evolution of a Financial Crisis: Collapse of the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market ," Journal of Finance, vol. 68 (June), pp. 815-48. Return to text 4. Runs on the repurchase agreement (repo) funding of asset-backed securities were also troublesome for both banks and nonbanks. See Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2012), " Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo ," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 104 (June), pp. 425-51. Return to text 5. Moreover, state and municipal borrowers had been issuing long-term debt while paying short-term interest rates by using structures such as variable-rate demand notes (VRDNs), which gave holders the right to put the securities back to liquidity providers on short notice. When the money market fund investors that held VRDNs became worried about their ability to get their money out at short notice, the volume of putbacks rose, and these developments ultimately led to increased payment obligations for some municipalities. Return to text 6. See Gorton and Metrick, "Securitized Banking," in note 4, op.cit.; Jeremy Stein (2012), " Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation ," Quarterly Journal of Economics , Vol. 127, pp. 57-95; Robin Greenwood, Samuel Hanson, and Jeremy Stein (2014), "A Comparative-Advantage Approach to Government Debt Maturity," Journal of Finance, vol. 65, pp. 993-1028. Return to text 7. See Gorton and Metrick, "Securitized Banking," in note 4; Samuel G. Hanson, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy C. Stein, and Robert W. Vishny (forthcoming), "Banks and Patient Fixed-Income Investors," Journal of Financial Economics ; and Zoltan Pozsar, Tobias Adrian, Adam Ashcraft, and Hayley Boesky (2010), " Shadow Banking ," Staff Report 458 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July; revised February 2012). Return to text 8. The four firms designated by the FSOC as systemically important are American International Group, Inc.; Prudential Financial, Inc.; General Electric Capital Corporation, Inc.; and MetLife, Inc. Return to text 9. Due to the critical nature of overseas derivatives data and the need to standardize these data for regulatory analysis, the CFTC and the OFR in 2014 formed a partnership to standardize and enhance the quality of the data collected by CFTC-registered swap data repositories. Important work on standardizing derivatives data is also under way at the international level. Return to text 10. This change is reflected in the setting up of the LISCC--the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee. Return to text Last Update: March 30, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the ECB Forum on Central Banking conference "Inflation and Unemployment in Europe", Sintra, Portugal Share It is an honor and a pleasure to participate in the ECB Forum on Central Banking, and I thank you, President Draghi, and other members of the ECB Board, for inviting me to take part. 1 Although the topic of the conference is inflation and unemployment, I will take another perspective by discussing some of the past, present, and future challenges that have and may in future confront the ECB and the euro area. My theme is taken from Jean Monnet, who in 1976 wrote: "Europe will be forged in crises, and will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises." 2 This quote is discussed in the interesting recent paper by Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, whose view of Monnet's contention can be deduced from the title of their paper: "Monnet's Error?" 3 There are similar quotes from others, among them Jacques Chirac in 2003 and the former chief economist of the ECB, Ottmar Issing, in 2010. 4 I first heard a statement to this effect from Jean-Claude Trichet at the 2011 Jackson Hole conference. 5 An extended 2015 version of the Monnet contention would take the form: "The first step on the road to European union was the creation of the Coal and Steel Community in 1951. At the start, we did not have a road map, but we had the goal of ensuring that the countries of Europe would never again go to war, and to that end, we had to build an institutional structure that would make another European war impossible. From time to time we encountered obstacles in that process. These obstacles often led to crises, but the crises were overcome, and from each crisis, the prospects for a united, prosperous, and peaceful Europe emerged stronger. And that is what will happen this time too." This leaves us with three questions: Has modern Europe developed primarily through crises? Will it be stronger when this crisis is over? And what challenges or crises is Europe likely to have to deal with in future? Despite the fact that political and economic aspects of the structure of the European economy have inherently been closely intertwined throughout history--and saying this, one thinks of the Romans and later of Charlemagne--I will focus on the economic aspects of the European project, and primarily on its monetary and financial aspects. 6 Intra-European monetary and exchange rate problems have for centuries bedeviled European countries and intra-European trade, and led to the desire for greater exchange rate stability--perhaps through some form of treaty or agreement, or even through a monetary union. Of course, the desire for greater exchange rate stability is true also of almost the entire world, and is reflected in the original Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund. The first modern international attempt to regularize monetary relations among independent European states was that of the Latin Monetary Union (LMU), which came into force in 1866. The original members were France, Belgium, Switzerland, and Italy. The Papal States joined later in the same year, and Greece and Rumania joined in 1867. 7 The members agreed to fix exchange rates among them by setting the amounts of silver and gold (weights and fineness) in the national coinage, with a specified exchange rate (15.5) between silver and gold. In addition, a limit of 6 francs per inhabitant was set on the value of smaller coins issued by each country, "because of their substantial seigniorage." 8 The LMU fixed exchange rates within a bimetallic international system. Kindleberger notes that in setting up the Union, the Swiss, Belgians, and Italians were in favor of moving to the gold standard, but that "French resistance dominated" (p. 68). "Then came a series of blows to silver" (p. 68), the most important occurring after the establishment of the Reichsbank, when Germany in 1873 shifted from bimetallism to the gold standard, and the Reichsbank started selling its silver. In practice this moved the LMU to a gold standard, a change that was formally recognized in 1878--the year of the International Monetary Conference called by the United States to maintain bimetallism, an effort which failed. The exchange rates established by the LMU became ineffective during and after World War I, and the Union was formally ended in 1927. 9 Kindleberger writes consolingly that "from 1865 to 1867, ... the Latin Monetary Union worked reasonably well, and its success suggested the desirability of expanding it to arrive at a 'universal money'" (p. 69). Now to post-World War II Europe, and the question of whether Europe has emerged stronger through crises. The Treaty of Rome, establishing the European Economic Community (EEC), was signed in 1957 by the six original members: Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and West Germany, the same group that had set up the Coal and Steel Community. The aim was economic integration among the six members, including a common market and a customs union. At that time, the Bretton Woods agreement and capital controls were still producing reasonable stability in exchange rates. However, as Bretton Woods began to unravel in the 1960s, exchange rates became more unstable, and appreciations and depreciations against the dollar led to sizable shifts in bilateral rates among European currencies. Yet the EEC continued to work within the Bretton Woods framework, even as the Bretton Woods approach began to be modified at the end of the decade and the beginning of the 1970s. Of particular difficulty to members of the EEC, under some circumstances the exchange rate bands specified in the Smithsonian agreement permitted movements of up to 9 percent between any pair of currencies. In response to these pressures, members of the EEC agreed in 1972 to the so-called "snake"--or "the snake in the tunnel"--that attempted to limit exchange rate fluctuations of each currency relative to the dollar. 10 However, this system was soon tested, notably by the oil crises of the 1970s, as both the effects of the oil price increases themselves and the policies adopted in response differed across countries. Denmark and the United Kingdom exited the snake soon after entering, Italy dropped out in 1973, and France participated intermittently during the mid-1970s, first dropping out in 1974. The snake was a failure, a failure that created problems, though not clearly a crisis. If exchange rates among members of the EEC were to be stabilized in the new world of floating rates, the Community had to invent a substitute. In 1978, the members of the EEC created the European Monetary System, which started with an Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM I) that limited currency fluctuations relative to a basket of national currencies. 11 All members except the United Kingdom participated in ERM I. The arrangement also committed central banks to intervene to support the resulting bilateral rates as they approached the limits of the permissible bands. Countries in the ERM also adopted policies that lowered inflation, bringing interest rates into closer alignment. The initial success of the ERM encouraged European leaders to lift capital controls and built momentum toward monetary union, which was reflected in the Maastricht Treaty (the Treaty on European Union), agreed to in 1991 and signed in 1992. However, strains also emerged under the ERM, in an environment in which the Bundesbank emerged as the dominant central bank in Europe, and the Deutschmark as the dominant European currency. This led other countries in the ERM to follow German monetary policy. In part as a consequence of German reunification, the pressures generated by diverging fiscal policies and tightening German monetary policy contributed to the ERM crisis of 1992. Moreover, the earlier lifting of capital controls and the promises to intervene to support rates that were ultimately not credible put tremendous pressure on the pegged rates--and on relations among some members of the EEC. The crisis forced the United Kingdom and Italy out of the ERM and forced others (Portugal and Spain) to devalue their currencies. The ERM crisis was an apt illustration of the difficulties of trying to manage exchange rates among countries operating under markedly different economic conditions. However, rather than dissuading policymakers from trying to limit exchange rate fluctuations within a system that would nonetheless preserve the possibility of some exchange rate flexibility, the experience seemed to encourage them to continue with the plan of the Maastricht Treaty to introduce a single currency and a common monetary policy at the beginning of 1999. Here indeed was an example of a crisis leading to a strengthening of the European system--though the process to create EMU--the Economic and Monetary Union, not the European Monetary Union--began well before the ERM crisis. The exchange rate and central banking provisions of the Maastricht Treaty were introduced on the schedule set out in 1991, with the ECB coming into existence in 1999. Until about 2009, the monetary aspects of the plans for the development of the European Union (EU) seemed to be a major success--but not a sufficient success to persuade all members of the Union to become members of the ECB and adopt the euro, with the most notable standout being the United Kingdom. The ERM crisis also drove home the need for greater coordination of fiscal policies in the run-up to monetary union. Members of the EU agreed to the Stability and Growth Pact in 1996. Although, as we all know, the conditions of the pact have not always been observed, nor enforced by Brussels, the acknowledgment of the need for a coordinated fiscal policy to complement monetary union was still a step forward--one which may be drawn on in future. What lessons can we draw from this history of the region's economic and monetary responses to earlier crises? Do the results bear out the spirit of the statements by Monnet and others about each crisis leading to greater strength? Certainly, each setback and each crisis spurred policymakers to take steps that they might not otherwise have taken at that time, and the end result of those steps has been a more unified European monetary union. Successive crises have not deterred policymakers from the goal of economic integration, but rather seemed to strengthen their belief in the need for it--and that integration is stronger today than it ever was in the past. Looking back, the progress in this project from its earliest days after World War II until today has been impressive. Trade integration has led to the free flow of goods within the EU, and this has brought economic gains. Greater trade integration has in turn generated a continued desire for greater monetary integration, which was put in place in 1999, and until recently seemed to be a major success. That success in turn made crystal clear the need for more fiscal integration--a challenge for the future, to which we will return. What about the present crisis of the euro area? Two or three years ago, there was widespread skepticism on the western shores of the Atlantic and the English Channel about the viability of the monetary union, and there was much discussion of what would happen after the breakup of the present euro area--whether there would be one or two euro areas, one for the stronger countries, one for the weaker, and if so, how well each of the two blocs would fare. With one sentence--the sentence that included the words "whatever it takes"-- that skepticism was largely, though not totally, erased. With one decision--the decision to implement QE--it became clear that the ECB has the capacity both to decide to implement monetary policy at the zero lower bound--indeed below the zero lower bound--and to succeed in implementing that policy. There can be no one whose Bayesian priors have not moved in favor of the survival of essentially the present euro area, even though we still await the outcome of the Greek crisis, and even though we know that the present crisis is not yet over. Is this an example of the success of the Monnet approach? Absolutely. European monetary policy in the earlier part of the Great Financial Crisis was innovative, particularly in the invention of full-allotment outright monetary transactions. That policy was inspired by crisis, as were the innovative policies undertaken by the Fed in the United States. More important than that: It is hard to believe that a European banking union would have been put in place by 2014 if it had not been for the crisis. And it is no less difficult to believe that a Single Supervisory Mechanism would have been set up absent the crisis. Of course, one may say that the ability to make these difficult decisions depended on the skills of the leadership of the ECB--and that is true, and will always be true. But the fact is that, when needed, Europe produced the monetary policy leadership it needed. What of the future? What crises, what extremely difficult decisions, await the EU? Some are already visible. The decision to use the single currency to drive the European project forward was a risky one, and at some stage or probably in several stages, it will be necessary to put the missing fiscal framework into place. And that, if it happens, will be another example of a crisis--the present crisis, one hopes--whose solution will have strengthened the European enterprise. For success in this area must be one of the most difficult economic challenges facing the EU after the present crisis is over. Also awaiting the EU are the possibilities of major difficulties associated with the current Greek crisis and, later, with a potential British exit. One can of course imagine many different types of future crises, including crises that could develop out of the worsening geopolitical situation in which the Western world finds itself. And one could go on. Experience tells us that the best way to deal with future crises is to strengthen the economic framework in which they will be confronted. That will require a great deal of thought about how to deal with future crises that could most easily be solved by an exchange rate adjustment, and it will also require developing a better mechanism to ensure that member states run responsible financial and budgetary policies. It means also seeking solutions to the difficult demographics now confronting many European countries. And it means the continuation of a courageous and effective monetary policy, and courageous and effective regulation and supervision of the financial system--albeit a monetary policy that could do even better if accompanied by an expansionary fiscal policy. All that has been done so far makes it very likely that EMU--the Economic and Monetary Union--will survive this crisis. But in the longer run, EMU will not survive unless it also brings prosperity to its members. That means that the most important challenge of the future will require an increase in productivity growth in Europe--and that is a challenge that faces the entire developed world. Let me conclude by congratulating you, the management and staff of the ECB, on what you have achieved in your short history, and especially in the last few years. And best wishes for future success in continuing to do your share in contributing to the building of Europe--preferably without having to face too many future crises, useful as Monnet's approach suggests such crises could be. Thank you--and good luck. 1. I am grateful to Brian Doyle, Jane Haltmaier, Stacey Tevlin and Paul Wood of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. See Jean Monnet (1976), Memoires (Paris: Fayard) . Return to text 3. See Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2015), "Monnet's Error?" NBER Working Paper Series 21121 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April). Return to text 4. In a 2003 TV interview, Chirac said, "And whenever there's been a crisis, we've emerged from it with a stronger Europe." See TF1 and France2 (2003), " Excerpts of TV Interview by President Chirac to TF1 and France2 ," March 10. In November 2010, Prof. Issing (then chief economist and member of the Board of the ECB) gave an address at the Faculty of Economics of the University of Pavia for the honoris causa degree in international economic integration. He said, "After all, ‘Europe,' to use this term, has been through many crises and all in all has emerged stronger from each one." See Otmar Issing (2010), "Professor Otmar Issing Address," in " Otmar Issing: An Economist and Architect of Supranational Institutions (PDF) ," introduction by Guido Montani, Il Politico (University of Pavia, Italy), no. 1, p. 22. Return to text 5. A year later, at the 2012 Jackson Hole conference, I quoted Jean-Claude as having said, "[T]he European project is a project in process. It was not set up with this particular aim of getting to a monetary union. We've had crisis after crisis since we started. At every stage of the process, we have heard the same story from Americans .... 'You Europeans don't know how to make decisions. You're always slow. What phone number should I call if I want to speak to Europe? This dream is bound to collapse.' We have heard that every time, and we have been slow. But in the end we have emerged stronger from every crisis." I spoke to Jean-Claude recently to check that this is what he said in 2011. He replied that he had, but that he doubted that he had said "we have been slow," since he generally states "we have been bold." Return to text 6. See Charles P. Kindleberger (1993), A Financial History of Western Europe , 2nd ed. (New York: Oxford University Press). The book presents four chronologies in its chapter 1: "I: Wars"; "II: Monetary Events"; "III: Banking Landmarks"; and "IV: Financial Events." The earliest entry is in "Banking Landmarks," 12th and 13th c.: Fairs of Champagne. Return to text 7. Later many other countries accepted the coinage standards set by the LMU but did not formally join the Union. Return to text 8. See Kindleberger, Financial History of Western Europe, p. 68, in note 5. Return to text 9. Greece was suspended from the LMU in 1908 for debasing its gold coinage, and readmitted in 1910. Return to text 10. The snake agreement was made among the six original countries of the EEC plus another three about to join: Denmark, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. Return to text 11. By 1978, the original six members of the EEC had been joined by Denmark, Ireland, and the United Kingdom. Return to text Last Update: May 21, 2015 Back to Top

in an increasingly interconnected world. 2 Over the past 50 years, global trade has more than tripled relative to world gross domestic product (GDP), and the ratio of total exports to global GDP now stands at about 30 percent--though, interestingly, the rate of growth of global international trade has declined to the level of the growth rate of world GDP since the start of the Great Recession. International trade has not loomed as large in the U.S. national accounts as it has for many other countries, but it is an increasingly important driver of the U.S. economy, with the share of trade in U.S. GDP currently at about 15 percent. Although the U.S. share of world GDP has gradually declined since the mid-20th century, the broader importance of the United States to the global economy has diminished less, as a result of increasing financial linkages. In particular, U.S. residents' ownership of private foreign assets has risen from 6.5 percent of U.S. annual GDP in 1950 to more than 140 percent of annual U.S. GDP (nearly $25 trillion), reflecting the leading role of U.S. capital markets in cross-border finance. Total foreign investment in the United States is even larger, at more than $30 trillion. In a progressively integrating world economy and financial system, a central bank cannot ignore developments beyond its country's borders, and the Fed is no exception. This is true even though the Fed's statutory objectives are defined as specific goals for the U.S. economy. In particular, the Federal Reserve's objectives are given by its dual mandate to pursue maximum sustainable employment and price stability, and our policy decisions are targeted to achieve these dual objectives. 3 Hence, at first blush, it may seem that there is little need for Fed policymakers to pay attention to developments outside the United States. But such an inference would be incorrect. The state of the U.S. economy is significantly affected by the state of the world economy. A wide range of foreign shocks affect U.S. domestic spending, production, prices, and financial conditions. To anticipate how these shocks affect the U.S. economy, the Federal Reserve devotes significant resources to monitoring developments in foreign economies, including emerging market economies (EMEs), which account for an increasingly important share of global growth. The most recent available data show 47 percent of total U.S. exports going to EME destinations. And of course, actions taken by the Federal Reserve influence economic conditions abroad. 4 Because these international effects in turn spill back on the evolution of the U.S. economy, we cannot make sensible monetary policy choices without taking them into account. In this lecture, I would like to emphasize both aspects of our global connectedness--spillovers from the United States to foreign economies and the effect of foreign economies on the United States. I. International Transmission of Monetary Policies The recognition that a change in interest rates in one nation can spill over to other countries dates back at least to the 18th-century writings of David Hume on the international effect of changes in the money supply. 5 The standard models incorporating the international transmission of monetary policy were developed by Marcus Fleming and Robert Mundell. In the Mundell-Fleming framework, as well as in modern developments of the same theme, a shift toward a more accommodative monetary policy in the United States spills over to foreign economies by causing their interest rates to fall--though typically by less than in the United States--and their currencies to appreciate against the dollar. At the same time, international capital flows tend to shift toward foreign economies in response to their relatively more attractive interest rates. The pass-through of changes in U.S. policy rates abroad depends importantly on how foreign monetary authorities respond. A decline in U.S. policy rates has a relatively large effect on foreign policy rates in economies that opt to limit exchange rate fluctuations, at least for economies with reasonably open capital accounts. By contrast, a central bank in an economy with a freely floating exchange rate might choose to lower its interest rate by a much smaller amount than in the United States if it believes that domestic conditions so warrant. In this case, the country's exchange rate would appreciate as investors rebalance their portfolios in favor of assets denominated in its currency in response to the higher interest rate differential. 6 There is also evidence that monetary policy actions can influence investors' willingness to hold risky assets, the so-called risk-taking channel. 7 Such effects seem to be most potent when financial conditions are stressed. And countries that offer high prospective returns but have weak policy frameworks or other structural vulnerabilities may be particularly sensitive to fluctuations in international investment associated with global risk factors. 8 Effects of monetary accommodation since the global financial crisis After the 2007-08 global financial crisis, there has been heightened concern about the international spillovers of monetary policies--and of ours, in particular. Some EME critics argued that U.S. policy accommodation contributed to a surge of capital inflows and excessive credit growth in their economies, creating risks of financial instability. But, as time wore on, most EMEs seemed glad to receive those flows. There is little doubt that the aggressive actions the Federal Reserve took to mitigate the effects of the global financial crisis significantly affected asset prices at home and abroad as well as international capital flows. While the Fed's asset purchases were composed wholly of Treasury, agency, and agency-backed securities (for legal and practical reasons), the program also aimed to boost the prices of riskier assets and ease financial conditions for the private sector. 9 (And this is what the textbooks say the program should have done.) The preponderance of evidence suggests that the Fed's asset purchases raised the prices of the assets purchased and close substitutes as well as those of riskier assets. 10 Importantly, evidence shows that foreign asset markets have been significantly affected by the Fed's purchase programs. 11 For example, event studies of announcements associated with the Fed's purchase programs have found that they prompted inflows into investment funds holding both foreign debt and foreign equity securities. Of course, other countries' monetary policy announcements can also leave an imprint on international asset prices, with market reactions to new initiatives enacted by the European Central Bank (ECB) one recent example. 12 However, event studies tend to find larger international interest rate spillovers for U.S. policy announcements than for those of other central banks. 13 Earlier studies of the international effects of conventional U.S. monetary policy--namely, changes in the policy rate--have also found significant spillovers to asset prices in other countries. 14 Studies that have compared the spillovers of monetary policy across conventional and unconventional measures generally conclude that the effects on global financial markets are roughly similar. 15 Given the relatively fast recovery of many EMEs from the crisis, post-crisis monetary accommodation in the United States and other advanced economies created policy challenges for many EMEs. 16 If they resisted currency appreciation pressures by lowering their policy rates, they risked over­stimulating domestic demand, exacerbating financial excesses, and overheating their economies. If, instead, they reduced their policy rates less than the United States had done while intervening to resist currency appreciation, capital inflows could have increased further, thus partially offsetting their attempts to stabilize their economies. And, if they allowed currency appreciation pressures to pass through to their full extent, this could threaten their recoveries by hurting exports. In the event, EMEs tried to make the best of a difficult set of tradeoffs by allowing some exchange rate appreciation, partially reducing their interest rates, and in some countries also using capital controls. I would also argue strongly that U.S. monetary policies were not beggar thy neighbor policies in that, on balance, they generally did not drain demand from other economies. Federal Reserve staff analysis finds that an easing of monetary policy in the United States benefits foreign economies from both stronger U.S. activity and improved global financial conditions. The "taper tantrum" of 2013 We should also expect spillovers when monetary policy is tightened. Central bank communications can be a tricky business. And indeed, financial markets reacted strongly to the first statements by Chairman Bernanke in the spring of 2013 that the Fed's asset purchases were likely to decelerate in the near future and come to an end not long after that. Some market participants clearly understood these statements to be broadly in line with previous guidance about the eventual normalization of policy as recovery of the U.S. economy took hold. But others may have grown accustomed to continuing asset purchases; the most recent program of quantitative easing, commonly referred to as QE3, had been first announced less than a year before and was proceeding at a steady pace of $85 billion per month. The onset of the taper tantrum went well beyond a roiling of U.S. financial markets. Spillovers to other advanced-economy financial markets included stock price declines, significant increases in sovereign yields, higher overnight interest swap rates in the United Kingdom and euro area, and rising credit spreads in some countries. Spillovers to EME asset markets were significantly stronger. Inflows to EME investment funds reversed sharply, EME currencies depreciated, and other asset prices declined. 17 II. Normalization of Monetary Policies The cumulative effects over half of a decade of the extraordinary actions by the Federal Reserve and other central banks will need to be unwound in the coming years as the U.S. and other economies make progress toward economic recovery. In the normalizing of its policy, just as when loosening policy, the Federal Reserve will take account of how its actions affect the global economy. The taper tantrum episode notwithstanding, most EMEs have generally weathered the wind-down of our asset purchases reasonably well so far. The actual raising of policy rates could trigger further bouts of volatility, but my best estimate is that the normalization of our policy should prove manageable for the EMEs. We have done everything we can, within the limits of forecast uncertainty, to prepare market participants for what lies ahead. The Federal Reserve and other central banks are going to great lengths to communicate policy intentions and strategies clearly. Given this, markets should not be greatly surprised by either the timing or the pace of normalization. In fact, it bears mentioning that, following the taper tantrum, when the Fed started to taper its purchases, there was little reaction from markets. The tightening of U.S. policy will begin only when the U.S. expansion has advanced far enough--when we have seen further improvement in the labor market and when we are reasonably confident that the inflation rate will rise to our 2 percent goal. 18 The stronger U.S. economy should directly benefit our foreign trading partners by raising the demand for their exports, and perhaps also indirectly, by boosting confidence globally. And if foreign growth is weaker than anticipated, the consequences for the U.S. economy could lead the Fed to remove accommodation more slowly than otherwise. The EMEs themselves have generally done a good job of reducing their financial and economic vulnerabilities over the past couple of decades, which should bolster their resilience should normalization lead to financial market stresses. Since the 1990s, many EMEs have made remarkable progress in reducing inflation, improving government debt ratios, building foreign reserves, and better regulating and capitalizing their banking systems. In addition, the development of local-currency debt markets has made EMEs less vulnerable to exchange rate fluctuations. To be sure, some EMEs continue to face a wide array of structural and policy challenges, including, prominently, rapid credit growth. But it does not seem that the overall risks to global financial stability are unusually elevated at this time. Nevertheless, it could be that some more vulnerable economies, including those that pursue overly rigid exchange rate policies, may find the road to normalization somewhat bumpier. This gives all the more reason for the Fed and other major central banks to communicate policy intentions clearly and for EMEs to continue to strengthen their policy frameworks and to consider their own policy responses to the forthcoming normalization in the United States and some other advanced economies. III. The Fed's Responsibility to the Global Economy So far, I have focused on the immediate spillovers of U.S. monetary policy abroad and the feedback of those effects to the U.S. economy. More tacitly than explicitly stated has been my view that the United States is not just any economy and, thus, the Federal Reserve not just any central bank. The U.S. economy represents nearly one-fourth of the global economy measured at market rates and a similar share of gross capital flows. The significant size and international linkages of the U.S. economy mean that economic and financial developments in the United States have global spillovers. It is, therefore, important to ask, what is the Federal Reserve's responsibility to the global economy? First and foremost, it is to keep our own house in order. Economic and financial volatility in any country can have negative consequences for the world, but sizable and significant spillovers are almost assured from an economy that is large. There is no question that sharp declines in U.S. output or large deviations of U.S. inflation from its target level would have adverse effects on the global economy. Conversely, strong and stable U.S. growth in the context of inflation close to our policy objective has substantial benefits for the world. Thus, as part of our efforts to achieve our congressionally mandated objective of maximum sustainable employment and price stability, the Federal Reserve will also seek to minimize adverse spillovers and maximize the beneficial effect of the U.S. economy on the global economy. As the recent financial crisis showed all too clearly, to achieve this objective, we must take financial stability into account. For half a decade, we have been working to understand and better guard against the financial disruptions that were the genesis of the Great Recession. These efforts have spawned many speeches, including some of my own, which testify to our efforts. 19 In these speeches, we often emphasize that, given the integration of global capital markets, what happens in one market affects others. Thus, our efforts to stabilize the U.S. financial system also have positive spillovers abroad. These financial stability responsibilities do not stop at our borders, given the size and openness of our capital markets and the unique position of the U.S. dollar as the world's leading currency for financial transactions. For example, the global financial crisis highlighted the extent of borrowing and lending in U.S. dollars by foreign financial institutions. When these institutions came under pressure, their actions contributed to the strains in both foreign and domestic dollar funding markets. To achieve financial stability domestically and maintain the flow of credit to American households and businesses, we took action. Importantly, we developed swap facilities with central banks in countries that represented major financial markets or trading centers in order to facilitate the provision of dollar liquidity to these markets. We did so in recognition of the scope of dollar markets and dollar-denominated transactions outside of our country, the benefits they provide to U.S. households and firms, and the adverse consequences to our financial markets if these centers lose access to dollar liquidity. We have continued to maintain swap facilities with a number of central banks. Although usage is currently very low, these facilities represent an important backstop in the event of a resurgence in global financial tensions. But I should caution that the responsibility of the Fed is not unbounded. My teacher Charles Kindleberger argued that stability of the international financial system could best be supported by the leadership of a financial hegemon or a global central bank. 20 But I should be clear that the U.S. Federal Reserve System is not that bank. Our mandate, like that of virtually all central banks, focuses on domestic objectives. As I have described, to meet those domestic objectives, we must recognize the effect of our actions abroad, and, by meeting those domestic objectives, we best minimize the negative spillovers we have to the global economy. And because the dollar features so prominently in international transactions, we must be mindful that our markets extend beyond our borders and take precautions, as we have done before, to provide liquidity when necessary. That said, the world is not without other resources to guard against adverse economic and financial spillovers. Most obviously, the International Monetary Fund has played and will continue to play a critical role in providing liquidity and financial support to its member countries. In the United States, we are working to ensure that our financial institutions and other market participants are prepared for the normalization of monetary policy and the return to a world of higher interest rates. It is equally important that individuals, businesses, and institutions around the world do the same. For our part, the Federal Reserve will promote a smooth transition by communicating our assessment of the economy and our policy intentions as clearly as possible. IV. Concluding Remarks To summarize and conclude, the Fed's statutory objectives are defined by its dual mandate to pursue maximum sustainable employment and price stability in the U.S. economy. But the U.S. economy and the economies of the rest of the world have important feedback effects on each other. To make coherent policy choices, we have to take these feedback effects into account. The most important contribution that U.S. policymakers can make to the health of the world economy is to keep our own house in order--and the same goes for all countries. Because the dollar is the primary international currency, we have, in the past, had to take action--particularly in times of global economic crisis--to maintain order in international capital markets, such as the central bank liquidity swap lines extended during the global financial crisis. In that case, we were acting in accordance with our dual mandate, in the interest of the U.S. economy, by taking actions that also benefit the world economy. Going forward, we will continue to be guided by those same principles. References Ahmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (2014). " Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World? " Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 48 (November), pp. 221-28. Avdjiev, Stefan, and Előd Takáts (2014). " Cross-Border Bank Lending during the Taper Tantrum: The Role of Emerging Market Fundamentals (PDF) ," BIS Quarterly Review, September, pp. 49-60. Bernanke, Ben S. (2010a). " The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, August 27. ------ (2010b). " Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress ," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, July 21. ------ (2012). " U.S. Monetary Policy and International Implications ," speech delivered at "Challenges of the Global Financial System: Risks and Governance under Evolving Globalization," a seminar sponsored by the Bank of Japan and the International Monetary Fund, Tokyo, Japan, October 14. ------ (2014). " The Federal Reserve: Looking Back, Looking Forward ," speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Philadelphia, January 3. Borio, Claudio, and Haibin Zhu (2012). " Capital Regulation, Risk-Taking and Monetary Policy: A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism? " Journal of Financial Stability , vol. 8 (December), pp. 236-51. Bowman, David, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2014). " U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Papers 1109. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin (2015). " Cross-Border Banking and Global Liquidity ," Review of Economic Studies, vol. 82 (April), pp. 535-64. Chen, Qianying, Andrew Filardo, Dong He, and Feng Zhu (2012). " International Spillovers of Central Bank Balance Sheet Policies (PDF) ," BIS Papers Series 66p. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, October. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). " Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply ," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 108 (May), pp. 425-48. Ehrmann, Michael, and Marcel Fratzscher (2005). " Equal Size, Equal Role? Interest Rate Interdependence between the Euro Area and the United States ," Economic Journal, vol. 115 (October), pp. 930-50. ------ (2009). " Global Financial Transmission of Monetary Policy Shocks ," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics , vol. 71 (December), pp. 739-59. Federal Open Market Committee (2014). Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF) . Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 28. Fischer, Stanley (2014). " Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We? " speech delivered at the Martin Feldstein Lecture at the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. Fleming, J. Marcus (1962). "Domestic Financial Policies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange Rates," International Monetary Fund Staff Papers , vol. 9 (November), pp. 369-80. Fratzscher, Marcel (2012). " Capital Flows, Push versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis ," Journal of International Economics, vol. 88 (November), pp. 341-56. Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). " On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 1557. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, June. Furceri, Davide, Stephanie Guichard, and Elena Rusticelli (2011). " Medium-Term Determinants of International Investment Positions: The Role of Structural Policies ," OECD Economics Department Working Paper Series 863. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, May. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). " Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF) " Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, vol. 17 (May), pp. 41-59. Glick, Reuven, and Sylvain Leduc (2013). " The Effects of Unconventional and Conventional U.S. Monetary Policy on the Dollar (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 2013‑11. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). " The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44 (February), pp. 3-46. Hanson, Samuel G., and Jeremy C. Stein (2015). " Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates ," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 115 (March), pp. 429-48. Hausman, Joshua, and Jon Wongswan (2011). " Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements ," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 30 (April), pp. 547-71. Hume, David (1742). " Of Interest ," Political Discourses, essay IV, in Eugene F. Miller, ed., Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary . Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, Inc. (1987). Joyce, Michael A.S., Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011). " The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom ," International Journal of Central Banking , vol. 7 (September), pp. 113-61. Kindleberger, Charles P. (1986). The World in Depression, 1929-1939. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press. Luca, Oana, and Nikola Spatafora (2012). " Capital Inflows, Financial Development, and Domestic Investment: Determinants and Inter-Relationships (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper Series WP/12/120. Washington: International Monetary Fund, May. Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2014). " Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary Policy: A Global Game Approach (PDF) ," working paper, Princeton University, January. Mundell, Robert A. (1963). "Capital Mobility and Stabilization Policy under Fixed and Flexible Exchange Rates," Canadian Journal of Economic and Political Science , vol. 29 (November), pp. 475-85. Neely, Christopher J. (2011). " The Large-Scale Asset Purchases Had Large International Effects (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 2010-018C. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, January . Powell, Jerome H. (2013). " Advanced Economy Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies ," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2013 Asia Economic Policy Conference, San Francisco, November 4. Rey, Hélène (2015). " Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence (PDF) ," NBER Working Paper Series 21162. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Rogers, John H., Chiara Scotti, and Jonathan H. Wright (2014). " Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Comparison (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Papers 1101. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Sahay, Ratna, Vivek Arora, Thanos Arvanitis, Hamid Faruqee, Papa N'Diaye, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, and an IMF Team (2014). " Emerging Market Volatility: Lessons from the Taper Tantrum (PDF) ," IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/14/09. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September. Takáts, Előd, and Abraham Vela (2014). " International Monetary Policy Transmission (PDF) ," BIS Papers Series 78. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, August. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2014). " Stress Testing after Five Years ," speech delivered at the Third Annual Stress Test Modeling Symposium, sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, June 25. Yellen, Janet L. (2014). " Monetary Policy and Financial Stability ," speech delivered at the 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, July 2. ------ (2015). " Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives ," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27. 1. I am grateful to John Ammer, Christopher Erceg, Joseph Gruber, and Beth Anne Wilson of the Federal Reserve Board's staff for their assistance in preparing these remarks. Return to text 2. This lecture is an updated and shortened version of the Per Jacobsson lecture that I delivered in October 2014. Return to text 3. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has judged that 2 percent inflation in the price of personal consumption expenditures is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate. For more information, see Federal Open Market Committee (2014). The Fed also has separate responsibilities for promoting financial stability (some of which are spelled out in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010) that are, in many respects, complementary to the dual mandate. See Yellen (2014) for further discussion. Return to text 4. For a discussion of the effect of Federal Reserve actions on international economic conditions, see Rey (2015). Return to text 5. See Hume (1742). Return to text 6. See Mundell (1963) and Fleming (1962). One key implication of the Mundell-Fleming framework is that a central bank can exercise full control over both the exchange rate and the domestic interest rate only when there are significant barriers to the international capital mobility. Accordingly, policymakers face the constraint of the "impossible trinity," which states that a country cannot simultaneously have an independent monetary policy, free capital movement, and a fixed exchange rate. Return to text 7. Several recent papers discuss risk-taking channels through which monetary policy influences financial conditions more broadly than the level of safe interest rates. See Borio and Zhu (2012), Rey (2015), Morris and Shin (2014), Bruno and Shin (2015), and the Hanson and Stein (2015) "reaching for yield" concept. Return to text 8. Studies using panel data typically have found that country-specific factors help explain cross-sectional differences in international investment and capital flows. See, for example, Furceri, Guichard, and Rusticelli (2011); Fratzscher (2012); and Luca and Spatafora (2012). Avdjiev and Takáts's (2014) study of cross-border bank lending during the "taper tantrum" shows a larger pullback for countries with weaker current account balances, and Sahay and others (2014) find that country-specific market reactions during this period also were affected by high inflation, weak growth prospects, and relatively low reserves. Return to text 9. See, for example, Bernanke (2010a, 2010b). Return to text 10. See, for example, D'Amico and King (2013); Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2011); Hamilton and Wu (2012); and Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014). Return to text 11. See Neely (2011); Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub (2013); Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014); and Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014). Also, Ahmed and Zlate (2014) show that both conventional and nonconventional U.S. monetary expansion have driven capital flows into EMEs. Return to text 12. See Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014) and Chen, Filardo, He, and Zhu (2012) for more systematic evidence. Return to text 13. See, for example, Rogers, Scotti, and Wright's (2014) recent event study of central bank announcement effects on sovereign yields in different countries. Similarly, earlier work by Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2005) finds larger reactions in euro-area interest rates to U.S. rate changes than vice versa. Return to text 14. See, for example, Ehrmann and Fratzscher (2009) and Hausman and Wongswan (2011). Return to text 15. Among studies of spillovers from conventional versus unconventional U.S. monetary policy, Rogers, Scotti, and Wright (2014) report no significant differences in relative announcement effects on advanced foreign economy asset prices and Treasury yields; Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2014) find similar EME asset price responses; Takáts and Vela (2014) report mixed results for EMEs, with a weaker post-2007 relationship in levels of EME policy rates with U.S. rates but a stronger post-2008 relationship in levels of five-year yields; and Glick and Leduc (2013) also report similar spillovers to exchange rates. The effects of the Bank of England's quantitative easing program on corporate bond yields and sterling exchange rates are similar to predictions from a model estimated over an earlier period by Joyce, Lasaosa, Stevens, and Tong (2011). Return to text 16. See the discussion in Bernanke (2012). Return to text 17. Powell (2013) notes that EMEs with larger current account deficits experienced both greater depreciations of their currencies and larger increases in their bond yields in mid-2013, suggesting that, while a reassessment of U.S. monetary policy may have triggered the retrenchment from EME assets, investor concerns about underlying vulnerabilities appear to have amplified the reactions. Return to text 18. See Yellen (2015) for further discussion of the determinants of the pace of normalization. Return to text 19. Bernanke (2014), Fischer (2014), and Tarullo (2014) also discuss concrete steps that U.S. authorities have taken in the past five years to implement financial reform of large financial institutions (including introducing a systematic framework for stress-testing, stronger capital and liquidity requirements, and progress on resolution mechanisms for failed institutions), of financial market infrastructures, and in short-term funding markets. Return to text 20. See Kindleberger (1986). Return to text Last Update: May 26, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the International Monetary Conference, Toronto, Canada Share There have been many economic and financial crises since the Mexican crisis that began in December 1994. Michel Camdessus, then Managing Director of the IMF, called the Mexican crisis "the first economic crisis of the twenty first century"--by which he meant that it was the first emerging market country crisis whose immediate roots were more in the capital account than in the current account of the balance of payments. The Mexican crisis was followed by the crises of East Asia, including Thailand, Indonesia and Korea that started in the second half of 1997. The crisis also affected Malaysia, which by imposing capital controls and other measures avoided having to enter an IMF program. The current Japanese crisis began in the 1990s, but was not then seen as a possible forerunner of crises among the industrialized countries of North America and Europe. The problems of East Asia were followed by crises in Russia, Brazil, Turkey and Argentina. All these took place during the Great Moderation, the moderation being the decline in inflation and greater stability of output that occurred in much of the industrialized world. The Great Moderation was ascribed primarily to the switch in many countries to an inflation targeting approach to monetary policy. The Mexican crisis began within four months of my joining the IMF. I left the Fund at the end of August 2001, and a few months later the string of crises seemed to be drawing to its close after Argentina abandoned the peg of its peso to the dollar. For a few years it seemed that whatever measures had been put in place to deal with the myriad crises had been successful, as the frequency and intensity of crises declined in the first half of the aughts. And then, in 2008, came the Great Recession and the Great Financial Crisis in the United States--a once-in-a-century event (one hopes), with deep worldwide repercussions. Nearly seven years after the failure of Lehman Brothers, the economies of the United States, Japan, countries within the Euro zone and other European countries who continue to use their own currencies, among them the United Kingdom, are still struggling to return to sustained growth, two percent inflation rates, and positive real central bank interest rates, and thus to leave behind the imprint of the Great Recession. I. Learning from Crises Folk wisdom, policymakers and researchers see opportunities in crises. Everyone is familiar with the notion that one should never waste a crisis. Jean Monnet, among the founders of the European Union, said that "Europe will be forged in crises, and will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises." 1 European Union and EMU decision-makers have made similar statements in each of their crises, including the present one. And when talking about the present situation, they often conclude by saying "And we will emerge stronger this time too." Policy economists seek to learn from crises, so that they can do better next time. During the thirty years from 1985 to 2015, I have been involved in a variety of roles in the management of crises, starting from the successful Israeli stabilization program of 1985, during which I was part of a small team advising then Secretary of State, George Shultz, and through the ongoing management of monetary policy in the United States today, where we are engaged in managing the expected exit from the policies adopted by the Fed to deal with the Great Recession. This morning I want to talk about major lessons learned from the economic crises of the last twenty years, many of them crises in which I was involved. I draw on three papers on lessons of crises that I wrote at different stages during that period. The three papers were written in 1999 (when I was at the IMF), 2011 (when I was Governor of the Bank of Israel), and 2014 (when I had been nominated but not yet confirmed as Vice-Chairman of the Fed.) The ten lessons presented in each paper are summarized in Table 1 . Each lesson is numbered, and each bears a letter: F for the 1999 paper (written when I was at the IMF); B for the 2011 paper, when I was at the Bank of Israel; and S for SIEPR 2 , where the 2014 paper was presented. Each of the lists reflects the concerns of the times and circumstances in which it was written. The 1999 paper was written at a time when the IMF was under criticism for its handling of the many crises with which it had been confronted since 1994. It was a time of far less transparency than today. For instance, in May of 1997 when I paid a secret visit to Thailand to try to gauge the seriousness of their situation, and asked for data on their international reserves, I was told that I could get them--on condition I not pass them on to anyone else in the Fund. This was an offer I had no difficulty in refusing. In addition to lessons in the 1999 paper relating to the Fund, it is clear from the conclusions presented in F5 (Keynesianism), F6 (bank and debt restructuring) and F7 (exchange rates) that the Fund had drawn the correct critical lessons on several of the central issues of economic policy. It is also clear from F8 that we were surprised--pleasantly so--that despite the pessimism of many that the Asian crisis spelled the beginning of the end of globalization, we had already concluded that very few countries, if any, intended to withdraw from the international economic system. The 2011 paper reflects lessons both about policy--especially the critical role of the exchange rate for small open economies--and about crisis management, some of which I learned from my experience as Governor of the Bank of Israel. Both B9 (don't panic in a crisis) and B10 are rules of behavior for those managing economic crises, or indeed any crisis. I included B10, "Never say never" because in a crisis a decision-maker may sometimes find him- or herself having to undertake a policy action that they were sure they would never do and which, furthermore, they dislike doing. The 2014 paper was written while I was focusing on joining the Fed, and thus includes in S5 and S7 issues that remain on the agenda today. I will return to the issues of moral hazard and too big to fail as I turn next to five major lessons that we should draw from the experiences that lie behind the three columns of Table 1. II. The Main Lessons. I will focus on five major issues, leaving the most important--lessons relating to the financial system and its regulation and supervision--to the last. 3 Lesson T1: Monetary policy at the Zero Lower Bound . 4 Before the Great Recession, textbooks used to say that once the central bank interest rate had reached zero, monetary policy could not be made more expansionary--otherwise known as the liquidity trap. The argument was that the central bank could not reduce the interest rate below zero, since at a zero interest rate people could hold currency, on which the nominal interest rate is zero--which implies that the nominal interest rate could not decline below zero. Almost immediately after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the Fed began to undertake policies of Quantitative Easing (QE), in two forms: first, by buying assets of longer duration on a large scale, thus lowering longer term rates and making monetary policy effectively more expansionary; and second, by operating as market maker of last resort in markets that in the panic had seemed to stop working--for example, the commercial paper market. Did these policies work? The econometric evidence says yes. So does the evidence of one's eyes. For instance, the recent inauguration of the ECB's QE policy seemed to have an immediate effect not only on European interest rates, but also on longer-term rates in the United States. More recently, policymakers in several jurisdictions have discovered that zero is not the lower bound on interest rates. The reason is that it is not costless to hold currency: there are costs of storage, and insurance costs to cover the potential for theft of or damage to the currency. We do not know how low the interest rate can go--but do know that it can go below zero. Whether it can be reduced much below minus one percent remains to be seen--and many would prefer that we don't go there. 5 Lesson T2: Monetary policy in normal times. 6 In normal times, monetary policy should continue to be targeted at inflation and at output or employment. 7 Typically, central bank laws also include some mention of financial stability as a responsibility of the central bank. At this stage the institutional arrangements under which different central banks exercise their financial stability mandate vary across countries, and depend to a considerable extent on the tools that the central bank has at its command. It will take time for the advantages and disadvantages of different arrangements to be evaluated and recommendations on what works best to be developed. On paper, the British approach of setting up nearly parallel committees for monetary policy and for macroprudential financial supervision and regulation appears to be a leading model. Another issue that remains to be settled is that of the possible use of monetary policy, i.e. the interest rate, to deal with financial stability. For instance, for some time several economists--including those working at the BIS--have been urging an increase in the interest rate to restore risk premia to more normal levels. Most central bankers say they would prefer to use macroprudential tools rather than the interest rate for this purpose. While such tools would have the advantage of being directly targeted at the problem that is to be solved, it is not clear that there are sufficiently strong macroprudential tools to deal with all financial instability problems, and it would make sense not to rule out the possible use of the interest rate for this purpose, particularly when other tools appear to be lacking. Lesson T3: Active fiscal policy. 8 There is a great deal of evidence that fiscal policy works well, almost everywhere, perhaps especially well when the interest rate is at its effective lower bound. Because the lags with which fiscal policy affects the economy may be relatively long (particularly the "decision lag", the lag between a situation developing in which fiscal policy should become more expansionary and the decision to undertake such a policy), automatic stabilizers can play an important stabilizing role. Another important fiscal policy discussion is currently taking place in the United States. Infrastructure in the United States has been deteriorating, and government borrowing costs are exceptionally low. Many economists argue that this is a time at which fiscal policy can be made more expansionary at low real cost, by borrowing to finance a program to strengthen the physical infrastructure of the American economy. This would mean a temporary increase in the budget deficit while the spending takes place. That spending would have positive benefits--both an increase in aggregate demand as the infrastructure is built, and later an increase in aggregate supply as the positive impact of the increase in the capital stock due to the investment in infrastructure comes into effect--that under current circumstances would outweigh the costs of its financing. More generally, the case for more expansionary fiscal policy has always to take into account the consequences of greater debt on future interest rates and on the flexibility of future fiscal policy. In this regard, government intervention to save banks has in some countries resulted in massive increases in the size of the government debt as a share of GDP, as in Ireland at the start of the Great Financial Crisis, when the Irish government stepped in to guarantee bank liabilities. This process is aptly known as a "doom loop". Lesson T4: The lender of last resort, TBTF, and moral hazard . 9 The role of the central bank as lender of last resort is a central theme in Walter Bagehot's 1873 classic on central banking, Lombard Street . The case for the central bank to be the lender of last resort is clear in the case of a liquidity crisis--one that arises from a temporary shortage of liquidity, typically in a financial panic--but less so in the case of solvency crises. 10 In principle the distinction between liquidity and solvency problems should guide the actions of the central bank and the government in a financial crisis. But in a crisis, the distinction between illiquidity and insolvency is rarely clear-cut--and whether a company goes bankrupt will depend on how the authorities respond to the crisis. Further, one has to be clear about which aspects of government actions are critical in this regard. If a firm is bankrupt, it may well be optimal for the firm to continue to operate while being reorganized, as typically happens in bankruptcies. In such a case, in which the firm's capital is negative, the ownership of the bankrupt firm should be changed--unless the owners succeed in mobilizing more capital, in which case the company was probably not bankrupt. If the government is dealing with a bank, or other financial institution, with an extremely large balance sheet and multiple interactions with the rest of the financial system, putting the firm into bankruptcy without a plan to continue its most important activities from the viewpoint of the financial system and the economy, may induce a financial and economic crisis of the order of magnitude that followed the Lehman bankruptcy. This is where the moral hazard issue arises. If the owners of a company are saved by official actions in circumstances where the company would otherwise have gone bankrupt, it will appear that the government is saving Wall Street at the expense of Main Street. One may argue that saving financial institutions would be good for Main Street. The lender of last resort may well be producing a result that is better for everyone in the economy when it intervenes in a financial crisis. But since the counterfactuals are difficult to establish, and the moral hazard argument is easy to deploy, the public sector may shy away from acting as lender of last resort except in extremis . Hence the phenomenon of too big to fail. If policymakers reach a point at which they confront a choice between allowing a large and/or systemically interconnected bank to fail without their having reasonable assurance that its essential activities will continue, they may well step in to "save" the financial institution. By "save", I mean, allow the bank to continue to exist and to carry out the functions that are needed to prevent a financial crisis. It is essential to emphasize that this requires a resolution process that does not, and should not, preclude actions to ensure that equity and bond holders lose all or most of the value of their assets, to an extent that depends on circumstances. And the ability to do this depends on the resolution processes for insolvent financial institutions. In this context, the progress that has been made since 2008 in developing effective resolution mechanisms will play a key role in dealing with the too big to fail problem by significantly reducing the probability of a bank being too big to fail. This is a good point at which to turn to the regulation and supervision of the financial system. Lesson T5: Regulation and supervision of the financial system . 11 The natural and sensible reaction to the problem that the central bank and the government face when the dark clouds of a massive financial crisis appear on the horizon, is to make two sets of decisions. The first relates to its immediate actions and the short run, where the goal should be to intervene in a way that prevents the massive crisis, at minimum future cost to the economy and the society. The second is for the longer run, to rebuild the financial system in such a way that the probability of having to confront such a situation again is reduced to a very low level. Hence regulations should be strengthened, essentially as they have been recently, through the activities of governments, legislators, and regulators in most countries. In the case of the United States, most of the important changes have been introduced though the Dodd-Frank Act, and they have been supplemented by decisions of the regulators and the supervisors. We are now at a difficult point. Regulations have been strengthened and the bankers' backlash is both evident and making headway. Of course, there should be feedback from the regulated to the regulators, and the regulated have the right to appeal to their legislators. But often when bankers complain about regulations, they give the impression that financial crises are now a thing of the past, and furthermore in many cases, that they played no role in the previous crisis. We should not make the mistake of believing that we have put an end to financial crises. We can strengthen the financial system, and reduce the frequency and the severity of financial crises. But we lack the capacity of imagining, anticipating and preventing all future financial sector problems and crises. That given, we need to build a financial system that is strong enough to withstand the type of financial crisis we continue to battle. We can take some comfort--but not much--from the fact that this crisis was handled much better than the financial crisis of the Great Depression. But it still imposed massive costs on the people of the United States and those of other countries that were badly hit by the crisis. No-one should underestimate the costs of the financial crisis to the United States and the world economies. We are in the seventh year of dealing with the consequences of that crisis, and the world economy is still growing very slowly. Confidence in the financial system and the growth of the economy has been profoundly shaken. There is a lively discussion going on at present as to whether we have entered a period of secular stagnation as Larry Summers argues, or whether we are seeing a more frequent phenomenon--that recessions accompanied by financial crises are typically deep and long, as Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff's research implies. Ken Rogoff calls this a "debt supercycle". It may take many years until we know the answer to the question of whether we are in a situation of secular stagnation or a debt supercycle. Either way, there is now growing evidence that recessions lead not only to a lower level of future output, but also to a persistently lower growth rate. Some argue that it was the growth slowdown that caused the financial crisis. This is a hard position to accept for anyone who has looked closely at the behavior of the financial system in the middle of the last decade. We need to remind ourselves that the principle underlying Basel II was that the private sector would manage risk efficiently and effectively, since the last thing a bank would want would be to fail. That did not work out as predicted. A possible reason is that incentives are misaligned. One sees massive fines being imposed on banks. One does not see the individuals who were responsible for some of the worst aspects of bank behavior, for example in the Libor and foreign exchange scandals, being punished severely. Individuals should be punished for any misconduct they personally engaged in. One reason we should worry about future crises is that successful reforms can breed complacency about risks. To the extent that the new regulatory and supervisory framework succeeds in making the financial system more stable, participants in the system will begin to believe that the world is more stable, that we suffered a once in a century crisis, and that the problems that led to it have been solved. And that will cause them to take more risks, to exercise less caution, and eventually, to forget the seriousness of the problems we are confronting today and will confront in the future. This is a process that will one day lead to an unhappy result. You, the regulated, and we, the regulators, will have to work very hard, for a very long time, and then keep on working hard, to reduce the frequency and magnitude of those future crises. Thank you. 1. See Jean Monnet (1976), Memoires, (Paris: Fayard). Return to text 2. Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research. Return to text 3. The lesson numbers in this paper are preceded by the letter "T" for Toronto. Return to text 4. This appears in Table 1 as B1 and S2. Return to text 5. There are fascinating issues about how a hypothetical monetary system without currency would operate, and what interest rates the central bank should attempt to control in such a situation--but we will have to leave those issues for another occasion. Return to text 6. This is topic B8 in Table 1. Return to text 7. In most modern central bank laws, the central bank's policy goals include both inflation and a measure of economic activity, although more often than not, the inflation goal is defined as more important than the output or employment goal. By contrast, the Fed has a dual mandate that gives equal weight to both inflation and employment. I believe that in practice almost all central banks give approximately equal weight to their inflation and employment or output goals. Return to text 8. This issue appears in Table 1 as S1 and F5. Return to text 9. These issues are discussed in S5, S7 and B5. Return to text 10. I am quoting here from my 2011 paper, "Central bank lessons from the global crisis." ( http://www.bis.org/review/r110414f.pdf ) Return to text 11. These issues are discussed in S3, S4, S6, B2, B3, and F6. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible version Last Update: June 01, 2015 Back to Top
