Remarks at the Culture Imperative – An Interbank Symposium - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Remarks at the Culture Imperative – An Interbank Symposium January 11, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Culture Imperative – An Interbank Symposium at the Convene Conference Center, New York City As prepared for delivery I very much appreciate having the opportunity to participate in today’s program. Improving the culture of financial services is an important issue for me and my colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as well as for many senior policymakers both domestically and abroad. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Why should we seek better culture in the financial services industry? We do this to achieve better outcomes in terms of conduct and behavior—and, with that, greater trustworthiness in our nation’s financial system. Greater trustworthiness will make it easier for the financial industry to perform its role in supporting economic activity and rising living standards. Greater trustworthiness will also make it easier to attract top talent into the industry. Without that, the industry will suffer. The focus of today’s event is the role you can play as future leaders of the industry. Your firms selected you to attend because of your career success thus far and your potential for senior leadership. It is timely, therefore, for you to consider what type of leader you want to be, what type of firm you want to lead, and what type of industry you want to work in and influence. I have some views on all three, which we will get to in a moment. I am encouraged that members of the industry have convened here today to engage on these issues. I think it is important that the industry tackle this together. You can learn from one another. And, given the scandals of recent years, you really do have to sink or swim together. Before the recent spate of conduct problems, there were times when one might be secretly happy when a competitor stumbled through some sort of misconduct. All the better if such a stumble generated negative publicity and headlines. Today, the situation is vastly different. When each new scandal emerges, the industry is painted with the same broad brush. This underscores the importance of taking both individual and collective responsibility for reform. You have a personal stake in improving bank culture. Your firms have a stake too. And so does the industry. There are three messages I am going to focus on today: First , stay in banking and be good role models of the behaviors and conduct that we all want to see. It’s important. The banking industry needs your talents. And, if done the right way, it will result in a fulfilling career. Second , banking does not have its own ethics—nor should it have its own ethics. The qualities that you value in other aspects of your life should be the same qualities you apply at work and encourage in your colleagues. Third , candid assessment is critical to improving culture. I invite you to think in particular about the incentives and norms of behavior within your organizations. Do they support or impair the qualities and principles that guide you and that your firm espouses? Before expanding on those points, let me explain why I believe that reforming culture is important, and justifies the time and effort of not only of today’s program, but of the ongoing work at your institutions and collectively across the industry. The manipulations of LIBOR and foreign exchange rates prompted the New York Fed’s work on culture. Of course, widespread misconduct did not originate with either episode. The timing, however, was significant. Despite the near-death experience of the financial crisis, new rules and regulations, and―in some cases―large fines and penalties, the LIBOR and FX events made clear that serious ethical and behavioral problems had persisted in the industry. I was particularly struck by how the manipulation of foreign exchange rates occurred even after the LIBOR fixing was widely known. The appropriate lessons from the LIBOR scandal did not seem to have been learned. That was both surprising and profoundly disappointing to me. The LIBOR and FX collusions were not occasional atonalities in an otherwise harmonious financial system. They were not two remote tail risks that both happened to materialize, or just a bad coincidence. There have been too many examples of other misconduct to list. Wells Fargo is the most recent example, but serious misconduct is not confined to a single jurisdiction or a business model. The evidence, which now stretches over a decade, has only reaffirmed my initial belief that there is an industry-wide problem. In light of these continuing and widespread failures, my colleagues and I recognize the importance of culture—that is the unwritten norms and accepted practices of an organization. The culture of each firm will necessarily be its own. But the pervasiveness of problems—across firms and countries—points to common, industry-wide norms that need attention. An industry-wide problem needs an industry-wide solution. I also think that, when the problem is cultural, any solution must be industry-driven. It is the public sector’s job to establish and enforce rules, but rules face some inherent limits in shaping conduct and behavior. It is natural to adapt to the behaviors that we observe around us. A common illustration of this point is the speed limit. Most drivers move with the flow of traffic. They pay less attention to a number posted on a sign. This is not to deny the necessity and importance of regulation, or to criticize any of the particular rules imposed in response to the financial crisis. But, we also must recognize that it is impossible to create a rule for every situation. Also, rules tend to be reactive rather than proactive. Rulemakers—whether they be members of Congress, regulators or judges—are almost always responding to events. And, even if rules could cover every situation, having a rule does not mean that people will always follow it. In many recent examples, the behaviors we observed violated rules already on the books. Thus, more rules and penalties alone will not cure the industry’s underlying problems. They are necessary, but not sufficient. What’s more, establishment of too many brightline rules may prove counterproductive in encouraging a good culture. For one thing, intricate and detailed rules can be construed as implying that the responsibility for good conduct rests with supervisors and regulators. For another, rules may create opportunities or incentives for legal or regulatory arbitrage—finding creative ways around rules. And this activity may, in itself, have insidious effects on culture. As I see it, the problem occurs when an organization’s culture equates “what is right” with what is legally permissible, and when “what is wrong” becomes equivalent to what is legally impermissible. The technical legality of the rule, not the propriety of our conduct, becomes the arbiter of our actions. A proliferation of rules may prompt us to ask first what we can do, not what we should do. Legal arbitrage is intellectually energetic, but ethically lazy. And, as U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York Preet Bharara has observed, if you spend your time thinking about how close to the line you can get, it is inevitable that you will at some point cross that line. No one gets the arbitrage right 100 percent of the time. 2 When you make that mistake, you will not only have a bad culture, but you will also have to deal with Preet Bharara’s office. Therefore, what’s needed is a better culture. Culture can help to fill in the spaces between and beyond rules. Culture also shapes our attitude toward rules. A strong, ethical culture is one in which individuals within an organization demonstrate to each other a commitment to certain first principles. These principles must align with both the private purpose of the organization and the public rules governing its operations. Of course, it is possible for principles to conflict. When that occurs, determining the right course will be difficult. But, the more you wrestle with that conflict, the better you will become at resolving ethical quandaries. Aristotle called this aspect of ethics “habit,” but I prefer to think of it as ethical muscle memory. The more practice you have in thinking about it, the better you will be at determining what is right. Bankers will be more likely to think about what is right, as opposed to what is merely legal, the more often they observe their colleagues doing the same. I doubt that rules alone can accomplish this. Telling people to be ethical doesn’t make it so. Seeing others engage in ethical decision-making is, by contrast, quite powerful. With that prologue, let me turn to my first message: Stay in banking. This might be a surprising message in light of my introduction. Nonetheless, banking is important work. Society relies on its financial system to “create substantial value for our society.” 3 As investor and author John Bogle has written: “[Banking and finance] facilitate the optimal allocation of capital among a variety of users; it enables buyers and savers to meet efficiently; it provides remarkable liquidity; it enhances the ability of investors to capitalize on the discounted value of future cash flows, and other investors to acquire the right to those cash flows; it creates financial instruments [. . . ] that enable investors to assume additional risks, or to divest themselves of a variety of risks by transferring those risks to others.” 4 To fulfill its potential for creating value for society, the financial system needs talented and dedicated people at the helm. This is especially true for banks, which are indispensable to our economic system. As the philosopher Onora O’Neill has observed, banking requires more than just technical competence. 5 Bankers must reproduce their efforts and results with reliability. And, above all, bankers must be honest. They must do what they say and say what they mean. This is necessary for the financial system to be viewed as trustworthy. Without that, the financial industry cannot be effective in performing its key roles. Cultivating these three traits emphasized by Onora O’Neill—competence, reliability and honesty—will help enable you to have a personally fulfilling career. The best doctors or lawyers do their work not only because it pays well, but because it is interesting and contributes an important service to society. I hope you feel the same about what you do. And if you don’t, I urge you to consider how your industry can become more professionally fulfilling. What is needed for you to feel better about your work, to sleep more soundly, to worry less about the risk posed to your business by potential misconduct? Your professional fulfillment will grow if you also contribute to promoting these qualities in others—that is, by helping to improve the culture of financial services. It is easier to be smart, dependable and trustworthy when you are surrounded by other people who also fit that description. My second message is to reject the idea that a separate regime of ethics or morality applies in banking. I’m sure you have heard this, or perhaps even thought this, at some point in your career. Let it end there. We often teach our children by asking them if they would engage in that type of behavior at home. This is good professional advice as well. Bankers have been criticized for their ethical and moral shortcomings. That criticism has legitimate grievances at its roots. There have been far too many instances in which bankers have not lived up to expectations. But it is also true—and I’m sure you have experienced this—that you have advanced in your careers because you have demonstrated personal attributes that anyone would be proud to possess. I mentioned before honesty, competence and reliability. You could add to that list hard work, perseverance and responsiveness. Moreover, if you are like me, your careers will have benefitted from teamwork—the good fortune to work with capable colleagues. Individual effort is essential, but success often depends as well on the contributions of others. 6 Whatever list you have come up with, make sure that teamwork is among your core personal principles. I would also like to make a slightly different observation on banker ethics. What’s missing is not so much a personal commitment to good conduct, but rather a commitment to call out bad conduct observed in others. You might think it is a paradox or a contradiction to praise teamwork in one breath, and then in the next breath to call for raising the red flag when you see bad conduct in others. I do not see it that way. We hear often that integrity is a corporate value. I think what is often meant by this is honesty—doing what you say, and saying what you mean. But integrity, to me, has an additional meaning. It means operating according to a single, internally consistent set of principles. If you are honest only in some places or circumstances, but not others—or only with some people, but not others—then honesty is hardly integral or integrated into your life and work. The importance of this particular meaning of “integrity” was made apparent to me on a recent visit I made to the United States Military Academy at West Point. The faculty and students there believe that strong individual ethics are what make large organizations like the U.S. armed forces succeed. The commitment of cadets to living the ideals of the institution was impressive and humbling. They embodied the word integrity—alignment of word and deed in all aspects of life. Another lesson that I took from West Point is that cadets commit to integrity because their careers—and, in combat, their lives—depend on others. We are in this together—this city, this industry, this country. And if we’re in it together, we all have to behave in ways that benefit the group. 7 We have to behave in ways that merit the trust of others. Whether we are citizens or soldiers, the most important relationships in our lives are built on trust. In our personal lives, we take action when our trust has been betrayed. To reform financial services, we need to bring the same expectations of trust—and the consequences of a breach of that trust—to the office each day. If you would not tolerate a practice in your personal life, do not tolerate it in the office. Calling out bad conduct is not easy. Let me share with you another observation from Preet Bharara. A common element in many of the frauds his office has prosecuted is the failure of colleagues to call out bad conduct by raising their hands. This is so telling of a culture that condones or promotes misconduct. People see something, but do not say something. And, it is so shortsighted. It prevents problems from being addressed while they are small. By not raising their hands, these colleagues are “quietly adding risk to your books [and] invisibly enlarging your liabilities.” 8 They are also tacitly encouraging bad conduct by skewing incentives. There may be many reasons for choosing silence over raising your hand. You may face a conflict of loyalties. It’s uncomfortable to tell on a colleague. You may think that the problem will just go away, or that calling attention to a problem will harm the firm. Raising your hand is difficult. But, it is also absolutely necessary. As rising leaders in the industry, you need to lead by example. In doing so, you will make it easier for others to follow your lead. My final message is a request that each of you commit to a candid assessment of yourselves, your firms and your industry. For Adam Smith, candid observation was a cornerstone of economic behavior: “We suppose ourselves the spectators of our own behavior, and endeavor to imagine what effect it would, in this light, produce upon us. This is the only looking glass by which we can, in some measure, with the eyes of other people, scrutinize the propriety of our own conduct.” 9 Candid self-assessment is essential to knowing where you stand and how you are progressing toward your goal. Industry groups here and in other financial centers are working on useful ways to measure culture—consistent with the maxim, “if it’s important, you will measure it.” But, assessment cannot stop there, and it cannot be the job of someone else—such as management, compliance, audit or a regulator. Each of us must also be reflective about our own faults. We must also commit to do better going forward. When it comes to making a candid assessment of your group, your firm and your industry, I would like to suggest that you devote significant attention to incentives. I believe that incentives shape behavior, and behavior drives culture. If you want a culture that will support your long-term business strategy, you need to align incentives with the behaviors that will sustain your business over the long haul. There are many ways of encouraging certain behavior through incentives. Promotion is quite powerful, as is compensation. They are powerful, in part, because they convey values and community esteem. People work hard to earn money. But, most also work hard to earn the trust and respect of colleagues, peers, subordinates and seniors. If you want to know what behaviors are valued or esteemed in reality, look to see who is promoted and well-compensated and the behaviors that they embody. Do the results match what is said? Do they match your expectation of fairness? Do you aspire to be one of these individuals, not because of their status and compensation alone, but because of the esteem you hold for them and their values? Over the long haul, the economy needs a vibrant and trustworthy financial sector in order to thrive, just as the financial sector needs a vibrant economy to thrive as well. You are the rising leaders of your firms. You can help accomplish these aims. A strong and ethical culture in the banking industry will make it more trustworthy, and therefore more effective in performing its mission. It will also help the industry be held in higher esteem and this will help attract the talent needed to sustain the industry. I am encouraged by today’s gathering, and hope you will take heart that an improved culture in the financial services industry is both necessary and possible. Thank you for your continued efforts and your kind attention. 1 Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Thomas Noone, Joseph Sommer and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See Criminal Accountability and Culture , Remarks by Preet Bharara, Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue, October 20, 2016. 3 See John C. Bogle, Enough: True Measures of Money, Business, and Life , 45 (2009). 4 See Bogle, 45-46. 5 See What is Banking For? Remarks by Onora O’Neill, Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue, October 20, 2016. 6 See generally Robert H. Frank, Success and Luck: Good Fortune and the Myth of Meritocracy (2016). 7 See generally Dan Awrey, William Blair, and David Kershaw, “Between Law and Markets: Is There a Role for Culture and Ethics in Financial Regulation?” 38 Del. J. Corp. L. 217 (2013) (discussing the need for “other-regarding” norms in finance). 8 See Criminal Accountability and Culture , Remarks by Preet Bharara, Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue, October 20, 2016. 9 See Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments , Section III.1.5. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

January 17, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the National Retail Federation Annual Convention, Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning. It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at this year’s gathering of the National Retail Federation. Retail activity plays a key role in the U.S. economy, with consumption comprising about two-thirds of total gross domestic product. As such, understanding what is happening in your sector is critical in assessing the economic outlook—and, with that, the outlook for employment, inflation and interest rates. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 This morning, I will be focusing on retail spending—an important element of household consumption. But, I will do so in a way that’s perhaps somewhat different from the usual approach, focusing in particular on the connections between housing and retail sales. I will argue that there have been some dramatic changes that have taken place in the way that households finance their consumption. I believe—and hope to convince you—that changes in the housing and mortgage markets have affected the willingness and ability of households to borrow, and that this, in turn, has had important consequences for the dynamics of consumption over the last decade. It is an important reason why the economic recovery and expansion have been weaker than we would like, despite the efforts of the Federal Reserve to stimulate economic activity. It also matters as we look forward. The good news is that, while the current expansion is quite old in chronological terms, it is still relatively young in terms of the health of household finances. Later in my remarks, I will talk a bit about the outlook for consumer spending in 2017 and beyond. It’s worth starting off with some background in order to develop the linkage between housing wealth and retail spending. Household incomes tend to increase as individuals grow older and become more skilled in their work and better matched to their employers. This tends to continue until they approach retirement age. This means that incomes are much higher later in life than when people first enter the workforce. Ideally, households would like to be able to even out their consumption based on their lifetime incomes, raising consumption in their early adulthood years. In general, this would mean that young people would consume a relatively high share of their incomes, while older people would save more. Indeed, young people might even wish to borrow against some of their future income so that they can enjoy some of those benefits earlier in their lifetimes. However, there are limits on the ability to shift consumption to earlier in life through borrowing. One problem is that lenders don’t have a reliable way to compel repayment of such debts. Consequently, the young may not have access to the credit they need to even out consumption to the extent they would like. A pledge of assets—collateral—can help to solve this problem, since it can be claimed by the lender in the event of a loan default. For most households, the main form of wealth is human capital—the value of the wages that the household members can earn over the course of their lifetimes. But human capital cannot always be credibly pledged as collateral. For funding of educational investments, government intervention in the form of the federally-guaranteed student loan program helps address this problem. While private student loans exist, they typically require a co-signer with a strong credit record. Moreover, these borrowing sources are broadly restricted to education-related spending only. The second most important asset on the balance sheet of many households is housing equity. So, in addition to being a source of shelter, housing can be a major form of collateral for borrowing for many households. In fact, for those households that have collateral available to secure loans, housing equity is by far the most important form of collateral. What this tells us is that the performance of the housing and mortgage markets are important to the retail business. When home prices are rising and housing equity can easily be converted into cash, we can expect to see relatively high levels of consumption, all else equal. Conversely, when home prices are flat or declining, or mortgage credit is tight, this will put a damper on retail spending. Events of the last decade have driven this point home in a very clear way. It is well known that beginning in the mid-1990s and intensifying in the early 2000s, there was a massive U.S. housing boom that dramatically increased the value of residential real estate in the United States. Over the period from 1995 to 2006, the aggregate value of real estate owned by households and nonprofits nearly tripled, rising from $8.6 trillion to nearly $25 trillion. A remarkable, yet not widely-known, fact about this boom period is that while home values were rising very quickly, borrowing was growing almost exactly as fast. Rather than saving the extra wealth that was being generated by the housing boom, households were diverting a large share of it to other purposes. Indeed, the fraction of every additional dollar of households’ housing wealth that was consumed seems to have been higher than that for financial wealth—such as investments in equities and bonds—suggesting that they viewed the increase in home prices as permanent. In order to be able to assess the evolution of household finances more precisely, we worked with Equifax—a major credit bureau—to create a new database that tracks the credit files of a random sample of households over time. From this consumer credit panel data, we conclude that between 2004 and 2006, households were increasing their cash flow by over $200 billion a year by borrowing against their housing equity collateral. They supplemented that with another $185 billion through non-mortgage borrowing. So, at the height of the boom, annual consumption was being supplemented by around $400 billion in cash flow from debt, much of it collateralized by housing. As we now know, homeowners were mistaken in viewing the home price increases during the boom as permanent. Things turned quickly as housing supply increased, home prices softened and mortgage underwriting standards tightened sharply as credit losses on residential mortgage lending climbed. The rise and fall of mortgage securitization activity marked by tranching mortgage cash flows into collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) exacerbated the downturn. Home values began to fall in mid-2006. By 2008, we saw a massive reversal in the way people used their housing equity to finance consumption. People went from borrowing hundreds of billions of dollars per year and increasing their mortgage debt, to paying back hundreds of billions dollars and reducing their mortgage debt. Households deleveraged even apart from the decline in household debt associated with the charge-offs from foreclosures. Instead of $400 billion in net cash flow from increased borrowing, this net cash flow sharply reversed to negative $150 billion by 2010, with increased residential mortgage debt pay-down being the main source. This rapid swing—a reduction of more than $500 billion on an annual basis—in the resources available for household consumption was associated with a sharp and prolonged slump in personal consumption expenditures during the Great Recession. Typically, consumption growth slows but remains positive during a recession. In contrast, consumption actually contracted by over $300 billion during the Great Recession. Between 2009 and 2012, households continued paying down debt of all kinds—with the exception of student loans, which behave differently from most other forms of consumer borrowing. Ultimately, housing prices stabilized and began to increase again in 2012. However, since that turning point in home prices over five years ago, something surprising has happened. Nationally, home values have risen over 40 percent since 2012, and are now very close to their pre-crisis levels on average—just 4 percent below their all-time peak reached in early 2006. Most other kinds of debt—first auto, and now, credit card debt—have joined student debt by starting to rise again, resuming their traditional role in financing consumption. The surprising development is that housing debt has stayed virtually flat. The previous behavior of using housing debt to finance other kinds of consumption seems to have completely disappeared. Instead, people are apparently leaving the wealth generated by rising home prices “locked up” in their homes. The implications of this development have been quite significant for the retail sector. As I noted earlier, housing debt during the boom was rising at essentially the same pace as home values, leaving household leverage ratios more or less constant. If housing debt had risen apace with home prices since 2012—rather than staying flat as it has—then we would once again be seeing housing debt producing cash flows available for consumption of about $200 billion a year. Instead, households continue to divert about $200 billion annually to paying down their housing debt. That’s a difference of roughly $400 billion per year, or about 3 percent of total consumption. Relative to historical patterns the household saving rate currently seems quite high, given the ratio of household net worth to disposable income. So, why has household behavior with respect to housing debt apparently changed so much? As always, the data reflect the result of the interaction between the demand and supply sides of the credit market. One obvious demand-side candidate is that consumers may have become more cautious about housing’s value as a financial investment, or its value as collateral for borrowing to finance consumption. That is, households may have come to view housing wealth as more similar to financial wealth in that changes can be transitory rather than permanent. Consequently, it may be viewed as prudent not to spend too much out of increases in these sources of wealth. Additionally, the deep job losses that occurred during the Great Recession may have also impressed on households the need for precautionary savings against adverse income shocks. In fact, the lessons from the housing boom and bust may have been even more traumatic. There are many versions of this story, and most have a word like “scarring” in them. Perhaps some potential homeowners, having seen the wild gyrations in home prices during the 2000s, have soured on homeownership altogether. This would result in a reduced homeownership rate due to a loss of confidence in housing as a good financial investment. Data indicate that homeownership has declined, especially among younger workers. However, households in our Survey of Consumer Expectations continue to report that they believe that housing is a sound financial investment. So, the explanation for our declining homeownership rate doesn’t appear to be that homeownership has lost its luster as an investment. And, reduced homeownership doesn’t explain why people who still own homes have become less likely to tap their available equity to finance consumption. Other households may have been scarred by the experience of seeing their neighbors who borrowed heavily during the boom lose their homes and have their credit ratings badly damaged. Observing these consequences may dissuade current homeowners from making themselves vulnerable to foreclosure by borrowing against rising home values. This would lead to an increase in a household’s precautionary demand for savings in the form of higher housing equity. This increased equity cushion would guard against the risk that the household could find itself in a negative equity position in the event of a future decline in home prices. With an equity cushion, even if the household were to experience a job loss during a future housing downturn, they would be able to sell their home, pay off the mortgage and avoid any damage to their credit. Homeowners’ desire to finance consumption by borrowing against housing equity might also be diminished by their desire to retain their ability to move easily. The decline in home prices during the bust eliminated many households’ home equity, which is traditionally the source of down payments for households that wish to move and remain homeowners. This mobility might be associated with a change of labor markets or an upgrade of your home or residential location. It is possible that households have saved their newly recovered equity in order to rebuild the capacity to make future down payments and therefore restore this option to move. It is certainly the case that mobility has declined since the housing bust, a fact consistent with this hypothesis. Many homeowners also took advantage of the Federal Reserve’s accommodative monetary policy stance to refinance into very low fixed-rate mortgages. As mortgage rates rise, there is a higher financial cost to extracting housing equity through a cash-out refinancing. The pace of cash-out refinancing has indeed been very low even as housing equity has risen, consistent with this hypothesis. But, owners have other ways of tapping equity, like taking out a second mortgage or a home equity line of credit (HELOC). Interestingly, these forms of housing debt have been paid down even more aggressively than first mortgages. So, the fluctuation in the level of mortgage rates also does not explain the change in household behavior. A final factor that may be reducing the demand for home equity extraction is a change in the distribution of housing equity in the population. Even though aggregate home equity is back to pre-crisis levels, the data indicate that the growth in equity since 2012 has gone disproportionately to older, wealthier households. Presumably, these households have less demand for credit to fund their consumption plans. In contrast, those who would like to convert housing wealth into retail purchases have not yet seen their housing equity restored to its earlier levels—reflecting, in part, slower rates of mortgage balance paydown. In addition, younger and less credit-worthy households also experienced higher relative declines in homeownership rates. While some of these demand-side factors seem to be playing a role in reducing home equity extraction, there is undoubtedly a strong supply-side effect in operation as well. Our consumer credit data indicate that lenders’ adoption of minimum credit scores for mortgage lending and their considerably more rigorous underwriting standards for HELOCs have played a very important role in limiting consumers’ ability to convert home equity into new consumption. The drivers of this change in lender behavior are complex, but are likely to include a combination of more regulation and stress testing of banks’ portfolios, more conservative practices by the government sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac—which tend to dictate underwriting practices for a large part of the market—and banks’ own experience from the crisis period, when so many lenders faced extreme stress and residential real estate seemed to be the main culprit. The fact that housing prices declined so much and that the foreclosure process was so often drawn out may also have caused lenders to reassess how much to rely on the housing collateral as security for their loans. In response, lenders may have shifted their underwriting to put more weight on the creditworthiness of the borrower rather than relying mainly on the value of the collateral. This is consistent with the fact that mortgage credit is now much harder to get for lower credit-rated borrowers than during the housing boom. So, what’s next? When and to what extent will households again start tapping home equity to fund their consumption? Answers to these questions will determine the degree to which housing equity growth will add to income growth as a fundamental driver of consumption. We do not want to repeat the experience from the housing boom, but there are prudent ways for households to access their housing equity. It is hard to predict when the recent trends might change, given that some milestones have passed that could have reignited lenders’ and borrowers’ appetite for home lending. First, home prices stopped falling in 2010, which could have been taken as a signal that a complete collapse was not imminent and that the worst was behind us, yet mortgage borrowers continued to divert cash to paying down their debts. Second, home prices—and home equity—resumed their growth in 2012, indicating that the market was recovering. Yet, far from extracting this equity, borrowers continued to pay down their mortgages thereby reinforcing the effect of the home price increases in terms of rebuilding housing equity. Aggregate home prices and home equity have almost reached their previous peaks. Time will tell if there is a renewed appetite, on both lenders’ and borrowers’ parts, to convert housing wealth into consumption. Perhaps, we will soon see a recovery in cash-out refinancing and in HELOC borrowing as a means for households to expand their consumption. In this case, the household saving rate will begin to decline. Or, we may need to wait longer for households to feel confident enough to extract some of their home equity, and for lenders to decide that expanding such lending is safe enough for their balance sheets. Whatever the timing, a return to a reasonable pattern of home equity extraction would be a positive development for retailers, and would provide a boost to aggregate growth. In the meantime, consumption growth will largely be determined by income growth, the trajectory of wages and the strength of the labor market. The U.S. expansion is now in its eighth year. By historical standards, it is long in the tooth. Despite this, I am optimistic that the economic expansion will continue over the next few years. First, it is important to note that economic expansions don’t simply die of old age. Usually, they end either because inflation climbs and the Federal Reserve responds by shifting to a much tighter stance for monetary policy, or because the economy gets hit with a large unanticipated shock that the Fed and the fiscal authorities cannot respond to quickly enough, or with sufficient force, to prevent an economic downturn. While economic shocks are, by their very nature, difficult to forecast, the risk that the Fed will snuff out the expansion anytime soon seems quite low because inflation is simply not a problem. Not only are underlying inflation trends very subdued—for example, the core personal consumption expenditures deflator has risen at only a 1. 7 percent annual rate over the past year—but the economy is not growing much above its sustainable long-term pace. Thus, while pressures on labor resources have been increasing, but quite slowly. Finally, the recent strengthening of the dollar will put downward pressure on import prices and limit the ability of domestic producers to raise their prices. Second, the household sector’s financial condition is in unusually good shape for this point in the economic cycle. Household indebtedness is relatively low, debt service burdens relative to household income have fallen to levels not seen since at least the early 1980s. Moreover, household incomes are rising at a moderate pace, supported by continued job gains and some modest strengthening of wage compensation trends. If households and lenders again become comfortable with financing consumption with debt in addition to income, this will provide additional support to household spending and to the current economic expansion. The challenges in the retail space over the near term, therefore, are not likely to be a shortfall of aggregate demand from households. Instead, it seems to me the challenges lie more in how to satisfy households’ changing demands for goods and services, and the medium through which these demands are satisfied—whether it be brick and mortar or online. Also, there is the important issue of how to retain brand loyalty in a world where information is ubiquitous and always near at hand, and it is easy to shift purchases among participants in the retail marketplace. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Andrew Haughwout, Joseph Tracy and Wilbert van der Klaauw assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

February 15, 2017 Posted February 21, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Maureen O’Hara : Bill, let me start off with kind of the low-hanging fruit. The post-Trump economy has been confusing, with low Q4 growth, yet record-setting stock market levels. So let me just throw you an easy one here. What does the Fed see as the outlook for the next year? President Dudley : For the near-term I think more of the same. I mean, we think the economy is going to continue to grow, a little bit above-trend. That's going to generate job gains that put, you know, more pressure on the labor market, and as a consequence of that, we think inflation's going to move back towards our 2% objective. So, you know, we could be completely wrong, but that – the data that's come out over the last couple of months, is very consistent with that pattern. A lot of uncertainty in the outlook. I mean we don't know what's going to happen with the whole host of policy choices: healthcare reform, immigration policy, trade policy, tax policy, fiscal policy. So, how that, how those policy questions get answered will also be an important aspect in terms of how the forecast actually falls. But the baseline forecast is pretty similar in 2017 to 2016, slowly above trend growth, a little bit more pressure on the labor market, gradual rise in inflation, back towards our 2% objective. And if that happens, if we stay on that trajectory, I think as Chair Yellen said yesterday and today, we would expect to gradually remove further monetary policy accommodation, snug up interest rates a little further in the months ahead. Maureen O’Hara : Well I think that's somewhat encouraging, isn't it? President Dudley : But the uncertainty around that forecast is pretty high. Maureen O’Hara : Is pretty high. Although, you know, it's interesting, think about the U.S., um, you know, our situation in the last couple of years has clearly been improving. What's been interesting is seeing the news out of Japan, that, you know, Japan seems to be able to keep out of deflation, which they haven't for a long time. Even Europe seems to be eeking some growth out. Do – do you think everybody's going to be doing better or is this just a blip? President Dudley : Well, I think that – a couple of things. Just let me touch on the U.S. first. One thing that's interesting is post-election you've seen a pretty big improvement in household and business confidence, especially business confidence among smaller businesses. Now it's hard to say how much weight to put on that because historically consumer confidence goes up and down, and it doesn't just necessarily feed into consumer spending. But the increase in business confidence is quite striking, especially for smaller businesses. And so one of the big open questions that we're going to be assessing over the next few months is: is that improvement in animal spirits, so to speak, going to actually feed through and lead to more spending? So, I think where a year or two ago, I think our anxieties were more about the risks to growth to the downside, so as that – well, a year ago, we were worried about events in China, we were worried about uncertainties about Europe. I think now the balance of risk is gradually shifting, where the possibility is that growth could actually be stronger than expected, rather than weaker than expected. The markets expect fiscal stimulus out of this Administration. That's another factor that probably will over time tilt the equation more to the upside. But on fiscal policy, it's really hard to factor into your forecast at this point because we don't know what it is, how big it is, or when it will happen. Other than that, we have it completely nailed down. So, it's really hard to sort of put that into your forecast. And so the way I think about the fiscal policy outlook is that we're probably going to get some fiscal stimulus at some point. And so that's just another factor that maybe tilts the risk to the economy a little bit to the upside. Maureen O’Hara : So, Bill, how about we think a little bit more broadly. You talked about where – it looks like interest rates are going up, at least that's what, you know… President Dudley : Gradually, right. Maureen O’Hara : What Janet Yellen indicated would happen. There's this interesting question, though, about will interest rates over the next year go to quote normal levels, or is there a new normal, right? I mean we've struggled through how many years now of zero interest rates, and the distributional consequences those have had, is there a "new" normal? Do we have an idea what that "new normal" is going to be? President Dudley : Well I think if you look at what the FOMC publishes, the so-called Summary of Economic Projections, one of the things that they forecast, we forecast, is the long-run federal funds rate, where we think the federal funds rate is going to end up in the long-run. So think five, six, seven years out. And that estimate has come down over the last few years. So what that's telling you is that people on the FOMC think that the normal federal funds rate is lower now than it's been in the past. And the idea behind that is a very simple one. One, there's probably still some residual headwinds left over from the financial crisis that are going to persist for some time. Think about how difficult it is to get a mortgage if you're a lower credit-rated borrower today compared to 2005, 2006. And two, productivity growth in the economy has been very anemic, and I think generally, most economists think there's a relationship between productivity growth and the inflation-adjusted level of interest rates in the economy. So, productivity growth is strong, you tend to have high real rates. At 2% inflation you get a relatively high federal funds rate. If productivity growth is weak, you have low real rates. Add 2% inflation, you get a little bit lower level of interest rates. So generally, if you look at the FOMC projections, people think that the federal funds rate in the medium term is going to more like 3% rather than the 4% that might have been attained historically. Now there's one little problem with this. Economists are terrible at actually forecasting productivity growth. So just because productivity growth has been weak over the last few years doesn't mean it will necessarily be weak over the next five years. Maureen O’Hara : Well, it's a tricky one. Here's one that's tricky, too. Are there issues connected with financial market valuations that concern you? And that's kind of the grown-up question. Here's the one we all want to know. Any predictions on the Dow reaching 30,000 this year? President Dudley : No way. Maureen O’Hara : Oh, quick, call your brokers. President Dudley : Let's put it this way, if it did reach 30,000, I would be concerned about the stock market valuation. I think one of the things that's interesting post the election is, I think the uncertainty level about policy has gone up enormously, yet markets have actually performed very well, especially the equity market. And that's actually pretty unusual. Usually markets don't like uncertainty. And so, one thing to ask yourself the question is, why are markets going up even though the uncertainty level has climbed so much? I think one of the reasons, perhaps, is the notion that political deadlock in Washington is going to ease. Another thing is maybe fiscal policy is going to ride in and provide some support for the economy. But it's an unusual environment, where uncertainty level goes up and the stock market goes up. There's a little tension there between those two things. Maureen O’Hara : The VIX which is – President Dudley : Well, that's the other thing. Volatility in the market is extraordinarily low. So, that's another thing that doesn't quite fit. You would think if uncertainty was high, you'd have a little bit more volatility. If I was going to write something down as a prediction, I guess I would think volatility will go up. At some point. Maureen O’Hara : Well, it is a confusing structure right now. I think it's hard for anyone to kind of predict this economy. But that kind of makes it fun. Let's talk about something else that is somewhat hard to fathom. What are your thoughts on the election? Let me make it a little more – are there lessons from the election that you think are particularly important for the economy going forward? President Dudley : Well, obviously, the Federal Reserve is completely apolitical, so we don't take sides in terms of elections, and whether the Democrats or Republicans win. But I do think there is an interesting lesson in the election in the sense of support around the country and around the world for globalization, and why that support did not seem to manifest itself in terms of our election outcome. You know, I think that globalization has lifted literally hundreds of millions of people out of poverty over the last decade or two. And so I think net-net from my perspective it's been a good thing. But people have been left behind from globalization. I think a lot of people in the United States didn't put enough weight on those people. You look at income distribution in the United States it’s become a lot more skewed. You look at income mobility in the U.S., it's not very good. I think those are things that we really need to work on is the country. I think we really want to make it so that globalization lifts all boats rather than just some boats because if you don't have that, you're not going to have support for globalization. You're not going to have support for free trade. And if you don't have that, then I think that has its own set of consequences. Maureen O’Hara : Yes, well, I think you've raised a great point, that there are both positive and negative consequences of globalization. Let me raise something that may have similar negative and positive, and that's the impact of technology. I think we're all beginning to see a brave new world in which technology is entering ways that even 10 years ago were hard to fathom. And you know, I think that just as globalization seems to have made people nervous about the future, so has technology. Now, what are your thoughts on that? Is technology going to be the bigger influence over the next decade? Is that what's going to change our economy and the ability of people to make that leap-up that you just talked about? President Dudley : Well I think technology is always challenging. I think it's been challenging for decades, even centuries. My mom for many years lived in Westville, Massachusetts, and if I have this right, it was the buggy whip capital of the world at one point. Well, Westville had to make the transition from being the buggy whip capital of the world to other things. And I think – so, I don't think this is new. I don't think this is a new story about technology. What I think is what's new is we have to do a better job in terms of retraining people, getting people the mobility they need so they can actually feel that they have a place in the new economy. I was thinking about this question about technology and you think about the U.S. farm sector. You think about how many people in the United States worked on farms in 1900 and how few people work on farms today. Same kind of tech, same science and process of technological transition, but the good news is we were able to find things for those people to do. People always have for many, many years, talked about how technology is going to put everyone out of work, and everyone's just going to have a lot of leisure. That has not panned out up to now at all, and so I'm just a little bit skeptical that now we're at that critical turning point. I could be wrong. This time could be different. But if you think about how long we've had these conversations about technology obsoleting everyone's skills and leading to massive unemployment, this has been a conversation that we've been having for hundreds of years, literally. Maureen O’Hara : It's tricky now, though, isn't it? I mean in the past, I think you used to think about technology as taking away some of the lower-skilled jobs, and yet now we're seeing it kind of marching its way up. I think it'll be awhile before it gets to Fed presidents. But I know… President Dudley : Well, there are some people in Washington that would like to make us conduct monetary policy by a rule. Maureen O’Hara : And there you go, a robot can do it. President Dudley : We don't think that's such a good idea, by the way. Maureen O’Hara It's an interesting challenging, and particularly here I saw some numbers the other day that the high school graduation rate in New York state is somewhere in the 70 percentage points. And again, as you think about the technology creating winners and losers, you know, obviously we’re in education, all of us are committed to education, you know. Is that kind of crucial to the technology solution? What do we do with the people who don't? President Dudley : Well, I think – I mean look, I think education is absolutely essential. Giving people the skills they need to sort of navigate in the 21st century economy. And the second thing we need to do a better job is actually retraining people so that the only education you get shouldn't just be when you're 18 to 22 years old or 25 years old. We need to have a better system where people can sort of retool themselves. I think a third thing we can do is a better job of matching the skills that people get in universities to the business needs. One of the things that we've been talking about for a long time is that the New York Fed has tried to have better partnerships between businesses and education, so that the skills that people are getting when they go to the university match the opportunities when they actually graduate. And I think we've made a lot of progress on that, but that's something that I think we could even do better on going forward. Maureen O’Hara : Can you turn us back to monetary policy again for a minute because, you know, one could argue that one of the major forces that helped us get through the crisis was monetary policy, with its expansive, you know, quantitative easing with the role that the central bank took up and really helped keep the financial markets from collapsing, and now also keeping the economy from collapsing. Now we have, as you mentioned earlier, the prospect for more fiscal stimulus, which in some ways makes it a little better… President Dudley : Potentially. Maureen O’Hara : Because it's not just monetary policy, we’ll have fiscal policy. But we also have a variety of other factors that may influence monetary policy. One of which is the possibility that we as a country are going to become more isolationist. And that has implications, doesn't it? For your monetary policy and how you implement it? President Dudley : Well, I think we – as I said before, I think we have a lot of uncertainty about what's going to happen on immigration and trade. Most economists – the overwhelming number of economists – think that open and free trade is a good thing, comparative advantage, you want to produce the goods and services that you're best at producing and let other people produce the goods and services that they're best at producing, and that actually generates gains for both sides. That's really the theory of trade. So I think that’s – so I think we don't want to lose sight of that. Obviously, to the extent that we – I think it's very – it's way too soon to sort of see how this is going to evolve. It could evolve in the direction where we negotiate hard and we get somewhat better trade deals for the U.S. and trade barriers around the world don't go up very much at all, if at all. That's probably not a bad outcome for the U.S., and I don't think it's a bad outcome for the world. Or you could go down the path that was quite a bit more pessimistic than that. So, I think it's just too soon to sort of see which direction. You know, the Federal Reserve is going to obviously take the world as it is. I mean we – our objectives are set by Congress. Very clearly, maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability. So we have two goals: employment and inflation. And if the world is a really good place, it maybe makes it a little easier to achieve those goals. And if the world is at a more difficult place, maybe it makes it a little harder to achieve those goals. But it doesn't change our goals, and it doesn't change our monetary policy mission. Maureen O’Hara : Let me turn that, our focus, just a tiny bit. You've been a leading critic of culture in the banking industry, and I kind of have a two-part question here. Do you think the era of bad behavior in banking is behind us? And here's the second part of the question: some people would argue that the behavior wasn't really that bad but instead the regulators… President Dudley : Who are those people? Maureen O’Hara : There was Elizabeth Warren, I'll say that, I think she’s convinced. But some people would argue that the regulators used the opportunity to extract excessive fines from banks for behavior that maybe wasn't ideal but wasn't so horrible. There's two different perspectives. I think no matter how we look at it, some of the behavior of the banks was sort of unacceptable. Are we past that, do you think? President Dudley : Well, first thing I would say is a lot of the behavior was just totally egregious, totally unacceptable. Not in the gray area. You know people talk about, well, it's hard to know where to operate in a gray area, I think a lot of the behavior was way over the line. When people are getting together in chat rooms trying to talk about how they can collude to rig a market, that's not in the gray area. That's way over the line. When people are consciously doing things to evade any money laundering rules and sanctions, that's not in a gray area, that's way over the line. So I feel that most of the things that have resulted in fines can be tied to things that are not in a gray area. They're just way over the line. Now the question of whether the fines are excessive – I mean it's hard to know how you take the behavior and then map it back onto the fine. I think the important thing, though, is to make the fines big enough so that the senior management of these institutions doesn't just say, "Well, I can just write a check, accept the bad behavior, and move on." If the fines are substantial, then it actually gets some senior management’s attention, and I think that's one of the reasons why banks are working harder on the issues of culture in their institutions. I've actually been very – you know, you asked me the question, is bank bad behavior over? I expect not because I think there's always people that test the limits of the law and regulation and are always trying to see where they can go. And there are obviously going to be bad apples in any really large organization. What I hope is that, one, the banks will sustain their effort to improve their cultures. Banks really are working on this. I spoke at a bank industry conference about a month ago, where they brought in all their very high potential mid-level people to talk about culture, and it was really them talking about bank culture and I came in for a very short period. I think I was the only person from the official sector that spoke there. And I thought the fact that they were taking all these people that are high-performers and spending a day trying to inculcate them with the importance of culture maybe suggests that we've passed a tipping point. So, that's important. I think the other thing that I'm hoping to see is the banks start to cooperate a little bit more with each other and share best practices on bank culture. Up to now it's been most banks working sort of on their own thing alone. I think if they actually shared best practices, shared survey results, to see how they were doing relative to their peers, that would also help them perform. And the last thing I would say on culture, I think we've got to continue to work on incentives. I have a very simple mantra. Incentives drive behavior. Behavior sets social norms. And those social norms define culture. So if you have the wrong incentives, you're probably going to have bad culture. If you have the right incentives, you're probably going to have a much better culture. One thing that Preet Bharara said when he came to a conference we had at the New York Fed, he said one of the big challenges that he sees is that people don't speak up early enough when they see something wrong going on. He said that if people spoke up early, a lot of these big things would never have been big things. They would have been little things. And so, the important thing also is to really educate people that it's okay if you see something that bothers you, that you're not comfortable with, raise your hand. You're not doing anybody a favor by keeping silent, hoping it will go away. You're not doing anybody a favor by thinking, well, if I raise my hand, I'm sort of tattling on my colleagues. That is not the right way to think about it. Bad behavior is not good for you, it's not good for the institution. And so, if you do see bad behavior, or something that you're not really sure whether it's bad behavior or not, raise your hand and raise it to your manager, and have a conversation about it. Maureen O’Hara : Well, I think, I hope you're right that we're reaching a new awareness of the fact that some behaviors just can't be accepted. You know, I don't care whether they're legal or not. They're over any kind of ethical lines. And we shall see, it's a new world, isn't it? President Dudley : Yeah. It's very important that people understand that the idea is not to just perform to the regulation and the legal law. And one of the things we have, because we have a very legalistic system with lots of regulations with banks – people sometimes feel like, "Oh, well, given that, I can do anything within those parameters." Well, the world changes faster than the regulations and law can sort of keep up. And so, using that as your guide in terms of what's good behavior, permissible behavior, I think is a very bad, bad guide. Maureen O’Hara : Well let me turn to one last question, and then we'll open it up to all of you. Would repeal of parts of Dodd-Frank, the Volcker Rule, be a good thing for the financial system? Any predictions about what's going to happen with financial regulation going forward? President Dudley : Well, I think that it's certainly going to be looked at, and obviously we'll have to see how it makes its way through the House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate. I'm perfectly – I think it makes sense to look at the Dodd-Frank Act, to see which parts are working and which parts are not working so well. I mean, when I sort of think about the Dodd-Frank Act, I think there's really two things that we're trying to accomplish here. Number one, we're trying to make the probability of failure of large complex financial institutions a lot lower than it was before. So that means more capital, more liquidity, better governance, better risk management. And we want to keep all those things. And the second thing we're trying to do is that if a firm does get into trouble, we can actually allow it to fail without it threatening to take down the rest of the financial system. So that means you need good resolution regimes, and you need a financial system where you don't have a lot of vulnerabilities. You know, one thing, for example, that we've accomplished over the last year is we've had money market fund reform. Money market funds were one of the accelerants of the crisis after Lehman Brothers failed. So, fixing the financial system to address some of those structural weaknesses is also important. So I think keeping that part of Dodd-Frank, central clearing of derivatives, I think is something that makes the financial system more robust. Keeping all those parts I think makes a lot of sense. Volcker Rule? You could probably do the Volcker Rule in a more efficient way to achieve the same objectives without the burden of regulation that you have right now. You know, right now, if you're an equity trading desk and the equity market falls very violently, you really aren't supposed to go in and buy equities unless you actually have customer orders. So, you actually have this crazy situation where the equity desk can't actually buy equities to support the market. So, I'd like to see the Volcker Rule looked at to see if there's a way of doing it in a way that – if you're a client-facing business, and you're trading your own asset class, you have a little bit more freedom to buy and sell when markets are volatile and maybe provide actually a little liquidity support in the market. But also make it a lot easier, I think, to enforce the Volcker Rule. The other thing I would say is relief for smaller banking institutions. The financial crisis was not about small banking institutions. It was about large banking institutions and particularly it was about large broker-dealers. And so I think the Dodd-Frank Act imposed a lot of compliance and regulatory costs on smaller banking institutions. And I think – we have about 6,500 smaller banks in the United States plus a lot of credit unions and other financial intermediaries. Relief for those guys I think would be really, really valuable because the burden on them, they feel that burden disproportionately because they don't have as big an asset base to spread all those compliance costs across. And I think it has more of a real consequence because a lot of these institutions support small business lending, which I think is really important to have a vibrant economy. Maureen O’Hara : So given the two goals you said that there were for the Dodd-Frank Act, it does make you wonder how the Congo Minerals Relief Act ever got into the Dodd-Frank. But maybe we'll leave the Congo Minerals for another night. Well, I think the issues we've talked about here have covered a wide range of areas, and let me turn it open to the audience here and see if we can come up with some other questions. How about you? Yes. Audience Member : You alluded to China and the concerns we had about it last year that have now gone away. Why do you think the narrative changed on that, why do you think China is doing better? Also, you know, we're seeing more about rising inflation, so is this really about rising inflation or is it about the end of the disinflationary-deflationary scare? Thank you. President Dudley : Well I think last January, early February, the markets were under a lot of distress. There was a big flight to risk aversion and markets went down pretty hard around the globe. I think part of the story was China, but I think part of the story was also worries about the slowdown in China leading to a big commodity bust, and that commodity bust then putting a lot of pressure on especially emerging market economies that were actually selling a lot of the products to China. China's been on a much more sort of stable growth path this year. They've also clarified what their foreign exchange rate regime is. So I think people are a lot more comfortable in terms of how they're managing the renminbi. I think there are still challenges in China and they're still trying to reorient their economy from investment-led growth to consumption-led growth. They're still an economy that I think that credit is growing quite rapidly and so you sort of worry about how sustainable that is over the long-run. But I think it's much less of a focus of the markets today than it was a year ago, and I think the anxiety about the emerging market economies is much more focused on individual countries rather than sort of broad like it was a year ago. I mean financial conditions really, if you look at the financial markets post-election, we've seen stocks up, we've seen the dollar a little bit firmer. We've seen credit spreads narrow quite a bit, and we've seen bond yields up a little bit. But net-net, financial conditions haven't actually changed very much post-election. That was very different a year ago. Financial conditions were actually tightening quite sharply a year ago. And it wasn't really clear how far that was actually going to run. Maureen O’Hara : There we go, question? Audience Member : Can you talk a little bit about balance sheet normalization, how you think about that in the context of monetary policy? In the September FOMC, you guys talked about thinking about balance sheet normalization in terms of when your rate hikes are well under way. What does "well under way" mean, how are you thinking about that? President Dudley : I'm sure "well under way" means different things with different people. I think the -- we made it pretty clear in terms of our statements that we sort of want the active tool of policy to be short-term interest rates. And the balance sheet to be sort of in the background. We've also said that we wanted to get some room off the zero bound before we actually start to normalize the balance sheet, to end the reinvestment. Now I think my own personal view is, how soon you want that process to start depends not just about how much margin you have between the current federal funds rate and zero, but also how confident you are that you're actually not going to need to reduce the federal funds rate in the near-term. So, to the extent that we become more confident, if we become more confident about the economic outlook, that the recovery will be sustained, then I think that for me – speaking for myself, and only myself – that might make me a little bit more comfortable to proceed with balance sheet normalization a little bit more quickly. I think the important thing here is that when balance sheet normalization occurs and we start to end the reinvestment, don't think of it as an active tool of policy. Think of it as a passive tool, number one. And number two, to the extent that we then do decide at some point in the future to taper or end the reinvestment, that will also be a way of removing accommodation. And so that would be a bit of a substitute for raising short-term interest rates. So, I would guess, my own personal view, is if we move to balance sheet normalization, that might actually stretch out the process of raising short-term interest rates a little bit because the two are substitutes for one another in terms of removing monetary policy accommodation. The Chair said in her testimony that this is something we're going to be looking at over the coming meetings. We want to make sure that we know exactly what we want to do long before we have to do it, and so obviously the discussion and contemplation of what the right strategy is here needs to start relatively early, so it can be done absolutely as soon as you actually might want to do something. People sometimes think that when we start talking about something in the minutes that that means that we're going to do something momentarily. Usually it takes a while for us to develop those themes and issues, and reach a consensus. So, I wouldn't take a lot of signals just because it was in the minutes last time and something here is imminent. Maureen O’Hara : Well, you'll have a few openings, too, in the FOMC that have to get filled in before you'll get full strength. So again, a slightly different Federal Reserve Board going forward, too. President Dudley : Yes. Maureen O’Hara : An excellent point, an excellent point. What have we got? Here we go. Audience Member : If the new Administration continues with this isolationist policy, is able to successfully put tariffs on imports, would that have an inflationary impact and would the Fed have to address that? President Dudley : Well, again, I don't think that's – I don't really think that's the professed goal of the Administration. I think the Administration wants better trade deals and not – I think the question is whether they'll get better trade deals without actually having to put, you know, higher trade barriers in place. Obviously to the extent that trade barriers go up and that would tend to raise import prices, that would feed into price level in terms of inflation, and so obviously, we had to take that into consideration in terms of how we do monetary policy. But going to be happening in a dynamic world where a lot of other things are going on. So, I wouldn't want to take one thing and say, “Oh, if that happens, we're going to do X,” because it really depends on, one, it’s highly speculative what's going to happen on trade policy, and two, even if it happened, it would depend on magnitude and it would depend on a lot of other things that are going on. So I think it's really hard to speculate about something like that. Maureen O’Hara : Okay, I see some hands way back there. So if you can hand the microphone to someone who's got their hand up, way back there, that'd be great. Audience Member : Recently, it's been speculated that the Trump trade policy actually will evolve into a border tax. It's been in the works in the Republican Party for the last several years. This would simply entail an increase across-the-board in taxation on imports and an equal proportional across-the-board decrease on all exports. First question would be, what do you think of this type of proposal? And second, if this were implemented, what do you forecast the impact to be? President Dudley : Well, there's been a lot of discussion in Washington about this border tax adjustment. If you were starting with a corporate tax code from scratch, it would be, I think, quite attractive in a lot of ways because it basically eliminates a lot of the incentives to engage in games of transfer pricing. It reduces a lot of the incentives to book your intellectual property abroad. So, it actually has a lot of attractive features. I think the challenge is that it's very different than the current tax regime, and so there really would be some pretty significant adjustment costs and frictions of moving from the current regime to that new regime. And so, I think the question is really going to be: do people think those adjustment costs are a price worth paying for what I would agree is probably a better corporate tax regime. Certainly, a much better tax regime than the one we have today. But you know, there's going to be a lot of people that are going to be worried about how that adjustment is going to affect their particular industry. If you're an importer, you're going to be worried that your price of imports is going to go up. Some people argue that the dollar will move proportionately with the size of the import tax, so the import prices won't go up at all in dollar terms. But, you know, that's theory, and people worry about how it will actually work in practice. So, I think this is just going to be a very heavily debated topic in Washington in the coming weeks and months. Maureen O’Hara : I think we have time for maybe one or two more. Let's let some people in the back again. Audience Member : Hi, Mr. Dudley, nice to hear from you. I've got lots of questions, but I guess everyone gets to only ask one. President Dudley : You can ask more than one, but I'll only answer one. Audience Member : Okay, so, I was going to ask some sort of structuralist post-Ricardian question, but I'll set that one aside. President Dudley : Thank you. Audience Member : On a similar vein, to what degree do you think that this challenging of facts and these threats about what is truth and, you know, journalistic integrity, to what degree did this affect the financial system and to what degree did this confidence in what the Wall Street Journal might say or the New York Times might say as a fact can affect confidence in financial institutions? And what remedies do you have, or does the Fed have, to combat that? President Dudley : I don't think I have any good real answers to that. I'll just have to say that I'm fact-based. New York Fed is fact-based. And I hope we stay that way. Maureen O’Hara : Do you have alternative facts? Just checking, just checking. President Dudley : Look, I think a healthy debate is a good thing about what facts matter and how the world works. You know, people can have different models about how the world works and what's important, and what's not. But I think that they have to be based on real evidence. So, I'm going to continue to live in my world, which is very much fact-based. Maureen O’Hara : I think we have time for one more question, and we have someone back there who's got a mike. Audience Member : Yeah, Mr. Dudley, I have a question. You mentioned that there was some nefarious behavior by banks. I heard you mention that there was some nefarious behavior going on by banks during the financial crisis. President Dudley : Well, the employees of banks. Audience Member : Ok, employees of banks. My question is, there was – some of the big banks, including J.P. Morgan and Bank of America, basically bailing out the government and the FDIC, buying institutions like Countrywide, Merrill Lynch, Washington Mutual. In some of these cases, they were given winks and nods by the government that they were not going to be held accountable for let's say the sins of these institutions that they took over. But then what happened, they did this, and then later on, these institutions were fined billions of dollars by the government. And I guess my question is would you call this nefarious behavior on the part of the government to do this to these companies that basically helped out the government and the FDIC, in taking over these insolvent institutions? President Dudley : Well, I wasn't part of any of those conversations, so I don't know what winks or nods were actually exchanged. Look, I think the banks are, people are, managers are big boys and girls. And I think when they were making these transactions, they had the ability to negotiate whatever terms and conditions that they wanted to negotiate. Now, I understand that there's some bad feelings after the fact, to the extent that the sins of the institutions that were acquired went along with those entities. But it'd be a little bit sad if you can have institutions do lots of bad things and then have them acquired and then have their sins sort of automatically forgiven because they were acquired by another institution. That would be a sort of "get out of jail free" card. And so I'm not sure that's necessarily the right approach either. [END OF SESSION] By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
