Recent Developments in U.S. Monetary Policy: From Extraordinary Back to Ordinary Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland GIC Central Banking Series: New Policies for the Post-Crisis Era Banque de France Paris, France March 23, 2015 1 Introduction Good morning. It is a privilege to join you at this event organized by the Global Interdependence Center and the Banque de France. I am proud to say that I have had an association with the GIC for many years. I have always valued the insights I’ve gleaned from attending GIC events, and I am very grateful that David Kotok, John Silvia, and their colleagues have invited me to participate in today’s program, which is part of the GIC’s Central Banking Series. Today’s topic, “New Policies for the Post-Crisis Era,” is quite timely. Although policymakers in the United States and Europe face distinct economic environments, we face similar challenges in determining the most effective policies in those environments. I plan to share a few thoughts about monetary policy on my side of the pond. In particular, I want to discuss some of the FOMC’s plans for policy normalization. But to put that into context, it is important to understand how we got to this point, so I will start with a review of some of the monetary policy actions the Fed took to address the financial crisis and Great Recession. As always, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. U.S. Monetary Policy in Extraordinary Times: Interest Rates, Asset Purchases, and Forward Guidance In response to the financial crisis and deep recession, the Federal Reserve took some unprecedented policy actions. The Fed’s policy body, the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, has run an extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy to promote our goals of price stability and maximum employment. The FOMC has kept its policy rate – the federal funds rate – at essentially zero since the end of 2008 and it has used forward guidance to communicate the anticipated future path of policy. In addition, to exert downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, it purchased large volumes of longer maturity Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities guaranteed by the housing-related U.S. government-sponsored enterprises, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae. 2 This extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy has provided important support to the U.S. economy, helping to promote stronger labor markets and the pickup in growth that underlies my projection of a gradual return of inflation to our 2 percent goal over time. But it has also presented some challenges for the FOMC in returning to a more normal policy-setting framework. To understand those challenges, it helps to review some of the major policy developments since the crisis. Some of the Federal Reserve’s policy actions were aimed at addressing the stresses that emerged in financial markets in 2007 and 2008. Other policy actions were focused on easing monetary conditions to promote the Fed’s dual mandate goals of price stability and maximum employment. The Fed’s first action in August 2007 was to cut the primary credit rate – the rate that banks pay to borrow from the Fed’s discount window – by 50 basis points, to 5.75 percent. This action was taken to encourage liquidity-constrained institutions to borrow from the Fed. The following month, the Fed began lowering the fed funds rate target, starting from 5.25 percent before the September 2007 rate-cut and ending at essentially zero in December 2008. This was an unprecedented step into a new monetary policy regime. The fed funds rate has been effectively at the zero lower bound ever since. During this period the Fed also responded to the crisis by implementing a number of unprecedented lending and liquidity programs, but in the interest of time, I won’t review them here.1 1 As discussed in Loretta J. Mester, “Federal Reserve Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Policy After the Crisis,” presentation at the Conference on Understanding the Economic Slump: Balance Sheets and Policy Uncertainty, at the Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance, Princeton University, March 1, 2013 (http://www.princeton.edu/jrc/events_archive/repository/second-conference/), these programs differed by the types of borrower and the types of collateral on which the lending was based. Some of the programs, like the Term Auction Credit Facility for banks and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, fell under the traditional lender-of-last- 3 The Fed’s actions helped to stabilize financial markets. However, the real economy had suffered a lot of damage. The U.S. unemployment rate rose from about 5 percent before the recession to its peak of 10 percent in October 2009. Over the course of the recession, core inflation fell from around 2 percent to about 1 percent. Ordinarily, such conditions would warrant further reductions in the policy rate. But with the fed funds rate at its zero lower bound, the Fed engaged in nontraditional policies to support the economy. In particular, between December 2008 and October 2014, to put downward pressure on longer- term interest rates, the Fed purchased large volumes of longer maturity U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities.2 Large-scale asset purchases are thought to affect longer-term interest rates via a couple of channels. The first channel relies on segmented markets. When financial markets are segmented either because arbitrage is disrupted (as it was during the financial crisis) or because certain market participants prefer particular types of assets, then assets are not perfect substitutes. In such a situation, when the central bank reduces the supply of longer-term assets by purchasing a large volume, the prices of those assets should rise and the term premium on the assets should fall. As investors begin to replace those assets with resort role of central banking. Other programs were targeted to particular credit markets outside of the banking system that were deemed critical, like the commercial paper market, money market mutual funds, and asset -backed securities. In addition, because of the global nature of the crisis, the Fed coordinated with other central banks to provide liquidity via swap agreements. Another set of actions was intended to avoid potential spillovers from a disorderly unwinding of contracts triggered by the failure of systemically important financial firms. This include d the Fed’s support in the sale of Bear Stearns to JP Morgan Chase and loans to AIG. 2 Between December 2008 and August 2010, the Fed bought $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage -backed securities; $175 billion of agency debt, and $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities. From November 2010 to June 2011, the Fed bought an addition $600 billion of longer maturity Treasuries. Between September 2011 and December 2012, the Fed implemented a program to extend the maturity of its asset holdings without changing the size of its balance sheet. Under the so-called Operation Twist, the Fed purchased longer-term Treasuries and sold an equal amount of short-term Treasuries. In September 2012, while Operation Twist was still in place, the Fed began an open -ended purchase program of agency MBS securities. At the conclusion of Operation Twist in December 2012, longer -term Treasuries were added to the program as well. This program differed from the earlier ones in that instead of announcing a set volume of purchases over a defined time period, the Fed specified a monthly amount of longer-term securities that it would buy. The initial flow amount of longer-term MBS and Treasuries was $85 billion a month. But as progress was made on the Fed’s maximum employment goal, the pace of purchases was tapered over time until the program’s conclusion in October 2014. 4 others, their prices will rise too, so there can be a transmission to assets beyond those being purchased by the central bank. A second channel through which large-scale asset purchases are thought to affect longer-term interest rates is via a signaling channel. The purchases signal that the central bank intends to pursue a more accommodative policy stance than the public currently expects. Thus, the purchases can be viewed as a form of commitment for policy forward guidance, another policy tool that the Federal Reserve has used during the unusual economic circumstances of the past six years. The formulation of the Fed’s forward guidance on the future path of interest rates has changed over time, from qualitative guidance, to calendar dates, to economic thresholds, and to a blend of state-contingent and date-based guidance.3 In extraordinary economic times, like those we’ve experienced in recent years, forward guidance is more than a communications device. It is a tool of monetary policy that has the potential to increase the degree of monetary policy accommodation, especially when interest rates are essentially at their zero lower bound. By reducing uncertainty about the future path of policy, forward guidance can help lower interest rates by reducing the premiums investors demand to compensate them for interest-rate uncertainty. In addition, in theory, if the central bank indicates that the future path of short-term interest rates will be low for a long time – perhaps lower and for longer than would have been consistent with the central 3 In December 2008, the FOMC began with qualitative forward guidance indicating that it anticipated that weak economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the fed funds rate for “some time.” In March 2009, “some time” became “extended period.” In August 2011, the FOMC changed its qualitative forward guidance to a calendar date when it said that it anticipated an exceptionally low fed funds rate at least through mid -2013. That date was later extended to late 2014, and then to mid-2015. In March 2014, the thresholds were replaced with guidance that linked the path of policy to the Committee’s assessment of both realized and expected progress toward its dual-mandate objectives. The guidance continued to provide a time element by indicating that based on the FOMC’s assessment, the funds rate target range would likely remain 0-to-¼ percent for “a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored.” 5 bank’s past behavior – this can also put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, thereby spurring current economic activity. According to the theory, if people believe that the central bank is committed to keeping rates very low, they will expect higher economic activity and higher inflation in the future. When households, businesses, and market participants are assured of better economic prospects in the future, they should be more willing to make investments in capital and labor today rather than delaying them, and this will help the current economy.4 There has been considerable study of the effectiveness of these extraordinary policy tools, especially the Fed’s large-scale asset purchase programs. Federal Reserve Board Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer recently reviewed the empirical evidence on how effective the Fed’s purchase programs have been in lowering longer-term interest rates, and discussed the results of a recent Board of Governors staff study on the effectiveness of the purchase programs along with forward guidance on the macroeconomy.5 In general, the studies find that the Fed’s various asset purchase programs have lowered longer-term yields and the staff study finds that purchases and forward guidance have had an impact on the macroeconomy. But as the Vice Chair pointed out, estimated magnitudes vary quite a bit across studies and are surrounded by wide bands of uncertainty. 4 Note, though, that for forward guidance to have this effect, the public must believe that the central bank is setting policy differently than it has in the past and also that the central bank is committed to implementing this particul ar policy. If, instead, the public believes that the central bank is behaving as usual, it could misinterpret a very low policy rate as suggesting a gloomier outlook, and this would work to depress current activity – the exact opposite of the intended effect. In addition, before they will change their behavior and start spending today, households and firms have to believe that the central bank is committed to behaving in this unusual way. How to increase the credibility of such a commitment continues to be a subject of economic research. The literature has suggested different mechanisms for increasing the credibility of this commitment, including temporarily increasing the inflation target, targeting nominal GDP instead of inflation, and targeting the price level instead of inflation. For an excellent discussion of forward guidance, as well as other policies at the zero lower bound, see Michael Woodford, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, 2012 (http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/Woodford_final.pdf). 5 See Stanley Fischer, “Conducting Monetary Policy with a Large Balance Sheet,” remarks at the 2015 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, NY, February 27, 2015 (http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/fischer20150227a.pdf). 6 There is, however, no uncertainty about the dramatic change in the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as a result of the purchase programs. Assets on the Fed’s balance sheet have increased five-fold, from less than $900 billion in July 2007 to about $4.5 trillion today. On the liability side, banks have more than $2.5 trillion in reserves at the Fed, most of it in excess of that required to meet reserve requirements. In terms of composition, before the actions taken to combat the crisis, about 90 percent of the Fed’s assets were Treasuries and none were agency securities; now about 55 percent of the Fed’s assets are Treasuries and almost 40 percent are agency MBS. And of the Fed’s Treasury holdings, over 50 percent have a maturity of more than 5 years compared to about 20 percent before the crisis. Today, the Fed holds very few short-term Treasury securities. The changes in the Fed’s balance sheet as well as the evolution of the Fed’s forward guidance have raised some challenges about how to move back from extraordinary monetary policy to ordinary monetary policy, what the Fed has called normalization. In my remaining minutes, I would like to discuss some of the Fed’s plans for addressing those challenges. Moving from Extraordinary Back to Ordinary The FOMC has been preparing for policy normalization for quite some time. The FOMC first laid out exit strategy principles in June 2011; these were updated last September to take into account the changes in the Fed’s balance sheet. Just as it did before the Great Recession, the FOMC plans to implement monetary policy by adjusting short-term interest rates. It will communicate changes in the stance of policy by changing the target range for the fed funds rate. But because the level of excess reserves held by banks is now much larger, the tools the FOMC will use to move the funds rate into the target range will be different than before the crisis. In particular, in October 2008 Congress gave the Fed the authority to pay interest on the reserve balances that banks and other depository institutions hold at the Fed. The Fed will use the interest rate it pays on excess reserves, 7 the IOER rate, as the main tool for moving the funds rate into the target range. Raising the IOER rate will put upward pressure on the fed funds rate because banks will be unlikely to accept a rate in the market lower than the one they could get by depositing their funds at the Fed. We expect that while reserves are so plentiful and because not all financial institutions holding reserves are eligible to receive interest, the fed funds rate will trade somewhat below the IOER rate. In addition to IOER, the Fed will use other tools, as needed, to ensure adequate control of the policy rate. One of these tools is an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility. Overnight reverse repos, or ON RRPs, involve the Fed selling securities from its large portfolio of assets with an agreement to buy them back the next day at a pre-determined price from eligible counterparties, including banks, primary dealers, money funds, and government-sponsored enterprises. By offering a safe overnight asset for a broader array of money market participants, some of whom are not eligible to receive interest on reserves, overnight reverse repos should help put a firmer floor on the fed funds rate. These counterparties should be reluctant to lend their liquidity in the market at rates lower than what they could get at the Fed via this facility. The Fed has been testing overnight reverse repos, and the results to date suggest that they have been helpful in firming the floor on money market rates. The FOMC has indicated that the overnight reverse repo facility will be used only to the extent necessary and will be phased out when no longer needed to help control short-term interest rates. This will help to ensure that the facility doesn’t lead financial institutions to permanently change the way they do financial intermediation. In addition, the Fed has been testing usage caps on overnight reverse repos and other design features. These would help mitigate the possibility that during times of financial stress the facility would attract liquidity from the market, thereby increasing the level of stress in the market. And the Fed is considering other tools, like term deposits and term RRPs, that could absorb some of the excess reserves in the banking system. 8 The Fed’s ability to pay interest on excess reserves, along with supplementary tools like overnight reverse repos, will allow the Fed to move interest rates up to target when it is appropriate to do so, despite the large size of the Fed’s balance sheet. Over the longer run, the Fed’s balance sheet will return to a more normal size and composition. The FOMC intends to reduce security holdings in a gradual and predictable way, primarily through ending reinvestment of principal payments on securities it holds and letting the securities mature and run off the balance sheet. At this point, the FOMC doesn’t anticipate selling the agency mortgage-backed securities on its balance sheet as part of the normalization process, although it might engage in limited sales in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings. The evolution of the language in the FOMC’s statement, in particular its forward rate guidance, also poses some challenges for the FOMC. While explicit forward guidance was used as a policy tool during the recession and earlier in the recovery, in more normal times, away from the zero lower bound, I believe forward guidance should be viewed more as a communications device. As such, I would like to see the forward guidance evolve over time to give more information about the conditions we systematically assess in calibrating the stance of policy to the economy’s actual progress and anticipated progress toward our dual-mandate goals. It would articulate the considerations the Committee would take into account when determining future changes in policy, as well as information to help the public anticipate how policy is likely to change in response to changes in economic developments that affect the economic outlook. To the extent that households and businesses understand policymakers’ reaction function, their policy expectations will better align with those of policymakers, thereby making policy more effective. As normalization proceeds, I expect we will be able to make more progress along these lines. 9 Conclusion In summary, the Federal Reserve took some unprecedented policy actions in response to the financial crisis and deep recession. These extraordinary actions helped support progress toward the Fed’s goals of price stability and maximum employment. At the same time, they present some challenges for the return to ordinary monetary policymaking. But the FOMC has plans to address those challenges. It has laid out how it anticipates conducting monetary policy during normalization. In addition, the FOMC’s forward guidance on the future path of policy has been evolving. Most times in life, moving from extraordinary to ordinary is considered a bad thing. In the case of monetary policy, such a move should be viewed as a good thing – because it means conditions are in place for a sustainable economic expansion with maximum employment and price stability.

The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Forecasters Club of New York New York, NY April 16, 2015 1 Introduction Good afternoon. I would like to start by thanking Charlie Steindel and the Forecasters Club of New York for their invitation to speak today. It is a particular pleasure for me to address your group: first, because I have known Charlie for many years – we both grew up as economists in the Federal Reserve System – but also because I know I won’t have to explain to you what a difficult task economic forecasting can be, even in the best of times. Still, forecasting is something economists and policymakers must do, so today I will discuss my outlook for the economy and monetary policy. As always, the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook The economic expansion began nearly six years ago. While volatility in the monthly data can often obscure underlying trends – and today is no exception – it is important to recognize the significant economic progress the country has made since the darkest days of the global financial crisis and Great Recession. That progress, though slow in coming, has been significantly supported by extraordinary monetary policy accommodation. Underlying economic fundamentals have improved, resulting in an economy that is better able to sustain growth through the inevitable transitory shocks and typical sectoral ups and downs. For example, the harsh winter weather took its toll on first-quarter growth this year, just as it did last year. A number of recent data releases have come in below expectations. But my sense in speaking with business contacts is that the economy has resiliency. I expect the slowdown to be temporary and do not view it as pointing to something more fundamental. 2 My view reflects the fact that a number of the so-called headwinds have waned. Those headwinds held back growth earlier in the recovery, made the economy more vulnerable to negative shocks, and dampened the transmission of very accommodative monetary policy to the broader economy. The Great Recession wreaked havoc on household and business balance sheets. But balance sheets have improved substantially over the expansion. Households have reduced debt levels relative to disposable income from a peak of 130 percent before the recession to about 100 percent today. Very low interest rates mean that households are spending less to service their debt. And thanks to higher prices of equities and houses, households have more than made up the $10 trillion in net worth destroyed in 2008. U.S. businesses are also in better financial condition after deleveraging. They are positioned to expand investment and hiring, and they are doing both. The headwind from government spending is also abating. Government spending declined over 2010 to 2013, but began to rise again last year. With tax revenues recovering, state and local governments have been adding to their payrolls and increasing expenditures. The drag from federal government spending has lessened over time, although it is unlikely that such spending will contribute to growth this year. The banking sector is regaining its health, with higher capital levels and lower loan delinquencies. Bankers are working through the new regulatory requirements and augmenting systems to better monitor and evaluate risks in their portfolios. Loans to consumers and businesses are now rising and delinquencies and write-offs are at low levels. As the headwinds continue to diminish, we now also have a tailwind in the form of lower oil prices. For an oil-importing country like the U.S., lower energy prices will be a net positive. No doubt, the drop in oil prices has led to reduced investment and dislocation in parts of the domestic energy and energy-related 3 sectors. This is already affecting growth, especially in certain regions of the country. But lower energy prices will eventually show up as a positive for consumer, business, and local government spending. Despite the positives, as is always the case, not all sectors will contribute equally to growth. Residential construction is unlikely to come back strongly this year, but easing of mortgage credit conditions will help support continued moderate improvement in the housing sector. I also expect net exports to be a drag on U.S. growth this year. The strength of the U.S. economy relative to that of many of our trading partners, as well as interest rate and inflation differentials, has contributed to about a 12 percent appreciation in the broad value of the dollar over the past year. While a stronger dollar means better terms of trade for U.S. consumers and businesses, which is a positive for a growing economy in the longer run, in the near term it can be a drag on U.S. export growth. Accommodative monetary policy actions have brightened the outlook for European economies, but growth and inflation are likely to remain low in the Eurozone for a while longer. Whether the drag from the trade sector will be larger or smaller than I’ve assumed is one of the risks to the forecast. On balance, I expect that after a weak first quarter, U.S. economic growth will strengthen, averaging about 3 percent over the remainder of this year and next. This is somewhat above my estimate of 2.5 percent longer-run growth. The above-trend growth I am projecting will support continued improvement in labor markets, one of the factors that will figure into the FOMC’s assessment of the appropriate timing of liftoff. Notwithstanding the slower job growth reported for March, the economy has seen significant improvement in labor market conditions. Over the past year, average monthly payroll job growth strengthened to about 260,000 jobs, and nonfarm payrolls are now about 2.8 million above their pre- recession peak. I certainly would have liked to have seen more than 126,000 jobs added in March. At the 4 same time, I believe it is premature to read anything about a significant new trend from this number. The FOMC has said that its policy is “data dependent.” But being “data dependent” does not mean reacting to every change in the data. Economic data can be volatile from one month to another. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), which publishes the employment report, the confidence interval for the monthly change in payroll employment is on the order of plus or minus 105,000. But we shouldn’t ignore monthly data reports either. My preference is to look at the broader trends in the data and at a number of indicators to get a better sense of developments. These other labor market indicators suggest that the weakness in payroll jobs in March is likely temporary. Let me point out a few of these. According to the Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey (JOLTS) published by the BLS, the rate of job openings is at a cyclical high, and both the hiring and separation rates are up substantially since the end of the recession, meaning that employers are looking to hire, and workers are confident enough to start looking for better jobs. The unemployment rate is 5.5 percent, down sharply from its peak of 10 percent in 2009, more than a percentage point below its level last March, and near the range many economists view as its longer-run level. I continue to view the unemployment rate as a useful indicator of labor market conditions. Some people feel its sharp decline is overstating the improvement in labor markets because of the confounding effect of cyclical declines in labor force participation. However, research, including some by my staff at the Cleveland Fed, finds that a large part of the decline we have seen in labor force participation since 2007 reflects a longer-run structural trend driven by factors like changes in demographics.1 Moreover, there have been significant declines in the broader measures of the unemployment rate, such as those that 1 Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher L. Smith, and William Wascher, “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series Paper 2014-64, Federal Reserve Board, September 2014, http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2014/201464/201464pap.pdf. 5 include discouraged workers and those that include people working part-time who would prefer to work full-time, although these have not yet reached their pre-recession levels. I expect progress to continue, and in my view, taken together, labor market indicators point to an economy that is nearing the Fed’s goal of full employment. Stronger labor markets have led to stronger growth in disposable income. While wage growth remains subdued, it typically lags improvement in labor market conditions. In fact, some analysis we’ve done at the Cleveland Fed shows that in the last three expansions, job gains in industries that pay above-average hourly earnings contributed more to total private-sector job gains as the expansions continued.2 After the Great Recession, it took some time for job gains to materialize. But our analysis indicates that at the national level, since the start of the expansion through 2014, for every job added in industries paying below-average hourly earnings, about 1.3 jobs have been added in industries paying above-average hourly earnings. As employment continues to grow, I anticipate that wages will accelerate and provide additional support for consumer spending. I also anticipate that inflation will gradually return to the Fed’s 2 percent objective over time, and I continue to monitor inflation developments closely. The sharp decline in oil prices is showing up in much lower headline inflation numbers, and the appreciation of the dollar has put downward pressure on the prices of non-petroleum imports. I expect further declines in inflation in the near term, but those should prove transitory as oil prices stabilize. The FOMC has indicated that, in addition to further improvement in labor markets, a second factor in assessing the appropriate timing of policy liftoff will be reasonable confidence that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. I am reasonably confident that inflation will gradually return to the Fed’s goal by late 2016 supported by above-trend economic growth. 2 See Loretta J. Mester and Guhan Venkatu, “Job Quality During the Expansion,” manuscript, March 2015. The same type of pattern holds in the four states in the Cleveland Federal Reserve District: Ohio, Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and West Virginia, https://clevelandfed.org/en/Our%20Research/President/Job%20Quality%20During%20the%20Expansion . 6 I base this view on a couple of factors. First, while there has been some pass-through of declines in oil prices and import prices to core measures of inflation that remove volatile food and energy prices, the pass-through has been relatively modest. Core PCE inflation is about 1.4 percent, but the Cleveland Fed’s median CPI measure has remained near 2.25 percent for the past year, and Cleveland staff research has found that this measure has some predictive power for headline inflation over the medium term.3 In addition, inflation expectations are an important factor in forecasting inflation, and in my view, inflation expectations remain well-anchored. The survey-based measures of inflation expectations of both consumers and professional forecasters have been fairly stable. These survey measures have historically done well at capturing longer-run trends in inflation and they have been shown to help in forecasting inflation.4 I am not inclined to take much of a signal about inflation expectations from the recent movements in inflation compensation measured by the spread between yields on Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities, so-called TIPS. These market-based measures have been affected by flight- to-quality flows into Treasuries from abroad, and the recent changes in inflation compensation likely reflect liquidity effects and changes in inflation risk premiums more so than changes in inflation expectations. The fall in inflation compensation late last year also seems to be closely correlated with the drop in energy prices. Cleveland staff analysis has found that while typical moves in energy prices explain little of the variation in longer-term inflation expectations, the sharp drop in energy prices since last June can account for all of the decline in the Cleveland Fed’s expected inflation measure, which 3 Brent Meyer, Guhan Venkatu, and Saeed Zaman, “Forecasting Inflation? Target the Middle,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, April 2013, https://www.clevelandfed.org/Newsroom%20and%20Events/Publications/Economic%20Commentary/2013/2013 - 05%20Forecasting%20Inflation%20Target%20the%20Middle.aspx. 4 See Jon Faust and Jonathan H. Wright, “Forecasting Inflation,” Handbook of Economic Forecasting, 2A, Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, eds., New York: Elsevier, pp. 3-56, and Todd E. Clark and Taeyoung Doh, “Evaluating Alternative Models of Trend Inflation,” International Journal of Forecasting, 30(3), 2014, pp. 426-448. 7 incorporates market data on inflation swaps and Treasury yields, as well as survey information from professional forecasters.5 As I am sure the professional forecasters in this room know, forecasting inflation with any precision is very difficult. The confidence bands around the forecasts tend to be wide. For example, historical average projection errors across a range of private-sector and government forecasts indicate that the 70 percent confidence interval around a forecast of CPI inflation one year out is about plus or minus 1 percentage point. So when I say I am “reasonably confident” that inflation will return to target by late 2016, it is within that context – I am not requiring higher-than-normal precision around the forecast. I see quite a bit of difference between the situation in Europe, where inflation has been falling and growth has been weak, and the situation in the U.S., where an oil-price shock is driving down headline inflation rates and the economy has been strengthening. We have been climbing out of a very deep recession and have experienced a negative oil-price shock. In that environment, it does not surprise me that inflation has been slow to return to our 2 percent goal. So long as inflation expectations remain anchored and the economy remains on track to return to trend growth or above, as I expect it to, then I am comfortable with it taking some time for inflation to return to our 2 percent objective. Of course, my projections for the economy are dependent on appropriate monetary policy. So let me turn to that now. Monetary Policy The financial crisis and the ensuing deep recession required an aggressive policy response. To support its goals of price stability and full employment, the FOMC has kept the federal funds rate at essentially zero 5 Randal Verbrugge and Amy Higgins, “Do Energy Prices Drive the Long-Term Inflation Expectations of Households?” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Trends, March 24, 2015, https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/Newsroom%20and%20Events/Publications/Economic% 20Trends/2015/Do%20En ergy%20Prices%20Drive%20the%20Long-Term%20Inflation%20Expectations%20of%20Households.aspx. 8 since the end of 2008. It pursued further policy accommodation by conducting large-scale asset-purchase programs to exert downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and by providing more explicit forward guidance on the anticipated future path of interest rates. This extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy has provided important support to the economy, helping to promote stronger labor markets and the pickup in growth that underlies my projection that inflation will gradually return to our goal over time. Because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, policy needs to be forward looking and rates will need to begin to move up from their very low level before we have fully reached our goals. With the fed funds rate at zero, even after the first rate increases, policy will remain very accommodative for some time to come and will continue to promote attainment of our goals. While financial market participants are particularly focused on the timing of the first rate increase, more important for macroeconomic performance is the expected path of policy beyond liftoff because expectations about the future path of policy can affect today’s economic decisions. The FOMC’s March Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) indicates that most participants anticipate that it will be appropriate to begin raising rates sometime this year and that the path thereafter will be a gradual one. As shown in the SEP, there is some diversity of views about the appropriate path of policy. Such diversity should not be surprising. It does not reflect different views about our commitment to promote our dual mandate goals of price stability and full employment, but rather different views about realized and anticipated progress toward those goals and about the potential costs and benefits to changes in policy with respect to achieving those goals. The economy has reached the point where these evaluations are not easy to make. But this situation should be celebrated because while it does mean policy decisions have become somewhat more 9 complicated, it also reflects the significant economic progress that has been made since the end of the recession. I supported the changes the FOMC made in its communications in March, which made the June meeting and subsequent meetings viable options for liftoff. There has been cumulative improvement in the economy and our monetary policy stance and communications should reflect that. Over the next couple of months, incoming information on the economy – including the two monthly employment reports we will receive before we meet in June – will help us evaluate whether the softness in the first quarter is indeed transitory, as I currently anticipate, or whether it could be more enduring. If it turns out that the incoming information shows that growth is regaining momentum after the first-quarter slowdown and more broadly supports my forecast, I would be comfortable with liftoff relatively soon. Let me explain my reasoning, which is based on my assessment that the potential returns to delaying action will soon be outweighed by the potential returns to beginning the normalization process. First, although the Committee has been appropriately cautious, the improvement in underlying economic fundamentals consistent with my outlook indicates that the expansion would not be adversely affected by a gradual increase in the policy rate from zero. Liftoff means a reduction in the degree of extraordinary policy accommodation; it doesn’t mean tight policy. Headwinds are diminishing and above-trend growth is projected over the medium run. In this environment, the equilibrium real interest rate will be rising and the policy rate should rise with it. Second, the FOMC has been communicating for some time that we anticipate it will be appropriate for policy normalization to take a gradual path. One benefit of the gradual approach is that it allows for a recalibration of policy over time as some of the uncertainties surrounding the equilibrium interest rate, potential growth rate, and longer-run unemployment rate in the post-crisis world are resolved. I would 10 like our policy actions to be consistent with our communications, and in my view, given the economic outlook, starting the normalization process relatively soon will help ensure that we can, indeed, take a gradual approach. A delay that’s too long might risk having to move rates up more steeply in order to promote attainment of our goals over time. Third, although not an issue now, too long a delay could also eventually pose risks to financial stability. Holding short rates at zero too long might spur excessive leverage or encourage investors to take on risks they are ill-equipped to manage in a search for yield. The FOMC is carefully monitoring financial markets for any signs of adverse consequences of very low interest rates, and so far, there does not appear to be a threat to financial stability. However, we need to acknowledge that leading up to the financial crisis, some of the vulnerabilities of the financial system were not fully recognized by policymakers. And although we have made significant strides since then, there likely remain gaps in our ability to assess the risks in every part of the financial system. This is not an argument that we should use monetary policy as the main tool to address financial stability concerns. As I’ve said elsewhere, given the state of our knowledge, I would opt to use the macroprudential tools as the first line of defense, since they can be more targeted to the markets and institutions where the risks are emerging.6 However, I do think we should be cognizant of the linkages between nonconventional monetary policy and financial stability when we are making policy decisions. Data-Dependent Monetary Policymaking This is my current thinking on appropriate policy, but let me emphasize again that it is dependent on whether economic developments are consistent with my forecast. Let me finish my remarks with some thoughts about data-dependent monetary policymaking. As the FOMC has said, policy is not on a pre-set 6 See Loretta J. Mester, “The Nexus of Macroprudential Supervision, Monetary Policy, and Financial Stability,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research 2014 Financial Stability Conference: “Measurement Challenges in Macroprudential Policy Implementation: Essential Data Elements for Preserving Financial Stability,” Washington DC, December 5, 2014, https://www.clevelandfed.org/~/media/Files/Speech%20PDFs/Mester_120514.pdf?la=en . 11 path. Indeed, as I already mentioned, the SEP gives some information on the diversity of views among FOMC participants about the appropriate path of policy. But that diversity understates the degree of uncertainty about the future path because around each participant’s policy path, there is a confidence band, which reflects the fact that shocks will hit the economy and the policymaker will want to respond to some of those shocks. In determining the appropriate timing for liftoff and the path thereafter, the FOMC will be assessing incoming information and evaluating how that information affects the economic outlook and progress toward our goals of maximum employment and price stability. If incoming economic information materially changes our outlook, we will adjust the funds rate up or down, as appropriate. Our policy path is not pre-determined because the future is not pre-determined. But “data-dependent” does not mean “non-systematic.” Policymakers should strive to respond in a systematic fashion to incoming information because to the extent that households and businesses understand how policymakers are likely to react to economic developments – whether those developments are anticipated or unanticipated – their policy expectations will better align with those of policymakers. This alignment helps households and firms make better saving, borrowing, investment, and employment decisions, thereby making monetary policy more effective. In the late 1980s and 1990s, the public had a pretty good sense of how the FOMC’s policy would respond to economic developments, the so-called reaction function. They were able to get a handle on the FOMC’s reaction function because after the great inflation of the 1970s, the FOMC became more predictable and systematic in how it reacted to changes in economic activity and inflation.7 Because the Great Recession required the Fed to behave in a way quite distinct from its past behavior, there is less 7 For a discussion, see John B. Taylor, “Monetary Policy During the Past 30 Years with Lessons for the Next 30 Years,” luncheon address at the Cato Institute’s 30th Annual Monetary Conference on Money, Markets and Government: The Next 30 Years, Washington DC, November 15, 2012. 12 understanding about how policymakers are likely to react to incoming economic information than there was earlier. As our economy returns to more normal territory and the Fed begins the process of normalizing policy, clear communications that enhance the public’s understanding of the rationale behind the FOMC’s policy decisions will have an important role to play. Stepping back from the explicit forward guidance the FOMC found necessary to use as part of its nonconventional policy tools and moving back to conveying a better sense of the FOMC’s policy reaction function should be viewed as a positive step. It is further evidence that our journey back to a more normal economic and policy-setting environment is well underway.

Consumer Credit: Suggested Directions for Policy-Relevant Research Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Remarks at the Conference on Regulating Consumer Credit A Joint Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and the Journal of Economics and Business Philadelphia, PA May 1, 2015 1 Introduction Good morning. I thank the conference organizers at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and the Journal of Economics and Business, in particular, Paul Calem, Julapa Jagtiani, Bill Lang, and Ken Kopecky, for inviting me to participate in this conference on regulating consumer credit. It is a particular pleasure for me to be back at my old haunt, having grown up at the Philly Fed, and seeing the many people I count not only as my friends but also as my teachers, because I’ve learned so much from you over the years. I also want to acknowledge my long association with the Journal of Economics and Business, and the opportunity Ken Kopecky gave me to serve as an associate editor of the journal and as the editor of a special issue associated with the Federal Reserve System’s March 2007 conference on financing community development. It may not surprise you that many of the topics contained in that special issue are still being researched today, including subprime mortgages, foreclosures, predatory lending practices, and consumer literacy. Indeed, some of these very topics are covered in this conference. I don’t think we should take this as signaling a lack of progress. Instead, I view it as recognition that consumer credit markets are a vital part of the modern economy, that the issues pertaining to these markets, including regulation, are intricate ones, and that the data and models being used to study these important markets are becoming more sophisticated and informative. Conferences like this one help us identify what we know and what we don’t know – a necessary step on the road to more effective regulation and policymaking. Today I will offer my perspectives on the research agenda on consumer credit and household finance. As always, the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Household Finance Before, During, and After the Financial Crisis Since I am in Philadelphia, I can’t help but begin by quoting one of Philadelphia’s favorite sons, Ben Franklin. Ben was not stingy with advice, and among the many pieces of wisdom he provided in his Poor 2 Richard’s Almanac was the warning: “...he that goes a borrowing, goes a sorrowing.”1 Yet U.S. households appear to have ignored this warning. Since the 1960s, household debt, including mortgages and consumer credit and other liabilities, has accounted for about 25 to 30 percent of total credit market debt outstanding.2 Consumer loans excluding mortgages have varied between 10 and 20 percent of commercial bank credit.3 In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, it is easy to forget the important benefits that access to such credit can mean for households and the economy at large. Well-functioning credit markets provide an efficient mechanism for allocating risk and moving funds from savers to borrowers. Credit allows households to consume and invest in goods and services that are currently unaffordable but which are affordable based on their future income, and to manage the risks associated with loss of income. This access to credit allows households to participate in the modern economy. Mortgages allow people to purchase houses, a goal of many families. Auto loans give buyers the means to search for jobs and get to work. Student loans allow people to fund their educations, raising the level of their human capital and the productivity of the workforce. So credit allows people to increase their own well-being and contribute to the country’s economic growth. Over time, financial innovations, regulatory changes, and technological advances have all led to increased access to credit by households, some of whom found it difficult to borrow in earlier times. For example, the development of the secondary mortgage market and securitization brought new sources of funds to the 1 Benjamin Franklin included this in The Way to Wealth, a preface to his Poor Richard’s Almanac of 1758, which summarized advice from earlier editions of the almanac (see http://www.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/bdorsey1/41docs/52-fra.html). But the advice first appeared much earlier, in 1577, in a poem by Thomas Tusser, Five Hundred Pointes of Good Husbandrie (http://www.archive.org/stream/fivehundredpoint08tussuoft/fivehundredpoint08tussuoft_djvu.txt ), as referenced in Hoyt’s New Cyclopedia of Practical Quotations, Funk & Wagnalls Company, 1922. 2 Data are from the Federal Reserve’s Financial Accounts of the United States, more commonly known as the Flow of Funds Accounts. The accounts aggregate data on households and nonprofit organizations. In these remarks, household debt refers to total liabilities of households and nonprofit organizations. 3 Data are from the Federal Reserve’s Assets and Liabilities of Commercial Banks in the United States – H.8. 3 market. Permitting banks to branch nationwide lowered noninterest expenses and loan losses. And the development of credit scoring models lowered transactions costs and allowed lenders to better assess and monitor the riskiness of potential borrowers. However, as the financial crisis underscored, not all financial innovations and credit extensions are beneficial to households or to the broader economy, especially when the risks they entail aren’t fully appreciated. While household debt-to-income ratios had been trending up since the 1960s, the rate of increase rose dramatically in the period leading up to the financial crisis, from about 100 percent in 2000 to over 130 percent in 2007. Over the same period, residential mortgage debt outstanding more than doubled, from $4.8 trillion to over $10.6 trillion, and consumer debt excluding mortgages rose by nearly $1 trillion, from $1.7 trillion to $2.6 trillion. Expansion of the supply of mortgages, including subprime mortgages, played a role in fueling the run-up in home prices, which then permitted an increase in borrowing against home equity, further fueling the rise in debt. Research by Mian and Sufi suggests that most of the rise in household debt prior to the Great Recession was due to an expansion of mortgage debt to new homebuyers, who traditionally had had trouble getting mortgages, and to an increase in home equity borrowing by existing homeowners.4 Demyanyk, who is on the Cleveland Fed staff, and Van Hemert found that as subprime mortgage growth expanded significantly before the crisis, the quality of those mortgages deteriorated.5 The increasing complexity and opacity of some mortgages and other consumer debt products, including complicated structured debt instruments derived from these credits, also contributed to the problems to 4 See Atif Mian and Amir Sufi, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 2009, pp. 1449-1496, and Atif Mian and Amir Sufi, “House Prices, Home Equity Based Borrowing, and the U.S. Household Leverage Crisis,” American Economic Review 101, 2011, pp. 2132-2156. 5 Yuliya Demyanyk and Otto Van Hemert, “Understanding the Subprime Mortgage Cr isis,” Review of Financial Studies 24, 2011, pp. 1848-1880. 4 come. Adjustable rate mortgages with introductory teaser rates, option ARMs, piggyback second mortgages, and other types of complex mortgages were offered. Some of these could be sustained only if it were assumed that house prices would keep rising, allowing the borrower to refinance to repay the mortgage. Credit card contracts began including more complex terms like double-cycle billing, in which interest was based on the current and prior month’s balance. As these dynamics continued, systemic risks were building up. The seminal model of Kiyotaki and Moore shows how such risks can be amplified and propagated.6 In their model, because borrowers cannot be forced to repay, all lending is collateralized. When the economy is performing well, the value of the collateral increases, which supports further borrowing and higher output. But when a negative shock hits the economy and output declines, collateral values also fall, which means borrowing falls, which depresses output even further. Thus, the collateral constraint is a mechanism that amplifies and propagates the effects of temporary shocks on the economy. Brunnermeier and Sannikov build on the Kiyotaki and Moore model.7 In their model, an economic boom increases bank capital levels high enough so that credit is amply available to borrowers. This lowers the volatility of both output and asset prices. The lower volatility induces banks to increase their leverage and lend even more, so much so that the system is now vulnerable to a negative shock. Geanakoplos talks about this in terms of a leverage cycle.8 Variation in leverage can have an important impact on asset prices and contribute to economic booms and busts. Agents that value the asset more are willing to pay more and leverage up to get it, driving the price up. If they are unable to borrow or are hit by a wealth shock, they will buy less and the value of the asset will fall. So leverage is high in booms and low in bad economic times, and in the boom times, the economy becomes quite vulnerable to economic shocks. 6 Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and John Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 1997, pp. 211-248. 7 Markus K. Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov, “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Secto r,” American Economic Review 104, 2014, pp. 379-421. 8 John Geanakoplos, “The Leverage Cycle,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009, pp. 1-65. 5 When home prices began to fall, many borrowers found the amount owed on their mortgages was higher than the value of their property. Negative equity led to foreclosures when borrowers were unable to keep up their mortgage payments; some houses were sold at fire-sale prices, leading to further declines in real estate prices. The poor underwriting of many of these mortgages and the concentration of these risky assets into securities helped propagate the problems throughout the financial system, with spillovers to other asset-backed securities markets. Other significant weaknesses in the financial system were also revealed. Among them were over-reliance on short-term wholesale funding to finance longer-term assets, which made institutions vulnerable to runs; misaligned incentives; lax underwriting standards; and inadequate risk monitoring by institutions and regulators alike. As the housing market collapsed, highly leveraged households began to cut back on their spending. Businesses cut activity and hiring. Banks, under stress from their mortgage loans and securitized assets, began to restrict credit; loan losses rose, and bank capital levels shrunk. The economy entered a severe recession. But nearly six years ago, the economy began to emerge from that Great Recession, although seemingly begrudgingly at first. Among the so-called headwinds that held back growth earlier in the recovery was the significant deleveraging that households needed to do to get their balance sheets back in order. The good news is that this headwind has waned – there has been a significant improvement in household balance sheets over the expansion, and this is supporting consumer spending. At the aggregate level, household net worth fell by more than $10 trillion in 2008.9 It took more than three years to rebuild this wealth, but now thanks to higher equity and house prices, household net worth has risen to $83 trillion and is 24 percent higher than its previous peak of $67 trillion in 2007. Household debt peaked in the third quarter of 2008 at $14.6 trillion. By the third quarter of 2012, it had fallen by $1 9 Data in this paragraph are derived from the Federal Reserve’s Financial Accounts of the United States (Flow of Funds Accounts). 6 trillion to a trough of $13.6 trillion, led by declines in mortgage debt that reflect a combination of charge- offs and a drop in new mortgage issuance. But household debt is now rising again as charge-offs have been shrinking, mortgage issuance has turned positive, and consumer credit excluding mortgages has been rising. Despite this rise in credit, households’ leverage ratios are down. Household debt relative to disposable personal income has fallen to around 100 percent and is near its longer-run trend. The improvement in households’ balance sheets is one of the important fundamentals underlying the outlook for continued expansion, further improvement in labor markets, and inflation gradually moving back to the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target over the medium term. The Fed’s Interest in Consumer Credit Research The Federal Reserve System has long supported research on consumer credit and household finance, but the significant toll that the financial crisis and Great Recession have taken on the economy underscores the need for improving our knowledge of the important linkages between the health of the consumer financial sector and the health of the broader macroeconomy and financial markets. Because retail credit is an important part of bank portfolios, Fed bank supervisors and examiners need to be able to identify the emerging risks and trends in consumer credit markets in order to promote the safety and soundness of individual institutions. Even though some aspects of consumer protection rule-writing and the responsibility for oversight of large banks’ consumer-credit-related activities have shifted from the Fed to the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), the Fed maintains responsibility for conducting consumer compliance examinations, including fair lending reviews and financial institutions’ performance under the Community Reinvestment Act. This act induces lenders to find ways to extend credit and provide financial services in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. The Dodd-Frank Act, signed into law in 2010, directed the Federal Reserve and other financial regulatory agencies to augment the microprudential supervision of individual institutions with a macroprudential 7 approach designed to address systemic risk. If anyone ever doubted that emerging problems in household financial products have the potential to threaten not only the safety and soundness of individual financial institutions but also overall financial stability, the recent financial crisis quashed that view. Retail credit, including residential mortgages, credit cards, auto loans, and other consumer loans, is an important component of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) and Dodd-Frank supervisory stress tests applied to bank holding companies with over $50 billion in assets. And as we’ve been discussing, because disruptions in the household finance sector can have significant effects on the macroeconomy, Federal Reserve policymakers need to be able to quantify those effects in order to promote our monetary policy goals of maximum employment and price stability. Policy-Relevant Consumer Credit Research Research in consumer credit plays an important role in helping the Fed meet its responsibilities for setting monetary policy, promoting financial stability, and ensuring the safety and soundness of the financial institutions we examine. Good policymaking and regulation are not based merely on good intentions. The basis of effective policy is the economic and finance research that informs it. This research is hard work. Simple intuition that makes some things sound obviously true at first blush may be misleading, in particular when important interactions take place among decision makers with different preferences and incentives. Simple empirical regularities may exist in the data – until they don’t; they are not a reliable basis for effective regulation. Careful analysis can help ameliorate unintended consequences of regulations. Regulation Q is an example of a regulation that started with good intentions but played out poorly. Competition for bank deposits was thought to have contributed to the bank failures in the early part of the Great Depression. The Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935 sought to limit that competition by prohibiting the payment of interest on demand deposits and imposing interest rate ceilings on time and savings 8 accounts. Reg Q implemented these provisions. Although the rate ceilings were intended to make the banking system more stable, they did just the opposite when market rates rose sharply in the late 1970s and early 1980s and there were large outflows of deposits from depository institutions.10 Of course, to do the sound research needed to inform sound policymaking, researchers need the right tools. In his presidential address to the American Finance Association in January 2006, Harvard University Professor John Campbell pointed out that two challenges to the study of household finance are measurement and modeling.11 Because data on households’ choices of financial instruments, accounts, and payment methods are hard to obtain, it is hard to gain a deeper understanding of the drivers of those choices and how they change over the life cycle. Standard textbook models typically rely on the representative agent and single-period decision making. But households are more complicated. They differ in their rate of time preference and risk tolerance, and for any particular household, these are likely to change over its life cycle. Even my use of the word “household” is an abstraction, since who actually makes financial decisions within a household differs across households, products, and time. Progress is being made on both the data and modeling fronts. The workhorse data sets of consumer finance research – the Federal Reserve’s triennial Survey of Consumer Finances and the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data – are now being augmented by credit bureau data, new consumer surveys, data generated by field experiments, and non-U.S. surveys. Indeed, several papers included in this conference use new data sets. The Federal Reserve System has been putting consumer credit data in the hands of its bank examiners and researchers via the System’s Risk Assessment, Data Analysis, and Research data warehouse, or RADAR, which began as a collaboration between the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 10 For a discussion of Reg Q, see R. Alton Gilbert, “Requiem for Regulation Q: What It Did and Why It Passed Away,” Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, February 1986, pp. 22-37. 11 John Y. Campbell, “Household Finance,” Journal of Finance 61, 2006, pp. 1553-1604. 9 The focus of macroeconomists on better understanding the microfoundations of their models has also helped the study of consumer credit markets. Better computational resources and numerical techniques have allowed researchers to incorporate heterogeneous agents and expanded credit markets with borrowers, lenders, and savers of different types into general equilibrium models. These general equilibrium models, which are then calibrated to characteristics of the economy being investigated, allow researchers to study equilibrium dynamics, something that simpler models are less able to do. These models also allow for the serious evaluation of different policies, so-called policy experiments. They are less subject to the Lucas critique because by incorporating agents’ expectations about the policy regime they are in, the models help uncover structural relationships in the economy that are invariant to the alternative policy choices being studied. On the empirical side, researchers are applying insightful identification strategies to help isolate causal relationships in the data and test alternative hypotheses; some are running controlled experiments. For example, to uncover the important role leverage played in the effect of changes in house prices on consumer spending, Mian and Sufi exploited cross-sectional variation in household leverage across U.S. counties.12 An example of a controlled experiment is the study of the effectiveness of homeownership counseling conducted by the Philadelphia Fed’s Community Development Studies and Education Department under lead investigator Marty Smith. The experimental design involved random assignments of study participants into a treatment group, whose participants received one-on-one credit counseling as well as a two-hour homebuyer’s workshop, and a control group, whose participants received only the two-hour workshop. The participants’ financial performance was then tracked for four years. The study found that both groups benefited from the counseling they received, but the improvement in terms of 12 They found that when house prices declined, counties that had exhibited higher growth in household debt -to- income ratios from 2002 to 2006 experienced sharper declines in consumer spending on durables than did less - leveraged counties, and that the declines in spending by highly leveraged counties are sizable. See Atif Mian and Amir Sufi, “Household Leverage and the Recession of 2007-09,” IMF Economic Review 58, 2010, pp. 74-117. 10 credit scores, indebtedness, and days delinquent on debt payment tended to be higher for the treatment group. Directions for Future Research on Consumer Credit Partly due to applications of new data and modeling techniques, our understanding of consumer credit markets has advanced quite a bit from where it was 10 years ago. But there is more work to be done. Let me finish with three broad areas I think deserve further study. (1) First, we need to consider what the findings derived from applying behavioral finance to the study of household finance imply for the regulation of consumer credit markets and products. The research shows that consumers often make decisions that differ from those that would come from a standard optimization framework. For example, they often use simple rules of thumb to make decisions, or take other steps to limit their choice sets before making decisions. Households tend to be under-diversified in their asset holdings and to under-participate in the stock market; they rebalance their portfolios at frequencies lower than those suggested by theory; and many households fail to exercise the option to refinance their mortgages even though they’d stand to benefit.13 The discrepancy between what households do and what theory suggests they should do differs by type of product and by household characteristics. Whether remedies are needed to address these discrepancies, and what remedies would be effective in doing so, is an open question. Perhaps it is the theory that needs adjusting rather than the behavior of consumers. If certain high-cost loan products are being chosen by particular households, one needs to ask whether these are the best products available to them. Are there certain characteristics of the product on which they place high value even if the median consumer would not? Are they being screened out of alternative, lower-cost products because of their risk characteristics, or are they being screened out 13 See Campbell (2006) for further discussion. 11 unfairly based on irrelevant information? Are they locked into the high-cost product because of high switching costs, which afford the lender market power? Are they unaware of attractive alternatives, either because the complexity of the products makes them difficult to compare or because of insufficient disclosures? Whether regulatory intervention is called for and, if it is, the type of intervention needed would differ in each of these cases. It is also interesting to consider the relationship between the behavioral results suggesting that households may not be fully optimizing because they lack knowledge and financial literacy and other findings suggesting that some households make strategic financial choices. For example, Amromin, Huang, Sialm, and Zhong study complex mortgages with features like zero or negative amortization, short interest rate reset periods, and low introductory teaser interest rates. Contrary to what simple intuition might suggest, they find that over the 2003 to 2009 period, complex mortgages were used by financially sophisticated borrowers with high incomes and credit scores, and that these borrowers were more likely to strategically default on their mortgages when they were in a negative equity position compared to households with more traditional mortgages.14 If so, then additional disclosures of contract terms would not have necessarily changed demand for these mortgages or improved the welfare of these borrowers. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales also provide evidence of strategic defaults. They find that during the recent housing bust, roughly a quarter to a third of mortgage defaults were by homeowners in negative equity positions who defaulted even though they had the ability to pay.15 These results suggest that the heterogeneity across borrowers, including their level of sophistication, will be important to incorporate into our models and to consider when formulating regulations. 14 Gene Amromin, Jennifer Huang, Clemens Sialm, and Edward Zhong, “Complex Mortgages,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 17315, August 2011. 15 Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “The Determinants of Attitudes Toward Strategic Default on Mortgages,” Journal of Finance 68, 2013, pp. 1473-1515. 12 (2) A second important issue that deserves more study is how regulation of consumer financial products and markets may affect financial innovation. It would be a mistake to infer from the financial crisis that financial innovation is always harmful. Innovation has led to a more efficient financial system, extended the benefits of financial services to underserved communities and households, and yielded more product choice. But it would also be a mistake not to recognize that some innovations may be harmful or do not provide sufficient benefits to justify their costs. For example, loan pricing terms can be so complex as to reduce transparency and impede competition. Some provisions defy easy disclosure – like the double- cycle billing in which a bank calculated interest based on the current balance and on the previous month’s balance. The Board of Governors banned this practice after determining its complexity reduced transparency and provided no benefit to the consumer. As Campbell discusses, many investment products involve a cross-subsidy from unsophisticated consumers of the product who don’t take full advantage of the product’s embedded options to sophisticated borrowers who do. But this means that lenders have no incentive to try to educate consumers of these products, since this would reduce the ability to cross-subsidize; indeed, they may have the incentive to create more complex, hard-to-explain, higher priced products. How to strike the proper balance between regulations that foster a more efficient, competitive, and safe financial system without stifling beneficial innovation should be informed by further research. (3) Finally, given the importance of the household sector to both the macroeconomy and to financial markets, more work needs to be done on the nexus between monetary policy and financial stability policy. This includes determining the most effective way to address emerging risks to financial stability and developing models that can be used to evaluate how policymakers should incorporate financial stability 13 concerns into monetary policymaking.16 Improving our ability to monitor and assess risks in the financial system is critically important, but it isn’t enough. We also need to be able to evaluate the cost and benefits of actions policymakers can take to mitigate emerging risks before they result in financial imbalances that threaten financial stability. Supervisors are developing macroprudential tools, such as countercyclical capital buffers, capital conservation buffers, and stress test scenarios, as well as tools not yet established in the U.S. but used in other countries, including loan-to-value ratio limits and debt-to- income ratio limits that vary over the cycle and which have been targeted to particular sectors like housing credit or household credit.17 These tools show promise, but as yet, their performance is largely untested. In remarks at an economic development conference, former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan cited some emerging risks the Federal Reserve was following in consumer credit markets. He said, “Last quarter credit card delinquencies ratcheted up to just short of an all-time high, and consumer bankruptcies continue at a record pace. We also have heard first hand at the Federal Reserve about the use of ‘equity stripping’ by some mortgage lenders who have made loans to lower-income homeowners that have no reasonable prospects of repayment.”18 It might surprise you to know that this statement was not made at 16 There is an ongoing research effort at central banks around the world to develop such models. Yves Mersch, member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, discusses some of this research in “Monetary Policy and Economic Inequality,” keynote speech, Corporate Credit Conference, Zurich, October 17, 2014. 17 For example, Canada tightened loan-to-value and debt-to income limits on mortgage lending over the 2009 to 2012 period. See Ivo Krznar and James Morsink, “With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility: Macroprudential Tools at Work in Canada,” IMF Working Paper WP/14/83, May 2014. Beginning in 2010, Israel also implemented a package of macroprudential tools to restrict the supply of housing credit. See Stanley Fischer, “Macroprudential Policy in Action: Israel,” in George A. Akerlof, Olivier J. Blanchard, David Romer, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds., What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy After the Crisis, Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press, 2014, pp. 87-98. Spain introduced dynamic loan-loss provisioning in 2000. This method builds up reserves during good economic times according to the historical losses experienced by the asset classes held in the bank’s portfolio. This buffer is then available to absorb losses in bad times. See Eliana Balla and Andrew McKenna, “Dynamic Provisioning: A Countercyclical Tool for Loan Loss Reserves,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 95, Fall 2009, pp. 383-418. 18 Alan Greenspan, “Remarks at the Economic Development Conference of the Greenlin ing Institute,” San Francisco, CA, October 11, 1997. 14 the height of the recent financial crisis; it was made in a speech given in October 1997, suggesting that although identifying emerging risks may be difficult, determining whether action should be taken and what actions are appropriate in addressing those risks may be even more difficult. Conclusion I would like to end my remarks the same way I started – with another quote from our friend Ben Franklin, who said: “Being ignorant is not so much a shame, as being unwilling to learn.”19 The financial crisis and ensuing Great Recession imposed very high costs on the American public, showing that there is still a lot to learn, but also that the returns to further knowledge are likely to be very high as well. The research agenda in the area of household finance undertaken by both central bank and academic economists has expanded our knowledge; it is producing results that are informing how we assess risk in individual financial institutions, the overall financial sector, and the macroeconomy. I hope and expect that researchers will continue to work on the household finance research agenda. This agenda includes the basic theoretical and empirical research needed to produce testable models so we can better understand the complex interactions in credit markets, assess the effects of proposed regulations, and understand the tradeoffs and linkages between monetary policy and financial stability. The agenda also includes more applied research focused on tools to better monitor emerging risks in the financial system and individual institutions that originate in consumer credit markets. We should heed the words of Ben Franklin. As policymakers charged with responsibility for monetary policy, and micro- and macroprudential supervision, it’s our duty not only to support the advancement of this knowledge but also to be willing to learn from it. 19 Ascribed to Benjamin Franklin in Poor Richard’s Almanac of 1755 by The Dover Anthology of American Literature, Volume 1: From the Origins Through the Civil War, B. Blaisdell, ed., 2014, p. 33.

Post-Crisis Financial System Regulation and Its Research Foundation Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Financial Intermediation Research Society Conference Reykjavik, Iceland May 25, 2015 1 Introduction Good afternoon. It is hard for me to convey how honored I am to present the lunch keynote address at this year’s Financial Intermediation Research Society (FIRS) conference. At the risk of dating myself, I am proud to say that I was a founding member of the society, and it’s been a great pleasure to see how FIRS has developed and spread its wings to all parts of the globe. I thank George Pennacchi, president of the society, Vish Viswanathan, president-elect and this year’s program chair, and Allen Berger, my friend and co-author, for the opportunity to speak today. It’s been wonderful catching up with old friends and meeting new scholars who are pushing the envelope of financial intermediation research. In his presidential address to the American Finance Association earlier this year, Luigi Zingales asked an important question: “Does finance benefit society?” He pointed out the dissonance between the view of academics, who typically say “yes,” and that of the average American, who is much less certain.1 Zingales argues that academia has an important role to play in ensuring that finance will benefit society. I agree. Academic research can help detect those aspects of financial system design and practices that are beneficial to society and those that are harmful, and Zingales calls for academics to get more involved in policy issues. Today, I’m going to focus on one aspect of policy – the design and practice of financial system regulation after the financial crisis – and the role research has played in informing that regulation. I’ll also discuss an area that needs further research: the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability policy. Before proceeding, I note that the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 1 Zingales (forthcoming) cites the Chicago Booth-Kellogg School Financial Trust Index survey of a representative sample of about 1,000 American households, conducted by Social Science Research Solutions. Forty -eight percent of respondents to the December 2014 survey said that the U.S. financial system hurts the U.S. economy, while only 34 percent said it benefits the U.S. economy. 2 The Post-Crisis Supervision and Regulation Framework: A Micro- and Macroprudential Approach I do not need to tell this audience that financial institutions are able to provide valuable credit, risk- management, and liquidity services to businesses and households because they are designed to take risks and are highly leveraged compared with nonfinancial businesses. But this risk-taking and leverage raise the possibility of systemic problems that could threaten the functioning of the financial system, hurt real economic activity, and impose significant economic costs. The 2008 financial crisis exposed gaps in the regulatory and supervisory architecture, which contributed to a build-up in financial imbalances and systemic risk. There are many lessons to be learned from the crisis and its aftermath. The crisis drove home the notion that incentives matter and regulation itself creates incentives. Finance and economic researchers do not need to be told this. Well-designed regulations create incentives that promote financial stability. But sometimes regulations, no matter how well intentioned, can create counterproductive incentives and unintended consequences. At least some part of the strong growth in financial intermediation that occurred outside of the regulated banking system was driven by the desire to avoid regulation. One strong lesson from the crisis is that when setting up regulatory systems, policymakers need to understand the incentives created by the regulatory system itself, incentives that influence the behavior of all market participants: the financial intermediaries and their investors and customers, and also the regulators. Of course, this was recognized in the finance literature well before the recent crisis. In fact, Ed Kane, who presented the lunch keynote address at the very first FIRS Conference, in 2004, has written extensively on the incentives of regulators.2 The crisis also taught us that we need to avoid designing regulations that attempt to work against market forces. Such regulations will be much more likely to fail or to distort incentives and create unintended 2 See Kane (1981) for one of his earlier works. 3 consequences. Instead, the regulatory system should attempt to harness market discipline to promote financial stability. The financial crisis underscored the need for a new approach to financial system supervision and regulation. The regulatory reforms engendered in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, signed into law in 2010, aim to foster financial stability in two ways: first, by lowering the probability of a financial crisis, and second, by reducing the costs imposed on the rest of the economy when a shock hits the financial system. Under Dodd-Frank, the Federal Reserve and other financial regulatory agencies were directed to augment their traditional microprudential approach, which promotes the safety and soundness of individual institutions, with a macroprudential approach in which examiners and supervisors take a horizontal view of risk across institutions rather than looking at only one institution at a time. Such a macroprudential approach had been suggested by Crockett (2000), Borio (2003), and others at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) well before the recent crisis, so there was a relatively large body of work to draw on. Indeed, according to Clement (2010), records at the BIS indicate the term “macroprudential” was first used in an international context in 1979 in a meeting of the Cooke Committee, which was the precursor to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. Although there is still more to be done, regulators continue to make progress in developing tools to implement the macroprudential approach to promoting financial stability and to improve the monitoring of risks over the business and financial cycles. In general, the macroprudential tools can be classified into two categories: structural tools and cyclical tools. The structural tools aim to build the resiliency of the financial system throughout the business cycle. These tools include the Basel III risk-based capital requirements, minimum liquidity requirements, central clearing for derivatives, and living will resolution plans. 4 In contrast, the cyclical tools are aimed at mitigating the systemic risk that can build up over the business cycle. These tools include the bank stress tests, the countercyclical capital buffer, and the capital conservation buffer. The countercyclical capital buffer allows regulators to increase risk-based capital requirements when credit growth is judged to be excessive and leading to rising systemic risk. The capital conservation buffer ensures that banks raise capital above regulatory minimums in good times so that when they cover losses in bad times, their capital ratio will stay at or above the regulatory minimum. Other possible cyclical tools, not yet established in the U.S. but used in other countries, include loan-to- value ratio limits and debt-to-income ratio limits that vary over the cycle and which have been targeted to particular sectors like housing credit or household credit.3 While the structural and cyclical tools show promise, as yet, their performance is largely untested. For example, a study by economists at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) examining the effectiveness of macroprudential tools in reducing systemic risk in 49 countries found mixed results (Lim, Columba, Costa, Kongsamut, Otani, Saiyid, Wezel, and Wu, 2011). The authors concluded that many of the most frequently used tools were effective in reducing the pro-cyclicality of credit and leverage, but the effectiveness depended on the type of shock hitting the financial sector. Research Has Informed the Post-Crisis Supervision and Regulation Framework Legislated regulatory reforms and the work being done by financial regulators to implement those reforms have been informed by a body of academic research over many decades. Many of the people in this room have made significant contributions to this research agenda. Academic research has greatly aided our 3 For example, Canada tightened loan-to-value and debt-to-income limits on mortgage lending over the 2009 to 2012 period (Krznar and Morsink, 2014). Beginning in 2010, Israel also implemented a package of macroprudential tools to restrict the supply of housing credit (Fischer, 2014). Spain introduced dynamic loan-loss provisioning in 2000. This method builds up reserves during good economic times according to the historical losses experienced by the asset classes held in the bank’s portfolio. This buffer is then available to absorb losses in bad times (Balla and McKenna, 2009). 5 understanding of how systemic risks can build up and propagate throughout the economy, and this understanding has put a firmer foundation under the regulatory reforms being undertaken. Indeed, well before the crisis, academic research on banking panics pointed to the importance of supplementing microprudential regulation with what we now call macroprudential regulation. The seminal work of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) explicitly modeled a financial crisis in which bank failures had macroeconomic consequences. Gorton (1985) distinguished runs on one bank from banking panics, which entail runs on many banks or the entire banking system. A large body of research has explored the problems imposed on the financial system from fire sales of assets. While one firm might benefit from the ability to sell assets in response to a negative shock, if the shock hits the potential buyers of these assets at the same time, asset prices can decline sharply, which will affect the prices of similar assets held by other firms. In their Journal of Economic Perspectives paper, Shleifer and Vishny (2011) discuss the role of fire sales in the recent financial crisis. Their model of fire sales (Shleifer and Vishny, 1992) was developed well before the recent crisis and built on Kiyotaki and Moore’s seminal work on the important role collateral plays in lending markets. In Kiyotaki and Moore’s (1997) model, because borrowers cannot be forced to repay, all lending is collateralized. When the economy is performing well, the value of the collateral increases, which supports further borrowing and higher output. But when a negative shock hits the economy and output declines, collateral values also fall, which means borrowing falls, which depresses output even further. Thus, the collateral constraint is a mechanism that amplifies and propagates the effects of temporary shocks on the economy. Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) build on the Kiyotaki and Moore model. In their model, an economic boom increases bank capital levels high enough so that credit is amply available to borrowers. This lowers the volatility of both output and asset prices. The lower volatility induces banks to increase their leverage and lend even more, so much so that the system is now vulnerable to a 6 negative shock. These models illustrate that systemic risk is endogenous, determined by the choices of the model’s decision makers, and that systemic risk varies across the cycle. The research also points out an important aspect of financial crises that, in my view, needs further study: the dynamics of distress in financial markets. In order to determine the appropriate response, regulators and supervisors need to be able to detect whether an institution’s problems stem from temporary liquidity problems or broader solvency concerns. If the former, then the lender of last resort can be used to address the issue, as the institution would have sound, albeit illiquid, collateral to post for the loan. But the demarcation between illiquidity and insolvency is fluid. A temporary liquidity problem at one institution, if not adequately addressed, can morph into a solvency problem, which can then propagate to other institutions. Thus, it is imperative that supervisors stay attentive to the risks that might be developing at individual institutions, as well as across institutions, before those risks become a systemic issue. So, microprudential supervision continues to have an important role to play. Implementing Supervision and Regulation Informed by Research A Tiered Approach While academic research has informed us about the benefits of augmenting microprudential with macroprudential supervision, it is up to the supervisors and regulators to actually implement this new framework as directed by the legislation. Let me discuss some of the recent efforts. The Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies in the U.S. are taking a tiered approach to banking supervision and regulation, which finds support in the literature (e.g., Brunnermeier, Crockett, Goodhart, Persaud, and Shin, 2009). This approach recognizes that the risk a banking organization poses to the financial system is likely to vary according to the bank’s size, range of activities, interconnectedness both domestically and globally, complexity, and the extent to which there is a lack of readily available substitutes for the services it provides; oversight is then tailored appropriately. Doing so 7 helps to reduce the potential costs some banks might face if made to comply with rules that don’t further the goal of a healthy and resilient financial system. It also frees up the bandwidth of examiners and supervisors so they can focus more of their attention on where the risks actually lie.4 Capital Regulation Two important focuses of post-crisis regulation and supervision are capital and liquidity. There is close to a consensus in the literature that high leverage was a major contributor to the severity of the financial crisis. Greenlaw, Hatzius, Kashyap, and Shin (2008) show that the concentration of losses in the leveraged financial sector exacerbated the negative effects of the crisis. They argue that leveraged financial institutions suffering from a shortage of capital were not in a position to take advantage of the central bank’s liquidity injections meant to encourage balance-sheet expansion. Rather, these institutions contracted lending in order to be in a position to rebuild their capital levels, and this lengthened the time to recovery. Acharya and Schnabl (2009) argue that mechanisms meant to transfer assets off their balance sheets to other investors, like securitization, actually worked to increase the banks’ effective leverage and raised systemic risk. Admati and Hellwig (2013) have been impassioned advocates for requiring significantly higher levels of bank capital, in particular, in the form of equity capital. The Basel III international capital reforms do raise the minimum requirements for both the quantity and quality of capital held by banks, although not to the levels Admati and Hellwig prefer. For all banking organizations, the U.S. rules raise the minimum ratio of tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets from 4 percent to 6 percent and impose a minimum leverage ratio of tier 1 capital to total assets of 4 percent. 4 The Federal Reserve has organized its supervision of institutions around four groups of banks: community banks, which are institutions with $10 billion or less in assets; regional banking organizations, with assets between $10 billion and $50 billion; large banking organizations; and systemically important institutions. Since the actions community banks take do not typically impose costs on the rest of the financial system or create the kinds of contagion that can put the entire financial system at risk, these banks aren’t subject to the same types of macroprudential rules and supervision that apply to systemically important institutions. 8 Common equity must now be the predominate form of tier 1 capital.5 In addition, large, internationally active banking organizations are subject to a new minimum supplementary leverage ratio that takes into account off-balance-sheet exposures, including credit derivatives, repo-style transactions, and lines of credit. While the U.S. has required banks to meet a minimum leverage ratio requirement for some time, the Basel III reforms introduced this requirement in an international context. I see a lot of benefit to complementing the risk-based capital requirements with a non-risk-based leverage ratio requirement. It is simpler and more transparent and should serve as a further backstop against excessive leverage. In my view, another lesson from the crisis is that regulatory complexity can complicate supervision, risk monitoring, compliance, and enforcement. Given the scope and ever-changing nature of the financial system, regulatory complexity is to a certain extent unavoidable. But the tradeoffs should be recognized. It is reasonable to require higher levels of capital to be held against higher-risk assets, but a system of risk weights that is overly granular and complex would be counterproductive. In practice, too much complexity would make it harder for regulators to assess compliance and to determine whether institutions were engaging in some practices merely as a way to hide risk and lower their capital requirements. Liquidity Regulation In addition to higher capital requirements, large banking organizations are now subject to minimum liquidity requirements. The earliest research on financial intermediation recognized that, by the design of their assets and liabilities, banks are subject to runs. Deposit insurance and access to the lender of last 5 The rules include a new minimum ratio of common equity tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of 4.5 percent. Banks must also hold a capital conservation buffer of this type of capital equal to 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets. 9 resort were meant to address the issue in a bank-centric financial system. But financial markets have evolved. The financial crisis showed that runs can occur not just at traditional banking institutions but in many parts of the financial system where short-term financing is used to fund longer-term assets, including money market funds and repo markets. Tirole (2011) reviews and models the role illiquidity played in the crisis and what he calls illiquidity’s friends: market freezes, fire sales, contagion, and, ultimately, insolvencies and bailouts. Much of the academic research points to the role of the lender of last resort in addressing liquidity problems. Liquidity regulation has a role to play, too, by helping to lower the probability of a systemic event and making one more manageable should it occur. International banking agencies through the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision have developed two quantitative liquidity standards: the liquidity coverage requirement (LCR) and the net stable funding ratio (NSFR). Under the U.S. rule implementing the LCR, the largest banking organizations must hold a buffer of high-quality liquid assets sufficient to cover net cash outflows during a 30-day stress scenario.6 The revised and final NSFR was released by the Basel Committee last October. The NSFR is meant to be a complement to the LCR by looking at the bank’s funding profile beyond the 30-day window. Stress Testing Another important aspect of the new regulatory approach involves horizontal reviews of banking organizations, which augment the examinations of individual institutions. An example is the annual cross-firm evaluation of capital that the Fed performs at the largest institutions (those with $50 billion or more in consolidated assets). One part of this assessment is the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which evaluates the bank holding company’s capital adequacy, the process by which the holding company ensures its capital adequacy, and its planned capital distributions, including dividend 6 In the U.S., the LCR applies to banking organizations with total consolidated assets of $250 billion or more or total consolidated on-balance-sheet foreign exposures of $10 billion or more. A simpler, less stringent version of the LCR applies to other banking organizations with $50 billion or more in total consolidated assets. Banking organizations with total assets of less than $50 billion are not subject to LCR requirements. 10 payments and stock buy-backs. Another part of the assessment is the Dodd-Frank Act stress test (DFAST), a forward-looking component that evaluates whether capital is sufficient to absorb losses under a stress scenario. These assessments of bank capital allow regulators to evaluate not only individual firms but also the resiliency of the group of institutions during times of stress. Resolution Plans and Orderly Liquidation Many of the regulatory reforms I’ve been discussing foster financial stability by aiming to lower the probability that a financial crisis will develop. But the crisis made clear that it was also important to reduce the costs imposed on the rest of the economy when a shock hits the financial system. Dodd-Frank has taken steps in that direction. The act requires a systemically important financial institution to provide a resolution plan or living will detailing how, were the firm to fail, it could be wound down in an orderly way under the bankruptcy code without imposing severe adverse consequences on the financial system and the rest of the U.S. economy. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Fed have provided guidance to financial companies on their submitted plans, asking them to address issues that are impediments to resolution under the bankruptcy code, such as funding and liquidity, counterparty risk, global cooperation, and the interconnectedness and complexity of their organizational and legal structures.7 When an orderly resolution by bankruptcy is not possible, the Dodd-Frank Act’s Title II provisions establish an orderly liquidation authority (OLA) to resolve troubled nonbank financial companies, including bank holding companies, securities broker-dealers, and other nonbank financial firms. This authority resides in the FDIC, the agency also responsible for resolving failed banks. Among other powers, the authority includes the ability to establish a bridge financial company, to terminate certain financial contracts, and to convert debt to equity. If a failing firm is taken into receivership by the FDIC 7 FDIC Chairman Gruenberg (2015) provides additional information on the status of financial firms’ living wills. 11 under this authority, the act compels the FDIC to ensure that shareholders and creditors bear losses and that the management responsible for the losses is replaced. Jackson and Skeel (2010) and Jackson (2010), among others, have made the case that a modified bankruptcy code could work even for large, complex financial firms and that it might work better than Dodd-Frank’s orderly liquidation authority because, for one thing, it is less discretionary.8 However, because systemically important institutions operate globally, U.S. laws would need to be harmonized with those of other countries. Of course, global operations are also a challenge for resolution under the orderly liquidation authority. There continues to be active discussion among academics and policymakers because effective resolution remains a key task in promoting financial stability. Ironically, we will have a more stable financial system if we build a system that allows insolvent institutions to fail and involves less regulatory intervention to prevent closure of these firms. When managers and creditors do not expect to be bailed out ex post, they will have increased incentives to monitor the risks their institutions are taking and to take adequate precautions to avoid failure. It is too soon to know how well the new orderly liquidation authority will work in practice, and whether it represents a credible resolution mechanism so that no institution is treated as too big to fail and the moral hazard issues engendered by too big to fail are solved. If too big to fail remains a problem, it seems reasonable to ask whether breaking up the institutions would solve it. My answer is “no.” To evaluate such a potential solution, it is important to know why banks have gotten so large. A body of research 8 A Board of Governors study (2011), compelled by Dodd-Frank, summarizes the principal arguments for and against various amendments that would be needed in the bankruptcy code regarding financial firms. 12 suggests that some institutions have grown in size, not to game the system, but for reasons of efficiency.9 More research is needed to calibrate these efficiency benefits against the potential systemic risks posed by large, complex institutions. However, to the extent that market forces and efficiencies encourage banks to grow larger, I remain skeptical that breaking up the banks, however well intentioned, will be effective. Indeed, if the scale economies are large, size restrictions would create great incentives for firms to try to evade the restrictions by moving activities outside of the more regulated sector without necessarily reducing systemic risk. That is, the risk would migrate elsewhere but would not be eliminated. I believe a better approach is to couple a credible resolution method with the imposition of more stringent requirements on institutions that impose more systemic risk on the financial system. This approach, which is a goal of Dodd-Frank, would spur institutions to internalize some of the externalities of taking on risk. Monitoring Emerging Risks Up to now I have focused mainly on regulation, but to promote financial stability, we need continued vigilance in monitoring the buildup of risks in the financial system. Better monitoring will be aided by data being collected by the Office of Financial Research (OFR) and by metrics being developed by academic and central bank economists, such as the Cleveland Fed’s financial stress index, which summarizes movements in a number of financial variables associated with stress.10 It is important to remember, however, that many of these metrics quantify correlations in the data rather than telling us something about the structure of the underlying financial markets or what has caused the movement in the 9 Mester (2008) and Hughes and Mester (2014) review the literature. See also Hughes and Mester (2013), a study that finds large economies of scale in banking, which are not driven by too-big-to-fail considerations. 10 There appears to be an active research agenda in this area. For example, an OFR working paper surveys 31 quantitative measures of systemic risk in the economics and finance literature and provides the c omputer code for most of these measures to encourage further research (Bisias, Flood, Lo, and Valavanis, 2012). 13 metric and whether it requires a policy response. Moreover, integrating such metrics into day-to-day supervision remains a challenge.11 Financial stability surveillance is also receiving regular attention in Federal Open Market Committee meetings. Federal Reserve staff are using a framework, described in Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013), that tracks a standard set of financial system vulnerabilities, including the pricing of risk, leverage, maturity and liquidity transformation, and interconnectedness and complexity, across four broad areas of the financial system: asset markets, the banking sector, shadow banks, and the nonfinancial sector. This regular and systematic analysis is already helping us to better identify changes in conditions over time. But more research is needed to determine what such changes signal about financial stability. Of course, an even bigger question is how policy should respond to signs of emerging financial stability risks and, in particular, how financial stability concerns should be incorporated into monetary policymaking. The Nexus Between Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Policy Recent experience has renewed the discussion of how central banks should respond to emerging systemic risk. We saw that financial imbalances can build up even in a low-inflation environment. While price stability may promote financial stability, it is not a sufficient condition. We also saw that when financial markets are not functioning well, the transmission of monetary policy to the economy can be disrupted. In addition, the FOMC has recognized that nonconventional monetary policy, including large-scale asset purchases and the extended period of essentially zero interest rates, could pose potential risks to financial stability by affecting market functioning and spurring risk-taking in a search for yield.12 11 Cleveland Fed supervisory staff, among others, are working on various applications (Oet, Bianco, Gramlich, and Ong, 2012). 12 The Board of Governors discusses developments related to financial stability in its monetary policy report to Congress. For example, see Board of Governors, 2015. 14 Before the crisis, the conventional approach generally taken by the Fed was to use monetary policy to respond to asset price movements – whether driven by fundamentals or not – only to the extent that those movements contained information about inflation and output growth. Monetary policy would not try to limit the size of imbalances as they developed, but would opt to mop up the consequences of a correction after the fact. But others argued for a more activist approach, with monetary policy being used to try to stem developing imbalances before they caused harm to the real economy. White (2009) characterized these approaches as using monetary policy to clean up the mess after a bubble bursts versus using it to lean against a bubble that appears to be forming. In deciding whether or not to take action against a growing imbalance, policymakers need to balance the expected improvement in future economic conditions against the potential cost of unduly limiting credit extension. If policymakers decide to intervene, the next question is, what tools should they use? Should macroprudential tools be used for financial stability concerns, with monetary policy focused only on its macroeconomic objectives of price stability and maximum employment? Even in this case, there will be interactions between the two types of policy – very loose monetary policy increases the likelihood that financial instabilities will develop, thereby increasing the likelihood macroprudential policy tools will be needed. Tight macroprudential policy could tighten financial conditions more generally, necessitating a monetary policy response. A necessary ingredient in gaining insights into the interactions between monetary and macroprudential policy is the development of structural general equilibrium models that seriously incorporate financial markets and the possibility of financial stress, borrower defaults, and financial institution failures. These models need to be fairly complex. While I earlier argued that simpler regulations may have benefits, the models in which we evaluate such regulations and policies, by necessity, need to be complex. Before the 15 financial crisis we may have convinced ourselves that we could rely on representative agent models, linearized around a steady state, with one interest rate. But the nature of the financial crisis pointed out the inadequacies of these models for understanding the impact of severe financial stress on the real economy. By their nature, financial crises involve nonlinearities, potentially multiple equilibria, and financial frictions that limit arbitrage. So our models need to include these features. In addition, macroprudential tools focus on the allocation of credit in the economy and work through redistribution. To study the effects of such tools, our models need to include heterogeneous agents with different rates of risk tolerance and time preference, and multiple interest rates.13 Of course, monetary policy also entails some redistributions of income and wealth, and understanding the dynamics of the effects of monetary policy also requires the use of more complex models.14 An ongoing research agenda in academia and central banks aims to build models useful for such policy analysis. I don’t have time to review the growing literature in this area, but Adrian and Liang (2014) provide a very useful summary. It is important that research continues to expand our understanding of the interactions between financial markets and the real economy and our ability to monitor developments in each. In the meantime, policymakers need to acknowledge that in the lead-up to the financial crisis, some of the vulnerabilities of the financial system were not fully recognized. Despite our best attempts, there likely remain gaps in our ability to assess the risks in every part of the financial system. This is not an argument that we should use monetary policy as the main tool to address financial stability concerns. Given the state of our knowledge, I would opt to use the macroprudential tools as the first line of defense, since they can be more targeted to the markets and institutions where the risks are emerging. However, I do think 13 For an informative discussion of the nature of the models, see Leeper and Nason (2014). 14 Mersch (2014) discusses some of this research. 16 that when we are making policy decisions, we should be cognizant of the linkages between our nonconventional monetary policy of an extended period of essentially zero interest rates and financial stability. And I encourage the researchers in this room and everywhere to continue pushing out the frontier of our knowledge with some urgency, since the world is not going to stop and wait. I recommend the same sense of urgency to central bankers and financial system supervisors, as we work to implement the new supervision and regulation framework. A Final Thought on How Research Should Inform Legislation Let me leave you with one final thought. The complexity of balancing monetary policy with financial stability considerations does not absolve policymakers from having to clearly explain the rationale for their decisions. If anything, it makes clear communication and transparency even more imperative, so that policy can be more effective and so that the public has the information it needs to hold the central bank accountable. Congress has set the Fed’s goals but it has also given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of those goals. That is, monetary policy decisions do not have to be approved by the president or Congress. This is consistent with a large body of research showing that when central banks formulate monetary policy free from government interference and are held accountable for their decisions, better economic outcomes result. I believe that allowing political considerations to influence monetary policy decisions would be a tremendous mistake because it would ultimately lead to poorer economic performance. The research on this point is clear: the Federal Reserve’s independence in setting monetary policy is worth preserving. 17 References Acharya, Viral V., and Philipp Schnabl, 2009, “How Banks Played the Leverage Game,” Chapter 2 in Restoring Financial Stability: How to Repair a Failed System, Viral V. Acharya, and Matthew Richardson, eds. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley and Sons: 83-100. Admati, Anat, and Martin Hellwig. 2013. The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong with Banking and What to Do About It. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang. 2013. “Financial Stability Monitoring.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) paper 2013-21, Divisions of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board (March). Adrian, Tobias, and Nellie Liang. 2014. “Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial Stability.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 690 (September). Balla, Eliana, and Andrew McKenna. 2009. “Dynamic Provisioning: A Countercyclical Tool for Loan Loss Reserves.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 95: 383-418. Bisias, Dimitrios, Mark Flood, Andrew W. Lo, and Stavros Valavanis. 2012. “A Survey of Systemic Risk Analytics.” Office of Financial Research Working Paper 0001 (January 5). Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2011. “Study on the Resolution of Financial Companies under the Bankruptcy Code.” (July). Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2015. “Developments Related to Financial Stability.” In the Monetary Policy Report: 24-25 (February 24). Borio, Claudio. 2003. “Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Financial Supervision and Regulation?” CESifo Economic Studies 49: 181-215. Brunnermeier, Markus, Andrew Crockett, Charles Goodhart, Avinash D. Persaud, and Hyun Shin. 2009. “The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation,” Geneva Report on the World Economy, International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies. Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov. 2014. “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector.” American Economic Review 104: 379-421. Clement, Piet. 2010. “The Term ‘Macroprudential’: Origins and Evolution.” BIS Quarterly Review: 59- 67. Crockett, Andrew D. 2000. “Marrying the Micro- and Macro-Prudential Dimensions of Financial Stability.” Remarks before the Eleventh International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Basel, Switzerland (September 20-21). Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91: 401-19. Fischer, Stanley. 2014. “Macroprudential Policy in Action: Israel.” In What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy After the Crisis, George A. Akerlof, Olivier J. Blanchard, David Romer, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press: 87-98. 18 Gorton, Gary B. 1985. “Bank Suspension of Convertibility.” Journal of Monetary Economics 15: 177-93. Greenlaw, David , Jan Hatzius, Anil K Kashyap, and Hyun Song Shin. 2008. “Leveraged Losses: Lessons from the Mortgage Market Meltdown.” Proceedings of the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum. Gruenberg, Martin J. 2015. “A Progress Report on the Resolution of Systemically Important Financial Institutions.” Remarks to the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. (May 12). Hughes, Joseph P., and Loretta J. Mester. 2014. “Measuring the Performance of Banks: Theory, Practice, Evidence, and Some Policy Implications,” in Oxford Handbook of Banking, Second Edition, Allen Berger, Philip Molyneux, and John Wilson, eds. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press. Hughes, Joseph P., and Loretta J. Mester. 2013. “Who Said Large Banks Don’t Experience Scale Economies? Evidence from a Risk-Return-Driven Cost Function.” Journal of Financial Intermediation 22: 559-85. Jackson, Thomas H. 2010. “Chapter 11F: A Proposal for the Use of Bankruptcy to Resolve Financial Institutions.” Chapter 11 in Ending Government Bailouts as We Know Them, Kenneth E. Scott, George P. Shultz, and John B. Taylor, eds. Stanford, California: Hoover Institution Press: 217-52. Jackson, Thomas H., and David A. Skeel, Jr. 2010. “Bankruptcy, Banks and Non-Bank Financial Institutions.” Manuscript prepared for the Wharton Financial Institutions Workshop: Cross-Border Issues in Resolving Systemically Important Financial Institutions (February 8). Kane, Edward J., 1981, “Accelerating Inflation, Technological Innovation, and the Decreasing Effectiveness of Banking Regulation.” Journal of Finance 36: 355-367. Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore. 1997. “Credit Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy 105: 211-48. Krznar, Ivo, and James Morsink. 2014. “With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility: Macroprudential Tools at Work in Canada.” IMF Working Paper WP/14/83 (May). Leeper, Eric M., and James M. Nason. 2014. “Bringing Financial Stability into Monetary Policy.” CAMA Working Paper 2014-72, Australian National University (November 11). Lim, C., F. Columba, A. Costa, P. Kongsamut, A. Otani, M. Saiyid, T. Wezel, and X. Wu. 2011. “Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments and How to Use Them? Lessons from Country Experiences.” IMF Working Paper WP/11/238 (October). Mersch, Yves. 2014. “Monetary Policy and Economic Inequality.” Keynote speech, Corporate Credit Conference, Zurich (October 17). Mester, Loretta J. 2008. “Optimal Industrial Structure in Banking.” Chapter 5 in Handbook of Financial Intermediation, Arnoud Boot and Anjan Thakor, eds. Amsterdam: North Holland: 133-62. Oet, Mikhail V., Timothy Bianco, Dieter Gramlich, and Stephen Ong. 2012. “Financial Stress Index: A Lens for Supervising the Financial System.” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 12/37 (December). 19 Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny. 1992. “Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equilibrium Approach.” Journal of Finance 47: 1343-66. Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 2011. “Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25: 29-48. Tirole, Jean. 2011. “Illiquidity and All Its Friends.” Journal of Economic Literature 49: 287-325. White, William R. 2009. “Should Monetary Policy ‘Lean or Clean’?,” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper No. 34 (August). Zingales, Luigi. Forthcoming. “Does Finance Benefit Society?” (August 2015), Journal of Finance.
