The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy: Low-Frequency Policymaking in a High-Frequency World Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland New York Association for Business Economics New York, NY April 1, 2016 1 Introduction Good afternoon. I thank Ellen Zentner and the New York Association for Business Economics for the invitation to speak to you today. I believe that one of the important responsibilities of a Federal Reserve policymaker is to share his or her economic perspectives with the public. Congress has wisely given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of our statutory goals of price stability and maximum employment. I say “wisely” because a body of research and practical experience both here and abroad show that when central banks formulate monetary policy free from short-run political interference, the policy is more effective and yields better economic outcomes. But to preserve that independence, the central bank must be held accountable for its policy decisions. And a key component of that accountability involves policymakers providing information to the public on their evaluation of economic conditions, their outlook for the economy, and the rationale for their decisions. At its March meeting, about two weeks ago, the Federal Open Market Committee made one of those decisions: it decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The FOMC also released a new set of economic projections, something that it does four times a year. Today, I plan to discuss my outlook for the economy and monetary policy. In doing so, I realize I am going against the teachings of Laozi, the 6th century BC Chinese philosopher, who said, “Those who have knowledge, don’t predict, and those who predict, don’t have knowledge.” However, I take my inspiration from a more modern thinker, Henri Poincaré, the 19 th century French mathematician, who said, “It is far better to foresee even without certainty than not to foresee at all.” Before I discuss what I foresee, I should remind you that the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook Despite the gyrations in financial markets at the start of the year, the underlying fundamentals of the U.S. economy remain sound. I expect the economy to grow at a moderate pace of 2.25 to 2.5 percent this year, 2 slightly above its longer-run trend and sufficient to generate further job gains and a further reduction in the unemployment rate this year. I anticipate that inflation will continue to move gradually up toward our target of 2 percent over time. In my view, it will be appropriate for monetary policymakers to continue to gradually reduce the level of accommodation this year. In putting together my forecast for the March FOMC meeting, I incorporated the new information we had received since the December FOMC projections. I know that many people in this room have to forecast at a much higher frequency than four times a year. Let me assure you that policymakers are also constantly assessing incoming information for its implications for the outlook and risks around the outlook. This information includes the official statistical releases and the reports we garner from talking to our boards of directors, advisory councils, and other contacts in our regions. It is important that our policy be “data-dependent,” meaning that policy should depend on how economic and financial conditions evolve, to the extent that those conditions have implications for the medium-run outlook and risks around the outlook. The focus is on the medium-run outlook because that’s the time horizon over which monetary policy affects the economy. But we live in a high-frequency world. Measures of stock market volatility, like the VIX, attest to that. The market gyrations at the end of last year and the beginning of this year were notable. The declines in global equity markets partly reflected market participants’ reassessment of the outlook for global growth, as well as their views on how effective policy actions taken abroad will be. Over the past month or so, we’ve seen some stability return to financial markets. Volatility has declined, stock prices have risen, and credit risk spreads on corporate bonds have narrowed. As a result, on balance, financial conditions are only slightly more restrictive than they were in December. While less volatile than financial market indicators can be, economic data can also vary quite a bit from month to month. “Data-dependent” policymaking does not mean that policy will react to every short-run 3 change in the data – that would be a mistake. One of the challenges for monetary policymakers is making low-frequency policy in a high-frequency world. We need to extract the signal about where the economy is headed from economic and financial market information that can often be noisy. My own forecasts tend to have some consistency over time because I try to stay focused on underlying fundamentals and the medium-run outlook. That said, I have made some changes to my outlook since December. Most of the changes have to do with my longer-run projections. In particular, the cumulative evidence since I last adjusted my longer-run projections has led me to slightly move down my estimates of longer-run growth, the longer-run unemployment rate, and the longer-run fed funds rate, each by 25 basis points. My longer-run growth and unemployment rate estimates had been on the high side of FOMC projections. Of course, it’s important to remember that because of the considerable uncertainty around estimates of potential growth, the natural rate of unemployment, and the equilibrium real interest rate, the differences across FOMC participants’ longer-run estimates are not statistically significant, nor are the 25-basis-point reductions I made to my own estimates. Nonetheless, I wanted to recognize that the moderate growth of around 2 percent that we’ve seen during the expansion has been sufficient to generate a significant fall in the unemployment rate, while inflation has remained low. That combination of moderate growth, continued improvement in labor markets, and low inflation persuaded me that it was time to take the evidence on board and to move my estimates of the longer-run values down a bit. I now project longer-run growth at 2 percent, the longer-run unemployment rate at 5 percent, and the longer-run fed funds rate at 3.25 percent. Economic Growth In terms of the forecast, as I’ve mentioned, I anticipate that growth will pick up to a 2.25 to 2.5 percent range this year. That is slightly lower than my last forecast and reflects both the weakness we saw in the fourth quarter, which suggests that the economy entered 2016 with a little less momentum, and slightly tighter financial conditions, which partly reflect somewhat slower growth abroad. So far, the information 4 we have suggests that growth in the first quarter will remain near the fourth quarter’s pace of around 1.5 percent, but there is still more information coming in. Consumer spending, which makes up about two-thirds of output, has been one of the economy’s strengths, although it too has shown month-to-month volatility that we need to smooth through. Consumer spending has been buoyed by continued improvement in household balance sheets; growth in personal income, reflecting the progress in labor markets; and lower oil prices, as well as highly accommodative monetary policy that has kept borrowing rates low. The drop in gasoline prices from $3.36 per gallon in 2014 to $2.42 per gallon in 2015 saved the average household about $700. The U.S. Energy Information Administration now forecasts that gasoline prices will average $1.89 per gallon this year, which would mean another $400 in cost savings for the average household. I believe we are seeing a positive effect on spending from lower gasoline prices. Auto sales were particularly strong over the past year, hitting a new record of 17.5 million; many of these were SUVs and other larger vehicles. Instead of spending it, some households may be choosing to save some of the windfall from lower gas prices – we’ve seen the savings rate rise. Or they may be using it to pay down debt. Either way, the improvement in balance sheets will help support future consumption. The housing sector has also shown steady improvement, and I expect that to continue. Total sales of new and existing homes have been rising slowly over the past few years. Existing home sales have made considerable progress in approaching the average level seen before the run-up during the housing bubble, while new home sales still have some ways to go to reach that milestone. Housing starts have been moving up but are still below the levels consistent with projections of household formation over the longer run, and in some markets, the supply of housing hasn’t kept up with demand. So there is some chance we will see an acceleration in construction this year. Mortgage rates are low, but households are being appropriately careful in not taking on more mortgage debt than they can handle, and banks are lending to those with good credit quality. House prices have been rising at a 5 to 6 percent pace, on a 5 national level. This has allowed households to rebuild some of the housing equity they lost during the housing bust, another factor that will support consumer spending going forward. While residential investment has been improving, business fixed investment remains weak. The sharp drop in oil prices since mid-2014 has benefitted consumers but has weighed heavily on firms in the drilling and mining sector, on their suppliers, and on regions whose economies depend on the energy sector. Firms tied to the sector have responded by cutting jobs and reducing investment. Some firms may face bankruptcy or will need to merge. In the face of low oil prices, I expect this sector to feel continued pressure. Manufacturers and other firms exposed to U.S. trade have also had to operate in a very challenging environment. The dollar has appreciated around 20 percent since mid-2014. This appreciation has been a considerable drag on U.S. export growth and on manufacturing output. We can expect the dollar to remain strong because real growth in the U.S. is expected to exceed growth abroad, and interest rates in the U.S. are expected to be higher than those in our major trading partners for some time to come. However, the rate of appreciation of the dollar has slowed, so the direct effect on U.S. net exports will likely lessen over time. Indeed, after last year’s deceleration in manufacturing output, several surveys suggest that manufacturing activity may be stabilizing. These include the national survey conducted by the Institute for Supply Management, as well as the regional surveys conducted by the Dallas, New York, Philadelphia, and Richmond Federal Reserve Banks. As this review suggests, some parts of the economy are doing better than others. But the message I take from U.S. economic performance is that despite financial market volatility, despite the pain inflicted on the energy sector from falling oil prices, and despite the relatively weak growth abroad, the U.S. economy has proven to be remarkably resilient. 6 Labor Markets Strong evidence of this resiliency is seen in labor markets. The unemployment rate is now about half of what it was at its peak of 10 percent in October 2009. Over the past two years, we’ve also seen significant improvement in other measures of the under-utilization of labor. The share of workers who are working part-time but who would prefer to work full-time has declined significantly, as has the number of people who have only been looking for work sporadically or who have been discouraged from looking at all because they don’t think they’ll find a job. Since its low point last September, the labor force participation rate has risen by half of a percentage point and is now at a level consistent with estimates of its longer-run trend.1 Payroll job growth has averaged more than 200,000 jobs per month over the past two years. And while there have been ups and downs in the monthly reports – as there always are – I think it is notable that even as output growth slowed during the fourth quarter of last year, firms continued to add workers to their payrolls at a very good pace. The data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, or JOLTS, show that some dynamism is returning to the labor market. 2 The rate of job openings is stronger than during the previous expansion, and both the hiring and quit rates have risen to levels suggesting that firms are looking to hire and workers are confident enough to be looking for better jobs. Wage acceleration typically lags the improvement in labor markets, and this time is no different. Average hourly earnings have only slowly accelerated over the past few years, and the employment cost index, 1 See Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher, “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2014, pp. 197-255. 2 Note that John Haltiwanger argues that there has been a longer-run decline in labor market fluidity. See John Haltiwanger, “Top Ten Signs of Declining Business Dynamism and Entrepreneurship in the U.S.,” paper written for the Kauffman Foundation New Entrepreneurial Growth conference, August 2015. 7 which measures total compensation, has risen at about 2 percent a year over the past three years. Some of the anecdotal reports suggest that wage pressures may be building. We have heard for some time from employers in our region that it has been hard to find workers with the necessary skills in certain higher- skilled occupations, including information technology, health care, and specialized construction. Firms have had to increase wages and benefits and offer and sweeten retention packages for these types of workers. But we are now hearing increasingly from firms across the service sector that they are having difficulty finding workers in lower-skilled and less-specialized occupations, like bank tellers and retail staff. As labor markets continue to tighten, I expect to see wages accelerate somewhat. I do not want to underestimate the difficulty that many workers have had during the recession and slow recovery, and that many continue to have. For example, in my region, those who have lost jobs in the mining, oil, and gas sectors in Appalachia and eastern Ohio have been slow to find new work because the economies in those areas are not well-diversified. I believe there are longer-run workforce development issues affecting U.S. labor markets, and the deep recession and slow recovery have exposed and exacerbated these problems. As a country, we need to ensure that people can enter and remain productive members of the labor force to raise our standard of living and make us more competitive in the global economy. The question is how to do that. I do not believe monetary policy would be effective in addressing these longer-run problems. More than that, trying to rely on it to do so is counterproductive because it takes the focus off of programs and policies that can help to prepare and sustain workers in the modern workforce. So from the standpoint of what monetary policy can do, the totality of the evidence suggests to me that the economy is basically at the Fed’s mandated monetary policy goal of maximum employment. However, I do believe that government policy and programs, such as educational assistance and retraining programs, have a role to play in addressing these long-run labor force challenges and it should be brought to bear. 8 Inflation Price stability is the other part of the Fed’s dual mandate. Inflation has been running below the Fed’s goal of 2 percent for quite some time. Low inflation partly reflects the effects of earlier declines in the price of oil and other commodities since mid-2014, as well as the appreciation of the dollar, which has held down the prices of nonpetroleum imports into the U.S. But the most recent data have been somewhat encouraging and in accord with the pattern anticipated by the FOMC. As oil prices and the dollar have shown some stability of late, the headline and underlying measures of inflation have moved higher. And these moves are not just one month’s data. Headline and core inflation, as measured by the year-over- year changes in the underlying indices, have been moving up over the past year. Headline PCE inflation has risen to 1 percent from 0.2 percent at the start of last year, and core PCE inflation is 1.7 percent, compared to 1.3 percent a year ago. Core CPI inflation is now above 2 percent. The Cleveland Fed’s median CPI inflation rate is 2.4 percent and it, too, has been rising over the past year. Stable inflation expectations are an important component of inflation dynamics. In my view, inflation expectations have been relatively stable, even in the face of sizable declines in energy prices. Market- based inflation compensation, which measures the difference in yields between nominal Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities, has fallen by more than the survey measures of inflation expectations. But movements in inflation compensation have been highly correlated with changes in oil prices, and in this period of heightened market volatility and flight-to-quality flows into U.S. Treasury securities, I take less of a signal about inflation expectations from the market-based measure of inflation compensation. Various models suggest that the movements in inflation compensation more likely reflect changes in liquidity premia and inflation risk premia rather than changes 9 in inflation expectations.3 Ba sed on the evidence at hand, if the real side of the economy continues to perform consistent with my projections, I expect inflation to remain low this year but to gradually move back to our goal of 2 percent over the next couple of years. And I will continue to monitor all of the measures of inflation and inflation expectations to assess whether this forecast is on track. Ri sks to the Forecast Of course, we have to recognize that the economy rarely evolves exactly as expected. The world is a dynamic place and the economy is hit by shocks, both positive and negative. So any economic forecast is surrounded by fairly wide confidence bands, and mine is no exception. I see risks on both the downside and the upside around my forecast. If the dollar were to appreciate more than I’ve assumed, perhaps because of weaker growth abroad, or if there were a significant further decline in oil prices rather than a stabilization, then growth and inflation could be lower than in my baseline forecast. The actions taken by several foreign central banks to increase monetary accommodation to further support their economies may help to mitigate some of this risk. 3 The Cleveland Fed publishes estimates of inflation expectations and the inflation risk premium based on a model that incorporates survey measures of inflation expectations as well as market data on nominal Treasuries and inflation swaps. The 5-year/5-year-forward measure of inflation expectations has been relatively stable and near 2 percent. The data are available at www.clevelandfed.org/en/our-research/indicators-and-data/inflation- expectations.aspx. For a discussion of this model, see Joseph Haubrich, George Pennacchi, and Peter Ritchken, “Inflation Expectations, Real Rates, and Risk Premia: Evidence from Inflation Swaps,” The Review of Financial Studies, 25, 2012, pp. 1588-1629. See also the Atlanta Fed’s macroblog discussion by Nikolay Gospodinov and Paula Tkac, “Are Long-Term Inflation Expectations Declining? Not So Fast, Says Atlanta Fed,” January 15, 2016. The authors conclude that long-run inflation expectations remain stable and that the large correlation of market- based inflation compensation and oil prices is due mainly to the liquidity premium on TIPS. These conclusions are based on a model described in Nikolay Gospodinov and Bin Wei, “Forecasts of Inflation and Interest Rates in No- Arbitrage Affine Models,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Working Paper 2016-3, February 2016, and Nikolay Gospodinov and Bin Wei, “A Note on Extracting Inflation Expectations from Market Prices on TIPS and Inflation Derivatives,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, November 2015. 10 Because inflation has been undershooting our goal for some time, many people have quite reasonably been focusing on the downside risks to inflation. But it is also good to keep in mind that, according to analysis by the Cleveland Fed staff, over the last 15 years historical forecast errors from several highly regarded inflation forecasting models have skewed to the upside; that is, the models have tended to underestimate actual inflation.4 While the steep declines in oil prices have kept inflation low, in the current environment, low oil prices also pose an upside risk to inflation over the medium run. They may spur stronger-than-expected consumer spending, and this, combined with accommodative monetary policy, could lead to a faster increase in inflation than forecasted. The intense volatility in financial markets that we saw at the end of last year and the beginning of this year has subsided. But were it to intensify and be sustained, this could lead to a broader pullback in risk appetites among investors, businesses, and consumers, which could dampen the U.S. economy. I note, though, that even during the recent turbulence we did not see this. Focusing too much on signals from market volatility is also a risk, as messages from the market can turn around quickly. It could be that if markets remain relatively stable, businesses may begin to feel more secure and investment spending may pick up more than expected. The resiliency of the U.S. economy throughout turbulent times is worth remembering as we aim to set monetary policy that will promote our longer-run goals of maximum employment and price stability. Monetary Policy Given actual and expected economic performance, the risks around the outlook, and the progress toward our policy goals, my assessment at this time is that it will be appropriate to continue to gradually reduce 4 Models whose forecast errors skew to the upside include the Faust and Wright inflation -expectations gap model and the Stock and Watson unobserved components model. See Jon Faust and Jonathan H. Wright, “Forecasting Inflation,” in Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier Press, vol. 2A, 2013, pp. 2-56, and James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson, “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, supplement to vol. 39, no. 1, February 2007, pp. 3-33. 11 the degree of accommodation this year. Gradual normalization means that monetary policy will remain accommodative for some time to come, providing support to the economy and insurance against downside risks. I think that’s appropriate given some of the forces still affecting our economy – for example, slow growth abroad, appreciation of the dollar, somewhat more restrictive financial conditions, and the continued rebalancing of supply and demand in the energy sector. As I mentioned earlier, at our March meeting the FOMC maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. I did not dissent from that decision. Even though I expect it will be appropriate to continue on the path of normalization this year, I recognized that the data we had on the first quarter were limited. I agreed that a reasonable case could be made to wait until more information could be gathered and assessed to see if they confirm that the economy is evolving as anticipated – namely, resumption of the moderate growth trajectory, with continued improvement in labor markets and inflation on track for a gradual return to 2 percent. I do not think the FOMC is behind the curve, but while there are risks to moving too soon, there are also risks to waiting too long to take the next steps on the normalization path given the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy. We live with uncertainty and one could always make the case that we should wait to act until we gather more information. But waiting until every piece of data lines up in the correct way means waiting too long and risks having to move rates up more aggressively in the future, with negative impacts on our economy. Similarly, forestalling rate increases for too long in light of financial market volatility that doesn’t affect the outlook may simply produce more volatility in the future if we find ourselves having to increase rates more aggressively than anticipated to achieve our goals. Of course, the actual path the fed funds rate will follow will depend on economic developments and how they affect the outlook. As we’ve seen over this expansion, things can take unexpected turns, and we want policy to appropriately react to changes in the medium-run outlook. The policy path I foresee as 12 appropriate today is slightly more gradual than the path I foresaw in December, partly because of the slight downward revision to my growth forecast but mainly because I now estimate a lower longer-run equilibrium interest rate. But these are small changes. The important point is that the economy has shown considerable resiliency, and in my view, the outlook and risks around the outlook will likely support gradual reductions in the degree of accommodation this year. The FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections As indicated in the March Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, the other FOMC participants also currently anticipate that it will be appropriate for the funds rate to move up gradually over time, with the median path across participants now slightly shallower than in December. A lot of media commentary has focused on this somewhat flatter policy path. To my mind, this change in the path is an excellent illustration of how our policy is data dependent. There were slight reductions in the participants’ economic projections between December and March, reflecting incoming economic information including weak fourth quarter U.S. growth, lower estimates of global growth, volatility in financial markets, and somewhat tighter financial conditions. Each participant took these developments into account when revising his or her projections and the policy path the participant thought was appropriate to achieving those outcomes. Because there is uncertainty around each participant’s projections of growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation, there is also uncertainty around the appropriate policy path. Thus, no one should read the median path in the SEP as a promised policy path. Policy is not on a pre-set course; the actual path of the fed funds rate will depend on the economic outlook and risks around the outlook. But the median policy path and changes in that path over time help to illuminate participants’ reaction functions – how participants believe policy should systematically respond to changes in economic conditions that affect the outlook. I believe the discipline of forecasting how the economy might evolve over the medium run and the uncertainty around the forecast is an essential part of the framework for setting monetary policy. It 13 provides a useful methodology for avoiding too much focus on short-run changes in the economic data or volatility in the markets. It allows us to do low-frequency policymaking in a high-frequency world. It forces us to consider how changes in the economic and financial data may or may not change the medium-run outlook, the risks around the outlook, and the appropriate policy path. It is the construct through which our policymaking can be made systematic, yet responsive to the evolution of economic conditions. The outcome of this process – the projections of economic outcomes and the policy paths thought appropriate to achieve those outcomes – is summarized in our SEP four times a year, allowing the public to better understand how the assessments of the economy and monetary policy are evolving. I view this as essential transparency, which is why I believe the SEP continues to be an important part of FOMC communications.

The Outlook for the National and Regional Economy and Monetary Policy: Low-Frequency Policymaking in a High-Frequency World Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Cleveland Association for Business Economics, CFA Society Cleveland, and the Risk Management Association, Northern Ohio Chapter Cleveland, OH April 6, 2016 President Mester delivered similar remarks about the national economy to the New York Association for Business Economics in New York, NY on April 1, 2016. 1 Introduction Good afternoon and thank you for that very kind introduction. I also thank the Cleveland Association for Business Economics, CFA Society Cleveland, and the Northern Ohio chapter of the Risk Management Association for inviting me to speak today. The very first speech I gave in Cleveland as president of the Cleveland Fed was at your organizations’ invitation. As they say, you never forget your first, and so it is with great pleasure that I am back with you today. Another reason I’m happy to be here is that I believe an important responsibility of Federal Reserve policymakers is to share their economic perspectives with the public. Congress has wisely given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of our statutory goals of price stability and maximum employment. I say “wisely” because a body of research and practical experience both here and abroad show that when central banks formulate monetary policy free from short-run political interference, the policy is more effective and yields better economic outcomes. But to preserve that independence, the central bank must be held accountable for its policy decisions. And a key component of that accountability involves policymakers providing information to the public on their evaluation of economic conditions, their outlook for the economy, and the rationale for their decisions. At its March meeting, three weeks ago, the Federal Open Market Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The FOMC also released a new set of economic projections, something that it does four times a year. Today, I plan to discuss my outlook for the national and regional economy and monetary policy. Of course, these are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook Despite the gyrations in financial markets at the start of the year, the underlying fundamentals of the U.S. economy remain sound. I expect the economy to grow at a moderate pace of 2.25 to 2.5 percent this year, slightly above its longer-run trend and sufficient to generate further job gains and a further reduction in 2 the unemployment rate this year. I anticipate that inflation will continue to move gradually up toward our target of 2 percent over time. In my view, it will be appropriate for monetary policymakers to continue to gradually reduce the level of accommodation this year. In putting together my forecast for the March FOMC meeting, I incorporated the new information we had received since the December FOMC projections. Although we publish our forecasts four times a year, let me assure you that policymakers are constantly assessing incoming information for its implications for the outlook and risks around the outlook. This information includes the official statistical releases and the reports we garner from talking to our boards of directors, advisory councils, and other contacts in our regions. It is important that our policy be “data-dependent,” meaning that policy should depend on how economic and financial conditions evolve, to the extent that those conditions have implications for the medium-run outlook and risks around the outlook. The focus is on the medium run because that’s the time horizon over which monetary policy affects the economy. But we live in a high-frequency world. Measures of stock market volatility, like the VIX, attest to that. The market gyrations at the end of last year and the beginning of this year were notable. The declines in global equity markets partly reflected market participants’ reassessment of the outlook for global growth, as well as their views on how effective policy actions taken abroad will be. Over the past month or so, we’ve seen some stability return to financial markets. Volatility has declined, stock prices have risen, and credit risk spreads on corporate bonds have narrowed. As a result, on balance, financial conditions are only slightly more restrictive than they were in December. While less volatile than financial market indicators can be, economic data can also vary quite a bit from month to month. “Data-dependent” policymaking does not mean that policy will react to every short-run change in the data – that would be a mistake. One of the challenges for monetary policymakers is making 3 low-frequency policy in a high-frequency world. We need to extract the signal about where the economy is headed from economic and financial market information that can often be noisy. My own forecasts tend to have some consistency over time because I try to stay focused on underlying fundamentals and the medium-run outlook. That said, I have made some changes to my outlook since December. Most of the changes have to do with my longer-run projections. The moderate growth of around 2 percent that we’ve seen during the expansion has been sufficient to generate a significant fall in the unemployment rate, while inflation has remained low. Taking that evidence on board, I slightly moved down my estimates of longer-run growth, the longer-run unemployment rate, and the longer-run fed funds rate, reducing each by 25 basis points. I now project longer-run growth at 2 percent, the longer- run unemployment rate at 5 percent, and the longer-run fed funds rate at 3.25 percent. Economic Growth In terms of the forecast, as I’ve mentioned, I anticipate that growth will pick up to a 2.25 to 2.5 percent range this year. That is slightly lower than my last forecast and reflects both the weakness we saw in the fourth quarter, which suggests that the economy entered 2016 with a little less momentum, and slightly tighter financial conditions, which partly reflect somewhat slower growth abroad. So far, the information we have suggests that growth in the first quarter will remain near the fourth quarter’s pace of around 1.5 percent, but there is still more information coming in. Consumer spending, which makes up about two-thirds of output, has been one of the economy’s strengths, although it too has shown month-to-month volatility that we need to smooth through. Consumer spending has been buoyed by continued improvement in household balance sheets; growth in personal income, reflecting the progress in labor markets; and lower oil prices, as well as highly accommodative monetary policy that has kept borrowing rates low. The drop in gasoline prices from $3.36 per gallon in 2014 to $2.42 per gallon in 2015 saved the average household about $700. The U.S. 4 Energy Information Administration now forecasts that gasoline prices will average $1.89 per gallon this year, which would mean another $400 in cost savings for the average household. I believe we are seeing a positive effect on spending from lower gasoline prices. Auto sales were particularly strong over the past year, hitting a new record of nearly 17.5 million; many of these were SUVs and other larger vehicles. Instead of spending it, some households may be choosing to save some of the windfall from lower gas prices – we’ve seen the savings rate rise. Or they may be using it to pay down debt. Either way, the improvement in balance sheets will help support future consumption. The housing sector has also shown steady improvement, and I expect that to continue. Total sales of new and existing homes have been rising slowly over the past few years. Existing home sales have made considerable progress in approaching the average level seen before the run-up during the housing bubble, while new home sales still have some ways to go to reach that milestone. Housing starts have been moving up but are still below the levels consistent with projections of household formation over the longer run, and in some markets, the supply of housing hasn’t kept up with demand. So there is some chance we will see an acceleration in construction this year. Mortgage rates are low, but households are being appropriately careful in not taking on more mortgage debt than they can handle, and banks are lending to those with good credit quality. House prices have been rising at a 5 to 6 percent pace, on a national level. This has allowed households to rebuild some of the housing equity they lost during the housing bust, another factor that will support consumer spending going forward. While residential investment has been improving, business fixed investment remains weak. The sharp drop in oil prices since mid-2014 has benefitted consumers but has weighed heavily on firms in the drilling and mining sector, on their suppliers, and on regions whose economies depend on the energy sector. Firms tied to the sector have responded by cutting jobs and reducing investment. Some firms may face bankruptcy or will need to merge. In the face of low oil prices, I expect this sector to feel continued pressure. 5 Manufacturers and other firms exposed to U.S. trade have also had to operate in a very challenging environment. The dollar has appreciated around 20 percent since mid-2014. This appreciation has been a considerable drag on U.S. export growth and on manufacturing output. We can expect the dollar to remain strong because real growth in the U.S. is expected to exceed growth abroad, and interest rates in the U.S. are expected to be higher than those in our major trading partners for some time to come. However, the rate of appreciation of the dollar has slowed, so the direct effect on U.S. net exports will likely lessen over time. Indeed, after last year’s deceleration in manufacturing output, several surveys suggest that manufacturing activity may be stabilizing. These include the national survey conducted by the Institute for Supply Management, as well as the regional surveys conducted by the Dallas, New York, Philadelphia, and Richmond Federal Reserve Banks. As this review suggests, some parts of the economy are doing better than others. But the message I take from U.S. economic performance is that despite financial market volatility, despite the pain inflicted on the energy sector from falling oil prices, and despite the relatively weak growth abroad, the U.S. economy has proven to be remarkably resilient. Labor Markets Strong evidence of this resiliency is seen in labor markets. The unemployment rate is now half of what it was at its peak of 10 percent in October 2009. Over the past two years, we’ve also seen significant improvement in other measures of the under-utilization of labor. The share of workers who are working part-time but who would prefer to work full-time has declined significantly, as has the number of people who have only been looking for work sporadically or who have been discouraged from looking at all because they don’t think they’ll find a job. Since its low point last September, the labor force 6 participation rate has risen by over half of a percentage point and is now at a level consistent with estimates of its longer-run trend.1 Payroll job growth has averaged more than 200,000 jobs per month over the past two years. And while there have been ups and downs in the monthly reports – as there always are – I think it is notable that even as output growth slowed during the fourth quarter of last year, firms continued to add workers to their payrolls at a very good pace. The data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, or JOLTS, show that some dynamism is returning to the labor market.2 The rate of job openings is stronger than during the previous expansion, and both the hiring and quit rates have risen to levels suggesting that firms are looking to hire and workers are confident enough to be looking for better jobs. Wage acceleration typically lags the improvement in labor markets, and this time is no different. Average hourly earnings have only slowly accelerated over the past few years, and the employment cost index, which measures total compensation, has risen at about 2 percent a year over the past three years. Some of the anecdotal reports suggest that wage pressures may be building. We have heard for some time from employers in our region that it has been hard to find workers with the necessary skills in certain higher- skilled occupations, including information technology, health care, and specialized construction. Firms have had to increase wages and benefits and offer and sweeten retention packages for these types of workers. But we are now hearing increasingly from firms across the service sector that they are having 1 See Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher, “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2014, pp. 197-255. 2 Note that John Haltiwanger argues that there has been a longer-run decline in labor market fluidity. See John Haltiwanger, “Top Ten Signs of Declining Business Dynamism and Entrepreneurship in the U.S.,” paper written for the Kauffman Foundation New Entrepreneurial Growth conference, August 2015. 7 difficulty finding workers in lower-skilled and less-specialized occupations, like bank tellers and retail staff. As labor markets continue to tighten, I expect to see wages accelerate somewhat. I do not want to underestimate the difficulty that many workers have had during the recession and slow recovery, and that many continue to have. For example, those who have lost jobs in the mining, oil, and gas sectors in Appalachia and eastern Ohio have been slow to find new work because the economies in those areas are not well-diversified. I believe there are longer-run workforce development issues affecting U.S. labor markets, and the deep recession and slow recovery have exposed and exacerbated these problems. As a country, we need to ensure that people can enter and remain productive members of the labor force to raise our standard of living and make us more competitive in the global economy. The question is how to do that. I do not believe monetary policy would be effective in addressing these longer-run problems. More than that, trying to rely on it to do so is counterproductive because it takes the focus off of programs and policies that can help to prepare and sustain workers in the modern workforce. So from the standpoint of what monetary policy can do, the totality of the evidence suggests to me that the economy is basically at the Fed’s mandated monetary policy goal of maximum employment. However, I do believe that government policy and programs, such as educational assistance and retraining programs, have a role to play in addressing these long-run labor force challenges and it should be brought to bear. Regional Growth and Labor Markets An important role of Federal Reserve Bank presidents is gathering information from our regions to help inform national monetary policy. For example, the anecdotal information on wages that I just mentioned has been particularly useful. Let me spend a few minutes on economic developments in the Fourth Federal Reserve District, which comprises all of Ohio, western Pennsylvania, eastern Kentucky, and the northern panhandle of West Virginia. Our regional economy is quite diverse, but the path of economic expansion here has been similar to the nation’s, with some sectors performing better than others and with 8 longer-run economic challenges evident. The outlook for our regional economy is similar to that of the nation. The energy sector in our region continues to feel the effects of the sharp decline in oil prices since mid- 2014, as well as the longer-term shift away from coal as a source of energy. The region had seen a sharp increase in production and employment in the oil and gas extraction sector as new technologies were brought to bear. But while natural gas production remains at historic highs, the sharp drop in oil prices since mid-2014 has resulted in a significant slowdown in natural gas and oil exploration in the Marcellus and Utica shale regions, which include the part of our District in northern Ohio and western Pennsylvania. Suppliers and other service providers to the industry and those employed in the industry have also experienced the slowdown.3 Regional firms with international exposure, such as steel producers, also continue to struggle in the wake of dollar appreciation and lower commodity prices that reflect weak global demand. Like the nation as a whole, the region’s economy has diversified over time, with jobs shifting from manufacturing to the service sector. Still, manufacturing remains a relatively important sector in our region, accounting for 15 percent of private-sector jobs in Ohio compared to about 10 percent in the U.S. While manufacturers with ties to energy and steel production have faced challenges, the weakness in that segment has been offset by production increases at manufacturers supplying the construction industry, and by the auto industry, which represents a significant share of manufacturing in Ohio and Kentucky. Over the past few years, District auto plants have produced about 17 percent of the nation’s autos and light trucks, so as auto sales have risen to record levels, regional production has risen as well. Our contacts in the District’s auto sector remain optimistic even though the record sales pace seems likely to level off. 3 For further discussion of trends in the energy, steel, and auto sectors in the Cleveland Federal Reserve District, see Mark E. Schweitzer, Robert Sadowski, and Christopher Vecchio, “Three Trends Influencing the Region’s Growth,” Forefront, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, January 15, 2016. 9 Like the rest of the nation, our region has seen considerable improvement in labor markets. In Ohio, the unemployment rate has fallen sharply from a peak of 11 percent in December 2009 to 4.9 percent in February, about the national average. Since the start of the expansion, jobs in Ohio have been growing at an annual pace of 1.2 percent. Admittedly, this is slower than the nation’s 1.4 percent pace. However, Ohio’s job growth has been well above the pace we saw during the previous expansion, when employment in Ohio was essentially flat. When I last spoke before your organizations in September 2014, employment in Ohio had not quite made it back to its pre-recession peak. There is no denying that it was a long time in coming, but Ohio payroll employment has finally regained its pre-recession peak. The longer-run challenges facing national labor markets also affect the regional economy. In addition, population growth in our region has been slower than in other parts of the country. Ohio’s population has been growing at less than 0.4 percent a year over the past 5 years, about half as fast as in the nation as a whole, and considerably slower than in the southern and western parts of the country. This is an additional factor that will need to be considered when assessing the future outlook for regional labor markets and the overall economic health of the region. Inflation In addition to maximum employment, price stability is the other part of the Fed’s dual mandate. Inflation has been running below the Fed’s goal of 2 percent for quite some time. Low inflation partly reflects the effects of earlier declines in the price of oil and other commodities since mid-2014, as well as the appreciation of the dollar, which has held down the prices of nonpetroleum imports into the U.S. But the most recent data have been somewhat encouraging and in accord with the pattern anticipated by the FOMC. As oil prices and the dollar have shown some stability of late, the headline and underlying measures of inflation have moved higher. And these moves are not just one month’s data. Headline and core inflation, as measured by the year-over-year changes in the underlying indices, have been moving up 10 over the past year. Headline PCE inflation has risen to 1 percent from 0.2 percent at the start of last year, and core PCE inflation is 1.7 percent, compared to 1.3 percent a year ago. Core CPI inflation is now above 2 percent. The Cleveland Fed’s median CPI inflation rate is 2.4 percent and it, too, has been rising over the past year. Stable inflation expectations are an important component of inflation dynamics. In my view, inflation expectations have been relatively stable, even in the face of sizable declines in energy prices. Market- based inflation compensation, which measures the difference in yields between nominal Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities, has fallen by more than the survey measures of inflation expectations. But movements in inflation compensation have been highly correlated with changes in oil prices, and in this period of heightened market volatility and flight-to-quality flows into U.S. Treasury securities, I take less of a signal about inflation expectations from the market-based measure of inflation compensation. Various models suggest that the movements in inflation compensation more likely reflect changes in liquidity premia and inflation risk premia rather than changes in expectations.4 4 The Cleveland Fed publishes estimates of inflation expectations and the inflation risk premium based on a model that incorporates survey measures of inflation expectations as well as market data on nominal Treasuries and inflation swaps. The 5-year/5-year-forward measure of inflation expectations has been relatively stable and near 2 percent. The data are available at www.clevelandfed.org/en/our-research/indicators-and-data/inflation- expectations.aspx For a discussion of this model, see Joseph Haubrich, George Pennacchi, and Peter Ritchken, “Inflation Expectations, Real Rates, and Risk Premia: Evidence from Inflation Swaps,” The Review of Financial Studies, 25, 2012, pp. 1588-1629. See also the Atlanta Fed’s macroblog discussion by Nikolay Gospodinov and Paula Tkac, “Are Long-Term Inflation Expectations Declining? Not So Fast, Says Atlanta Fed,” January 15, 2016. The authors conclude that long-run inflation expectations remain stable and that the large correlation of market - based inflation compensation and oil prices is due mainly to the liquidity premium on TIPS. These conclusions are based on a model described in Nikolay Gospodinov and Bin Wei, “Forecasts of Inflation and Interest Rates in No- Arbitrage Affine Models,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Working Paper 2016-3, February 2016, and Nikolay Gospodinov and Bin Wei, “A Note on Extracting Inflation Expectations from Market Prices on TIPS and Inflation Derivatives,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, November 2015. 11 Based on the evidence at hand, if the real side of the economy continues to perform consistent with my projections, I expect inflation to remain low this year but to gradually move back to our goal of 2 percent over the next couple of years. And I will continue to monitor all of the measures of inflation and inflation expectations to assess whether this forecast is on track. Risks to the Forecast Of course, we have to recognize that the economy rarely evolves exactly as expected. The world is a dynamic place and the economy is hit by shocks, both positive and negative. So any economic forecast is surrounded by fairly wide confidence bands, and mine is no exception. I see risks on both the downside and the upside around my forecast. If the dollar were to appreciate more than I’ve assumed, perhaps because of weaker growth abroad, or if there were a significant further decline in oil prices rather than a stabilization, then growth and inflation could be lower than in my baseline forecast. The actions taken by several foreign central banks to increase monetary accommodation to further support their economies may help to mitigate some of this risk. Because inflation has been undershooting our goal for some time, many people have quite reasonably been focusing on the downside risks to inflation. But it is also good to keep in mind that, according to analysis by the Cleveland Fed staff, over the last 15 years historical forecast errors from several highly regarded inflation forecasting models have skewed to the upside; that is, the models have tended to underestimate actual inflation.5 While the steep declines in oil prices have kept inflation low, in the current environment, low oil prices also pose an upside risk to inflation over the medium run. They may 5 Models whose forecast errors skew to the upside include the Faust and Wright inflation -expectations gap model and the Stock and Watson unobserved components model. See Jon Faust and Jonathan H. Wright, “Forecasting Inflation,” in Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier Press, vol. 2A, 2013, pp. 2-56, and James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson, “Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, supplement to vol. 39, no. 1, February 2007, pp. 3-33. 12 spur stronger-than-expected consumer spending, and this, combined with accommodative monetary policy, could lead to a faster increase in inflation than forecasted. The intense volatility in financial markets that we saw at the end of last year and the beginning of this year has subsided. But were it to intensify and be sustained, this could lead to a broader pullback in risk appetites among investors, businesses, and consumers, which could dampen the U.S. economy. I note, though, that even during the recent turbulence we did not see this. Focusing too much on signals from market volatility is also a risk, as messages from the market can turn around quickly. It could be that if markets remain relatively stable, businesses may begin to feel more secure and investment spending may pick up more than expected. The resiliency of the U.S. economy throughout turbulent times is worth remembering as we aim to set monetary policy that will promote our longer-run goals of maximum employment and price stability. Monetary Policy Given actual and expected economic performance, the risks around the outlook, and the progress toward our policy goals, my assessment at this time is that it will be appropriate to continue to gradually reduce the degree of accommodation this year. Gradual normalization means that monetary policy will remain accommodative for some time to come, providing support to the economy and insurance against downside risks. I think that’s appropriate given some of the forces still affecting our economy – for example, slow growth abroad, appreciation of the dollar, somewhat more restrictive financial conditions, and the continued rebalancing of supply and demand in the energy sector. As I mentioned earlier, at our March meeting the FOMC maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. I did not dissent from that decision. Even though I expect it will be appropriate to continue on the path of normalization this year, I recognized that the data we had on the first quarter were limited. I agreed that a reasonable case could be made to wait until more information could be gathered 13 and assessed to see if they confirm that the economy is evolving as anticipated – namely, resumption of the moderate growth trajectory, with continued improvement in labor markets and inflation on track for a gradual return to 2 percent. I do not think the FOMC is behind the curve, but while there are risks to moving too soon, there are also risks to waiting too long to take the next steps on the normalization path given the lags with which monetary policy affects the economy. We live with uncertainty and one could always make the case that we should wait to act until we gather more information. But waiting until every piece of data lines up in the correct way means waiting too long and risks having to move rates up more aggressively in the future, with negative impacts on our economy. Similarly, forestalling rate increases for too long in light of financial market volatility that doesn’t affect the outlook may simply produce more volatility in the future if we find ourselves having to increase rates more aggressively than anticipated to achieve our goals. Of course, the actual path the fed funds rate will follow will depend on economic developments and how they affect the outlook. As we’ve seen over this expansion, things can take unexpected turns, and we want policy to appropriately react to changes in the medium-run outlook. The policy path I foresee as appropriate today is slightly more gradual than the path I foresaw in December, partly because of the slight downward revision to my growth forecast but mainly because I now estimate a lower longer-run equilibrium interest rate. But these are small changes. As indicated in the March Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, the other FOMC participants also currently anticipate that it will be appropriate for the funds rate to move up gradually over time, with the median path across participants now slightly shallower than in December. The change in the path provides an excellent illustration of how our policy is data dependent. The important point I’d like to leave you with is that the economy has shown considerable resiliency, and in my view, the outlook and risks around the outlook will likely support gradual reductions in the degree of accommodation this year.

Recent Inflation Developments and Challenges for Research and Monetary Policymaking Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The 47th Konstanz Seminar on Monetary Theory and Monetary Policy Insel Reichenau, Germany May 12, 2016 1 Introduction I thank Keith Kuester and Jürgen von Hagen for inviting me to participate in the Konstanz Seminar on Monetary Theory and Monetary Policy. I am happy to be here for a number of reasons. First, I remember very fondly hiring Keith when I was research director at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Keith was a very productive addition to our department. While I was sad to see him eventually return to Germany, I was very thankful we were able to learn from Keith during his time with us. And hopefully, he was able to learn a little bit from his Fed colleagues as well. A second reason I am happy to be here is that it is a great honor to contribute to a forum that for more than four decades has fostered a fruitful dialogue between academic researchers and policymakers on both sides of the Atlantic. In the published proceedings of the first conference held in 1970, the seminar’s founder, Karl Brunner, provided the insight that “theory without application to our environment is useless and policy discussion or judgments not based on analysis are dangerous.”1 I believe that Professor Brunner would be very gratified by the discussions over the past two days, which have better joined monetary theory and monetary policy. Today, I’d like to spend some time talking about inflation. But before I do, I should mention that these are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. It seems clear to me that if there is one topic that would benefit from better understanding the interplay of theory and policy, it is inflation. For a monetary policymaker, price stability is the Holy Grail – price stability is the one thing that monetary policy can ensure over the longer run, and monetary policy is the only tool that can ensure price stability over the longer run. The benefits of price stability for the 1 See Fratianni and von Hagen (2001). 2 economy are clear.2 Stable prices mean businesses and households don’t have to spend time trying to protect the purchasing power of their money; they can make long-term plans and commitments without having to deal with the uncertainty about the value of their money. When the price level is stable, any price changes reflect changes in the supplies of certain goods or services relative to others and this information is helpful to businesses and consumers when they have to allocate their scarce resources. Price stability also promotes other goals like financial stability and confidence in the economy, thereby supporting growth and maximum employment, the other part of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. While price stability and monetary policy are intimately linked, setting monetary policy to achieve price stability is not trivial. It requires being able to measure inflation so that we’ll know how far we are from the goal. It requires being able to forecast inflation because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag that varies over time and with economic circumstances. It requires understanding the determinants of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. And it also requires having the wherewithal to make decisions under uncertainty. Given the importance of understanding inflation for monetary policy, one could get pretty discouraged about the state of our knowledge – I admit that sometimes such thoughts come to me, usually late at night. But instead of turning nihilistic, I think it’s better to keep pushing the envelope of our knowledge outward, as central bank and academic researchers are doing, and to learn to deal with the uncertainty as best we can. Before I discuss some of the advances being made and some open issues, let me review recent inflation developments. Recent Inflation Developments Many central banks conduct monetary policy with a goal of achieving an explicit inflation target. Such an explicit target provides transparency to the public and helps anchor expectations about inflation. When businesses and consumers have confidence that the central bank is committed to its goal over the longer 2 See Mester (2014), Bernanke (2006), and Plosser (2011). 3 run and will defend the target, they are more likely to look through temporary changes in inflation. Although it was discussed at various times over the years, the Federal Reserve’s Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) established its explicit inflation target relatively recently, in January 2012, when it issued its statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. The FOMC’s inflation goal is 2 percent, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. As indicated in its annual reaffirmation of this goal in January of this year, the FOMC views this goal as symmetric. That is, the FOMC would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above the objective, and also if it were running persistently below its objective. By helping Fed policymakers set appropriate monetary policy, the explicit 2 percent inflation target promotes not only price stability but also maximum employment. The Federal Reserve has not always been successful at achieving price stability. There have been misses on both sides. During the Great Depression in the 1930s, the U.S. experienced deflation. In the aftermath of the oil price shocks in the 1970s, inflation surged and remained high until then-Fed Chairman Paul Volcker began to tighten monetary policy to bring inflation down, at the cost of a deep recession in the early 1980s. These periods point out the importance of a central bank remaining focused on its price stability goal, because when attention wanders, there are severe costs to consumers and businesses. Relative to the Fed’s 2 percent goal, inflation has been low for quite some time, and while the most recent data are encouraging and consistent with the FOMC’s view that inflation will gradually move back to target over time, a reading of FOMC statements since the Great Recession clearly shows that inflation has been a focus of the Committee. As shown in Figure 1, low inflation has been a phenomenon not only in the U.S. In recent years, inflation has also run well below the United Kingdom’s 2 percent inflation target, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), and the European Central Bank’s inflation target of below, but close to, 2 percent, as measured by the changes in the harmonized index of consumer prices 4 (HICP). By each central bank’s respective target index, last year, inflation was 0.20 percent in the U.K., 0.25 percent in the Euro area, and 0.66 percent in the U.S. A couple of common factors have contributed to the low inflation rates in these countries in recent years. First, in the aftermath of the financial crisis and during the slow recovery from the Great Recession, global demand was weak. Indeed, over the 2009-2011 period, one puzzle for policymakers was actually not why inflation was low, but rather, why it wasn’t lower.3 More recently, inflation has been kept down by the decline in energy and other commodity prices, and in the U.S., a rise in the value of the dollar, which puts downward pressure on the prices of imports into the U.S. According to dynamic simulations of the Board of Governors staff’s SIGMA model, a 10 percent rise in the real value of the dollar affects core inflation via import prices fairly quickly, resulting in a drop of about 0.5 percent in core inflation a year after the shock, which partially reverses over the subsequent year. A shock to the value of the dollar also tends to reduce GDP with a lag, and the model indicates that this would put additional downward pressure on inflation.4 Of course, growth, commodity price changes, and currency fluctuations are not necessarily independent events. For example, a portion of the over 60 percent decline in oil prices since mid-2014 likely reflects expectations of weaker growth in China and other countries, although supply factors likely play a greater role. Similarly, since mid-2014 the U.S. dollar has appreciated almost 20 percent, reflecting expectations that real growth in the U.S. will continue to be stronger than growth abroad, as well as projected interest rate differentials between the U.S. and other economies. So we have to be careful about thinking of these shocks as independent and just summing their effects. 3 See Constâncio (2015). 4 See Chart 5 in Fischer (2015). 5 In trying to assess current and projected inflation, economists often look at measures of underlying inflation to get a sense of the trend. Some of these measures, like core inflation, shown in Figure 2, delete food and energy prices because they tend to be volatile. Other measures, like the Cleveland Fed’s median consumer price index, or the Dallas Fed’s trimmed-mean PCE inflation rate (shown in Figure 3), are constructed to reduce the influence of those components that have shown outsized changes; the particular components can vary from month to month. Economists also use various models to get a sense of the underlying trend in inflation. Figure 4 shows estimates of trend inflation for the U.S., Euro area, and U.K. based on an autoregressive model that allows continuous time variation in coefficients and the variance of shocks to inflation.5 Based on this model, as actual inflation rates have declined, estimated trend inflation has also declined modestly in each location. The Cleveland Fed staff has estimated several different models of trend inflation for the U.S., and they also exhibit declines in the trend over the past decade, suggesting that the result is not model specific.6 Of course, the estimates do not mean that the change in trend is a permanent one, with inflation mired below target. In fact, in the U.S., as oil prices and the dollar have shown some stability of late, the headline and underlying measures of inflation have moved higher, in accordance with the pattern anticipated by the FOMC. As of the first quarter of this year, the year-over-year change in the headline PCE price index has risen to 1 percent from 0.2 percent in the first quarter of last year. Core PCE inflation was 1.7 percent in the first quarter, compared to 1.3 percent a year ago, and core CPI inflation was 2.3 percent compared with 1.7 percent a year ago. The 12-month change in the Cleveland Fed’s median CPI inflation rate averaged 2.4 percent in the first quarter, and it, too, has been rising over the past year. 5 This model is an AR(1) with time-varying parameters and stochastic volatility, related to a specification considered in Cogley, Primiceri, and Sargent (2010). 6 See Clark and Garciga (2016). 6 Inflation expectations are an important determinant of inflation dynamics.7 There are a variety of ways to measure inflation expectations. Some measures are based on surveys of households or of professional economic forecasters; others are derived from transactions in financial markets. In my view, looking across measures, inflation expectations over the past few years have been relatively stable, even in the face of sizable declines in energy prices. This stability is most readily apparent in the survey measures of longer-term inflation expectations of professional forecasters, as seen in Figure 5. But it is also seen in survey measures of household expectations, depicted in Figure 6. Although these are measures of longer-term inflation expectations, analysis suggests household inflation expectations are sensitive to large changes in energy prices, and so the slight move down in the U.S. since mid-2014 may reflect the sharp decline in oil prices.8 To augment the survey measures, economists have also developed models to derive inflation expectations from financial market data. In the U.S., the 10-year breakeven inflation rate is measured by the difference between the yield on 10-year Treasuries and the yield on 10-year Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS). The U.S. Treasury began issuing TIPS in 1997 to allow investors to take out some insurance against unanticipated changes in CPI inflation. Theoretically, inflation swaps offer a similar way for investors to protect themselves. Inflation compensation based on swaps is another measure commonly used as an indicator of inflation expectations. These market-based measures can be volatile. Figure 7 shows five-year inflation compensation five years ahead – the so-called five-year, five-year forward measure. I am smoothing through some of the volatility and showing monthly data. As you can see, over the past two years, the measures have declined a bit in the U.S. and in the Euro area. 7 For example, Faust and Wright (2013) provide evidence of the value of longer-run survey expectations of professional forecasters for forecasting inflation at shorter horizons. 8 Larkin (2016) shows the effect of oil price increases on inflation expectations in the U.S., Euro area, Israel, and U.K. pre- and post-crisis. 7 One needs to remember that there are differences between inflation compensation and inflation expectations. In particular, the inflation compensation measures reflect not only investors’ expectations about inflation but also the amount they are willing to pay in order to protect themselves from inflation risk. In addition, the TIPS market is less liquid than the Treasury market, so there is a liquidity premium in inflation breakeven and compensation rates. We should expect the inflation risk premium and the liquidity premium to vary over time, so one needs to use a model to extract a measure of inflation expectations from inflation compensation. These models can produce very different estimates of the components depending on circumstances. For example, Figure 8 shows the inflation risk premia based on models maintained by the Cleveland Fed staff and the San Francisco Fed staff.9 You’ll note that even the signs can differ: in the most recent period, the San Francisco Fed model is estimating a negative risk premium while the Cleveland Fed model is estimating a positive risk premium. So the inflation expectations derived from these models can be quite different, as shown in Figure 9. In addition, at times, demand for Treasuries can increase significantly as investors seek safe haven flows for their money. This can make it even harder to infer inflation expectations from changes in inflation compensation. Finally, in the U.S., changes in the inflation compensation measures also seem to be correlated with changes in energy prices, a correlation that suggests they may not be reliable indicators of long-term inflation expectations. Jon Faust and Jonathan Wright argue that market-based inflation compensation measures are too volatile to be plausible estimates of longer-term inflation expectations, and they show that the data reject the 9 Note that the San Francisco Fed series shown is daily data while the Cleveland Fed series is monthly data and so that series appears smoother. The Cleveland Fed produces estimates of inflation expectations and the inflation risk premium that combine data on nominal yields, inflation swaps, and surveys of inflation expectations to separately identify these factors. 8 hypothesis that today’s five-year, five-year forward inflation compensation is a rational expectation of inflation in the long-run.10 Given the measurement challenges and the volatility we saw in financial markets last summer and at the turn of the year, I think we need to be somewhat cautious when inferring a signal about changes in inflation expectations from these market measures. Nonetheless, I also think it is worth monitoring all of the available indicators of inflation expectations because of the important role expectations play in inflation dynamics. Inflation Models and Forecasts The factors I’ve discussed – demand growth, oil and other relative price shocks, and inflation expectations – are factors that appear in the expectations-augmented Phillips curve, a statistical relationship that economists use in forecasting inflation (Figure 10). While the original version of the Phillips curve related changes in inflation to changes in unemployment, the newer version stresses the importance of inflation expectations in inflation dynamics and puts less emphasis on measures of economic activity. It generally provides better inflation forecasts than the traditional Phillips curve. In the expectations-augmented Phillips curve, economic activity is represented by a measure of slack – usually either the unemployment gap, which is the deviation of the unemployment rate from its longer-run natural rate, or the output gap, which is the deviation of output from its longer-run trend or potential level. A body of research has found that the estimate of the slope coefficient on slack in the expectations- augmented Phillips curve has diminished and that inflation expectations are a more important driver of inflation dynamics. In terms of forecasting ability, the model’s under-prediction of inflation in the early 10 As Faust and Wright (2013) discuss, for five-year, five-year forward inflation compensation to be a rational expectation of inflation in the long term, it would have to be a martingale, i.e., its expected value tomorrow would be equal to its value today. An implication is that the volatility of k-period changes in forward inflation compensation must be k times the volatility of one-period changes. They test and reject this hypothesis. 9 stages of the recovery in 2009-2011 renewed questions about the reliability of the Phillips curve in forecasting inflation. This generated a considerable amount of investigation aimed at resolving the puzzle of the missing disinflation. Analysis by economists at the ECB indicates that including food and energy prices in the Phillips curve for core inflation can explain the missing disinflation in the Euro area between 2009 and 2011.11 This points out that how the Phillips curve is specified and the measures one uses for inflation expectations and economic slack are likely to affect its forecasting ability – which doesn’t offer much solace if one wants to use the model in real time. More than that, we need to acknowledge that the measures of slack in the Phillips curve relationship are imprecise because they depend on unobservables like the natural rate of unemployment and the level of potential GDP. The slack measures also get revised over time. In fact, economists have been revising down their estimates of potential growth almost every year since the Great Recession started. For example, in 2008, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that potential growth between 2008 and 2013 would average 2.5 percent, well above its current estimate of 1.3 percent for that same time period. Revisions also plague certain inflation measures, like PCE inflation in the U.S., which complicates making monetary policy in real time. For example, in early 2002, FOMC policymakers were concerned about a drop in inflation. Ultimately, much of this drop was revised away. In a number of papers, Athanasios Orphanides has laid out a convincing case that mismeasurement of slack and other unobservables like the natural rate of interest led to monetary policy mistakes that contributed to the Great Inflation of the 1970s. He argues that these mismeasured concepts continue to unduly influence monetary policy today.12 11 See Constâncio (2015). 12 See, for example, Orphanides (2015), Orphanides and Van Norden (2005), and Orphanides (2002). 10 The New Keynesian Phillips curve is an alternative to the statistical Phillips curve I have been discussing. It is a component of the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model, the workhorse model in wide use at central banks. The model assumes that firms have some pricing power, i.e., there is imperfect competition, and a firm will set its price in order to maximize its profit. But the model also assumes that prices are sticky, i.e., the firms can adjust their prices only infrequently and not with every shock that hits the economy. These distortions mean that when the economy is hit by a shock, the level of output can differ from the efficient level that would prevail in the absence of sticky prices and with perfect competition. They also mean that monetary policy can affect real activity in the short run, even though it has a neutral effect on real activity in the long run, and that the main driver of inflation dynamics in the short run is the expected markup over marginal cost that firms charge to their customers. This expected markup will vary over time and economic circumstances.13 One implication of the New Keynesian Phillips curve is that the usual measures of economic slack play a role in inflation dynamics only to the extent that they help predict future changes in marginal costs, which does not seem to be the case. However, there is a different concept of slack that appears in the New Keynesian Phillips curve. The relevant measure of slack is the difference between the efficient level of output and the prevailing level of output in the economy with its sticky prices and imperfect competition. Inflation, then, is related to expected inflation and this gap. In the absence of shocks that affect the firms’ desired markups of price over marginal cost, monetary policy should seek to minimize this gap, which would be equivalent to stabilizing inflation. The nature of the shock hitting the economy will determine whether the efficient level of output will change and whether monetary policy will want to respond to it. While I’ve pointed out some difficulties with using statistical Phillips curves to forecast inflation, it’s also important to recognize limitations of the New Keynesian Phillips curve in capturing inflation dynamics. 13 For an accessible description of the New Keynesian Phillips curve, see Sill (2011). 11 For example, the theory does not predict that there would be a lot of persistence in inflation beyond that associated with marginal cost, but in the U.S., the data suggest there is considerable persistence. Thus, to forecast inflation, the model needs to be augmented with lagged values of inflation or output, or by allowing the expected longer-run value of inflation to move slowly over time.14 Work continues on enhancing our forecasting models because forecasts of inflation are particularly important for monetary policymaking. The fact that it takes considerable time for policy actions to be transmitted through all parts of the economy requires monetary policymakers to be forward looking. Central bankers in the U.S., U.K., and Euro zone are projecting that inflation will rise gradually toward their respective inflation targets over the next couple of years. We should keep in mind that the confidence bands around these forecasts are fairly wide, reflecting model uncertainty, the fact that the economy is constantly being buffeted by shocks, and that the data can be revised over time. Figure 11 illustrates the confidence intervals around forecasts of the Bank of England and ECB staff. In the Bank of England’s projection, the middle band is a 70 percent confidence interval; for the ECB staff forecast it’s a 57.5 percent confidence band – in both cases the width one year out is a little over 1 percentage point. Unlike these central banks, in the U.S., the FOMC does not publish a consensus forecast or a staff forecast. Instead, four times a year, the FOMC summarizes the individual projections of each Committee participant. The median projection of headline PCE inflation published in March indicates that inflation is projected to rise from 0.5 percent in 2015 to 1.2 percent this year and about 2 percent in 2017 and 2018. The FOMC does not produce error bands around these projections, although this is being discussed.15 14 See the discussion in Sill (2011). 15 See Minutes of the FOMC Meeting of January 26-27, 2016. 12 The Committee does publish a summary table of the average historical errors of projections from 1996 through 2015 made by various private and government forecasters. For inflation, these errors are around 1 percentage point one or two years out. We can apply these errors to the median FOMC projection to get an approximate, symmetric 70 percent confidence interval. As seen in Figure 12, although the dispersion across FOMC participants often gets some attention, it is actually quite narrow compared with the confidence bands around forecasts of inflation. The precision of the forecasts, or lack thereof, needs to be kept in mind when setting monetary policy. We must be forward looking, which means we must rely on models to forecast inflation, but there is no one model that forecasts with much accuracy. The best we can do in this situation is to recognize that there is uncertainty around our forecasts. I am in favor of the FOMC providing some type of error band around its projections. Not only will it help the public understand some of the risks around our forecast, but it will also be a helpful reminder to policymakers that we constantly live with uncertainty. This shouldn’t paralyze us. Instead we should cope with it by looking at the outcomes from multiple models and alternative simulations, using techniques like model averaging, and by continually evaluating the forecasts from the models against incoming data. The FOMC has been expanding the models it routinely examines as a part of the policymaking process – these include the Board of Governors staff’s large-scale FRB/US model and two smaller-scale DSGE models called EDO and SIGMA, as well as various models maintained and utilized at the Federal Reserve Banks. Researchers are now building model archives to aid in the systematic comparison of empirical results and policy implications across a large set of economic models as an aid to policy analysis. One such archive, The Macroeconomic Model Data Base (MMB), headed by Volker Wieland of Goethe University Frankfurt, currently includes 61 models.16 16 See The Macroeconomic Model Data Base (MMB) web page at www.macromodelbase.com for more information on the database; for a discussion of the approach, see Wieland, Cwik, Müller, Schmidt, and Wolters (2012). 13 Given the state of our knowledge, this seems to be a promising approach to ensuring that policy actions are robust across the span of plausible models of economic dynamics and economic circumstances. Of course, in addition to model averaging, it is also important for central bank and academic researchers to continue to push the envelope of our knowledge. Let me finish by discussing research on inflation expectations, an area that I view as critical to advancing our understanding of inflation dynamics, measurement, and forecasting. Inflation Expectations Research Despite the central role inflation expectations play in our theories of inflation dynamics and monetary policy transmission, there is still much we don’t know about how such expectations are formed or even whose expectations matter for forecasting inflation and setting monetary policy. It took many years to bring inflation expectations down, so keeping inflation expectations anchored at a central bank’s target is a high priority. If inflation runs below or above the targeted inflation rate for some period of time, will it cause longer-term inflation expectations to become unanchored and the public to lose confidence in the central bank? Does it matter how far inflation is from target, or how long it’s been away from the target to trigger such a response? Without a better understanding of how people form their expectations about inflation, it is difficult to answer these questions or to have a good sense of what might cause inflation expectations to become unanchored from the central bank’s target. To see that this is not straightforward, one can look at the experience in Japan. As shown in Figure 13, in Japan, after a long period of being stuck near zero, actual inflation ran below zero from 2009 through mid-2013. Even so, measures of inflation expectations were relatively stable between 1.5 and 2 percent, 14 well above actual inflation for a number of years.17 This presents a conundrum because the theory suggests that changes in inflation expectations should lead changes in underlying inflation. Inflation expectations may also be an important piece of the puzzle explaining the missing disinflation in the 2009-2011 period (Figure 14). Although the theory is based on firms’ pricing behavior, in the U.S. we don’t have consistent measures of firms’ inflation expectations. Olivier Coibion and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2015) find that there is a tighter link between the inflation prediction from an estimated Phillips curve and actual inflation when inflation expectations are measured by household expectations than when they are measured by the expectations of professional forecasters.18 The authors are conducting a survey of firms’ inflation expectations in New Zealand and are already getting some interesting results that suggest that firms’ inflation expectations behave more like the inflation expectations of households than of professional forecasters. In particular, the inflation expectations of firms, like those of households, are considerably higher than those of professional forecasters, and the dispersion across firms is similar to that for households and much wider than that observed across professional forecasters. Firm and household inflation expectations both rose significantly starting in 2009, reflecting the rise in oil prices. Coibion and Gorodnichenko suggest that the fact that disinflationary pressures were absent across countries during the 2009-2011 period lends some support to the idea that a common factor like oil prices, which rose over the period, may have been at work. A better understanding of firms’ expectations about future inflation may bring us better insight into how firms set prices and may help reconcile some discrepancies between our models and real-world pricing behavior. For example, based on the data on individual prices that are used to construct aggregate price indices like the CPI, Mark Bils and Peter Klenow find that firms appear to change prices more frequently 17 See Yellen (2015) and Trehan and Lynch (2013). 18 See Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2015). 15 than predicted by standard models that have been calibrated to match various features of the macroeconomic business cycle.19 This is a troubling finding in that it suggests a disconnect between the micro data and the New Keynesian macro models that are often used to inform monetary policy analysis. Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajsek are investigating the effect of financial constraints on firms’ pricing behavior. They find that product price inflation varies depending on the ease with which firms can access external finance. Firms with such access can compensate for reduced demand for their products by cutting prices, whereas firms that cannot get such funding need to raise prices to keep revenue from falling too much. Thus, in the wake of a downturn in demand that is accompanied by financial shocks that reduce firms’ access to credit and liquidity, we’d expect to see a drop in output and an increase in markups and, therefore, inflation.20 This is another factor that helps resolve the disinflation puzzle in the aftermath of the Great Recession. These types of results point to the need to further develop DSGE models that seriously incorporate financial markets and the possibility of financial stress, borrower defaults, and financial institution failures. These models need to be fairly complex. By their nature, financial crises involve nonlinearities, potentially multiple equilibria, and financial frictions that limit arbitrage. But there could be a high payoff in terms of furthering our knowledge of inflation dynamics. Borağan Aruoba and Frank Schorfheide incorporate nonlinearities into a DSGE model so that they can analyze inflation dynamics at and during exit from the zero lower bound on interest rates.21 This model has multiple equilibria and the authors examine the two steady states – one in which inflation is at its target and the other in which the nominal interest rate is zero and inflation is negative. Thus, inflation expectations would reflect the public’s expectations about the average inflation rate in each regime as 19 See Bils and Klenow (2004), and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008). 20 See Gilchrist, Schoenle, Sim, and Zakrajsek (2015). 21 Aruoba and Schorfheide (2015). 16 well as their expectations about the probability of switching regimes. Welfare is considerably lower in the deflationary steady state than in the targeted-inflation steady state. In a world with multiple equilibria, as in this model, one can think of a central bank’s monetary policy as choosing one of the equilibrium paths, which can have very different welfare implications. In the model, the economy can hit the zero lower bound either because of an adverse transitory shock or series of shocks within the targeted-inflation regime, or because the economy has switched to the deflationary regime. Since inflation and interest rates can be low in either regime, knowing which regime the economy is actually in is difficult. This presents a challenge to the central bank, since the optimal monetary policy in each regime differs. Based on their analysis of the inflation and interest rate experiences in the U.S., Euro area, and Japan, the authors suggest that Japan switched into the deflation regime, while it is unlikely that the Euro area did, and the U.S. case is more ambiguous.22 This type of model can help inform our thinking about the level of the central bank’s inflation target. Our recent experience of the Great Recession has led some economists to suggest that central banks should be targeting a higher inflation rate in normal economic times so that when the economy is hit by sizable shocks there will be more room for conventional expansionary monetary policy.23 Aruoba and Schorfheide use their model to analyze how output, inflation, and interest rates would have evolved under two different scenarios: first, if the U.S. had picked an inflation target of 4 percent in 1984, and second, if the U.S. were to shift to a 4 percent inflation target now. In the first scenario, after 2009 interest rates do not reach zero, inflation returns quickly to the 4 percent target, output recovers more quickly than under the baseline lower-inflation-target regime, and consumption is higher. However, the authors conclude that the overall benefits of the policy are not clear because there may be costs to adjusting prices to the 22 See Aruoba and Schorfheide (2015) and Aruoba, Bocola, and Schorfheide (2013). 23 See, for example, Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro (2010), and Rosengren (2015). 17 higher inflation target as well as higher costs of holding cash and other liquid assets at a higher inflation rate. In addition, the benefits depend on the probability of hitting the zero lower bound in the first place. In the second scenario, the deflation risk is reduced but there is little change in the trajectory of output; thus, there is little real benefit to making such a change. Moreover, other factors that are not modeled suggest that changing the inflation target would be ineffectual and even counterproductive. To the extent that it takes time for the central bank to earn credibility for its inflation target and time for household and business expectations to become anchored at the target, changing the target would have little effect in the short run and be detrimental in the longer run if it undercut credibility and unanchored expectations. The multiple equilibrium nature of nonlinear DSGE models, like the one built by Aruoba and Schorfheide, suggests that one potentially fruitful area of research is to marry the literature on learning in macroeconomics with the emerging empirical literature on how agents form their expectations. Do people form their expectations based on their own price experience? Do they listen to experts or form expectations based on past inflation rates? Do they have their own theories about what determines future inflation? The concept of rational expectations – that agents’ expectations are consistent with the economic model – was a major advance in macroeconomic theory and is the benchmark assumption in all modern macroeconomic models. Yet it is a strong assumption in that it requires all agents to know the model and its parameters and to know that other agents are rational as well. A literature developed over the past two decades has incorporated various models of learning into macroeconomic models.24 Some of the research finds that expectations eventually converge to rational expectations, but the economic dynamics in such models can differ from those in the benchmark rational expectations model. In addition to exploring the implications of different models of learning – e.g., recursive learning or Bayesian 24 George W. Evans and Seppo Honkapohja have done seminal work in learning and macroeconomics. See their review article, Evans and Honkapohja (2009). See also Orphanides and Williams (2008). 18 learning – some economists are taking the models to the laboratory to conduct experiments to investigate economic dynamics.25 The learning literature gives us a way to study how the economy might shift from one equilibrium to another.26 Depending on how learning is modeled, such a shift might be gradual or it could be more abrupt, which has implications for economic stability and appropriate policy. Learning models help put some structure on the notion of “anchored” inflation expectations. They potentially point us to factors that might affect the degree to which inflation expectations are anchored to the central bank’s inflation target as well as the role central bank communications and credibility play in individuals’ formation of inflation expectations. Conclusion In my remarks today, I have pointed out several open questions about inflation. But rather than being discouraged by what we still don’t know, I am encouraged by the promising avenues being pursued to advance our knowledge about inflation dynamics and inflation expectations. I urge researchers to continue this pursuit because price stability is clearly a goal worth pursuing and good policymaking is dependent on the research that informs it. 25 An interesting paper (Assenza, Heemeijer, Hommes, and Massaro, 2013) studies individuals’ formation of expectations in a standard New Keynesian model within a laboratory setting with human subjects . The authors find that the economy converges to an equilibrium but with oscillations and that, consistent with the theoretical literature, a monetary policy rule that reacts more than one for one to changes in inflation stabilizes inflation. 26 Bernanke (2007) discusses some of these ideas. 19 References Aruoba, Borağan, Luigi Bocola, and Frank Schorfheide, “Assessing DSGE Model Nonlinearities,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19693, 2013. Aruoba, Borağan, and Frank Schorfheide, “Inflation During and After the Zero Lower Bound,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 2015. Assenza, Tiziana, Peter Heemeijer, Cars Hommes, and Domenico Massaro, “Individual Expectations and Aggregate Macro Behavior,” Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper 13-016/II, January 5, 2013. Bank of England, Inflation Report, February 2016. Bernanke, Ben S., “The Benefits of Price Stability,” Center for Economic Policy Studies, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, February 24, 2006. Bernanke, Ben S., “Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting,” remarks at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, MA, July 10, 2007. Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,” Journal of Political Economy 112, 2004, pp. 947-985. Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro, “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42, 2010, pp. 119-215. Clark, Todd, and Christian Garciga, “Recent Inflation Trends,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Trends, January 14, 2016. Cogley, Timothy, Giorgio E. Primiceri, and Thomas J. Sargent, “Inflation-Gap Persistence in the US,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 2010, pp. 43-69. Coibion, Olivier, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko, “Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well after All? Inflation Expectations and the Missing Disinflation,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7, January 2015, pp. 197-232. Constâncio, Vítor, “Understanding Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 29, 2015. European Central Bank, ECB Staff Macroeconomic Projections for the Euro Area, March 2016. Evans, George W., and Seppo Honkapohja, “Learning and Macroeconomics,” The Annual Review of Economics 1, 2009, pp. 421-449. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright, “Forecasting Inflation,” in Handbook of Economic Forecasting, Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier Press, vol. 2A, 2013, pp. 2-56. Fischer, Stanley, “U.S. Inflation Developments,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 29, 2015. Fratianni, Michele, and Jürgen von Hagen, “The Konstanz Seminar on Monetary Theory and Policy at Thirty,” May 2001. 20 Gilchrist, Simon, Raphael Schoenle, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek, “Inflation Dynamics During the Financial Crisis,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-012, March 3, 2015. Larkin, John, “Box A: Oil Prices and Inflation Expectations: An Investigation Into the Contribution of Global Demand and Oil Supply Shocks to Euro Area Inflation Expectations,” in Central Bank of Ireland, Quarterly Bulletin 02, April 2016, pp. 47-48. Mester, Loretta J., “Inflation and Monetary Policy: Six Research Questions,” speech before the 2014 Inflation Conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, May 29, 2014. Minutes of the FOMC Meeting of January 26-27, 2016. Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson, “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost Models,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2008, pp. 1415-1464. Orphanides, Athanasios, “Monetary Policy Rules and the Great Inflation,” American Economic Review 92, 2002, pp. 115–120. Orphanides, Athanasios, “Inflation Dynamics: Lessons From Past Debates for Current Policy,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 29, 2015. Orphanides, Athanasios, and Simon Van Norden, “The Reliability of Inflation Forecasts Based on Output Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 37, 2005, pp. 583-601. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, “Learning, Expectations Formation, and the Pitfalls of Optimal Control Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 55, 2008, S80-S96. Plosser, Charles I., “Strengthening Our Monetary Policy Framework,” 20th Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference, New York, NY, April 14, 2011. Rosengren, Eric S., “Changing Economic Relationships: Implications for Monetary Policy and Simple Monetary Policy Rules,” Chatham House, London, England, April 16, 2015. Sill, Keith, “Inflation Dynamics and the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review, Q1 2011, pp. 17-25. The Macroeconomic Model Data Base (MMB) web page. Trehan, Bharat, and Maura Lynch, “Consumer Inflation Views in Three Countries,” Economic Letter, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 2013. Wieland, Volker, Tobias Cwik, Gernot J. Müller, Sebastian Schmidt, and Maik Wolters, “A New Comparative Approach to Macroeconomic Modeling and Policy Analysis,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 83, 2012, pp. 523-541. Yellen, Janet L., “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” The Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, September 24, 2015. Recent Inflation Developments and Challenges for Research and Monetary Policymakingfor Research and Monetary Policymaking Loretta J. Mester* President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of ClevelandFederal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 47th Konstanz Seminar on Monetary Theory and Monetary Policy47 Konstanz Seminar on Monetary Theory and Monetary Policy Insel Reichenau, Germany May 12, 2016 * The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of the Fd l R St ll th Fd l O Mk t Ci t t 1 Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Figure 1. Headline inflation 50 6.0 Year‐over‐year percentage change U.S. PCE price index Euro area HICP Percent 30 4.0 5.0 pg g U.K. CPI 10 2.0 3.0 ‐1.0 0.0 1.0 ‐2.0 1.0 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2 Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, ECB, Eurostat via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. March 2016 Figure 2. Core inflation U.S. PCE price index ex. Food & Energy 35 4.0 p gy Euro area HICP ex. Food & Energy U.K. CPI ex. Food, Energy, Alcohol & Tobacco Year‐over‐year Percent 2.5 3.0 3.5 percentage change 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 ‐1.0 ‐0.5 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 3 Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, ECB, and Eurostat via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. March 2016 Figure 3. Other measures of underlying inflation in the U.S. 4.0 Cleveland Fed Median CPI Dallas Fed Trimmed PCE Year‐over‐year percentage change Percent 25 3.0 3.5 Dallas Fed Trimmed PCEpercentage change 15 2.0 2.5 05 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 4 Source: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. March 2016 Figure 4. Trend inflation estimates 3.5 4.0 U.S. Euro area UK Percent 2.5 3.0 U.K. 1.5 2.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 5 Source: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Quarterly data: Last obs. 2015Q4 Figure 5. Longer‐term inflation expectations: Surveys of professional forecasters 4.0 y p U.S. PCE inflation over the next 10 yrs. E HICP if lt i 5 hd Percent 3.0 3.5 Euro area HICP inflation 5 yrs. ahead U.K. CPI inflation 3 yrs. ahead 2.0 2.5 05 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 6 Source: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia via Haver Analytics, ECB, Bank of England Quarterly data: Last obs. 2016Q1 Figure 6. Longer‐term inflation expectations: Surveys of households 4.0 y Percent U.S. 5‐10 years ahead U.K. 5 years ahead 3.0 3.5 15 2.0 2.5 05 1.0 1.5 0.0 0.5 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 7 Source: University of Michigan, Bank of England/GfK Monthly data for U.S.: Last obs. March 2016 Quarterly data for U.K.: Last obs. 2016Q1 Figure 7. Five‐year, five‐year forward inflation compensation based on swaps 5.0 Percent p p U.S. CPI Euro area HICP U.K. RPI 35 4.0 4.5 U.K. CPI 2.5 3.0 3.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.5 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 8 Source: Bloomberg Monthly data: Last obs. March 2016 Figure 8. Ten‐year inflation risk premia 2.0 Percent FRB Cleveland inflation risk premium FRB San Francisco inflation risk premium 0.5 1.0 1.5 ‐0.5 0.0 0.5 20 ‐1.5 ‐1.0 ‐2.5 ‐2.0 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 9 Source: FRB Cleveland and FRB San Francisco Monthly data for FRB Cleveland: Last obs. April 2016 Daily data for FRB San Francisco: Last obs. April 7, 2016 Figure 9. Five‐year, five‐year forward inflation expectations 45 5.0 Percent p FRB Cleveland 5 yr‐5yr forward inflation expectations FRB San Francisco 5 yr‐5yr forward inflation expectations 3.5 4.0 4.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 05 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0 0.5 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 10 Source: FRB Cleveland and FRB San Francisco Monthly data for FRB Cleveland: Last obs. April 2016 Daily data for FRB San Francisco: Last obs. April 19, 2016 Figure 10. The Phillips curve models The traditional Phillips curve The expectations‐augmented Phillips curve tt t u    The expectations‐augmented Phillips curve 1()( * )tt t t t Eu u       The New Keynesian Phillips curve ()Em c     1 1 () ()( ) tt t t t efficient tt t t t Em c Ey y              11 Figure 11. Confidence intervals around inflation forecastsinflation forecasts Bank of England, Inflation Report, February 2016 ECB Staff Projection, Mh 2016February 2016 March 2016 12 Figure 12. FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections: PCE Inflation 4.0 Percent j Median of projections Range of projections 3.0 3.5 70% confidence interval using historical projection errors 2.0 2.5 05 1.0 1.5 Actual 0.0 0.5 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 13 Source: FOMC Summary of Economic Projections, March 2016 Figure 13. Actual and expected inflation in Japan 5-year price change, annual rate Consensus Forecasts Consensus Forecasts, long-term expected inflation 12-month price change pg 14 Source: Janet L. Yellen, “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” The Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA, September 24, 2015 Figure 14. Research on inflation expectations  Inflation expectations formation - Do inflation expectations lead or lag inflation? - Inflation expectations of firms vs. households, vs. professional forecasters  Firms’ pricing behavior - Micro data - Financial constraints  Multiple equilibriap q  Learning models 15
