Perspectives on Monetary Policy and Market Volatility By Eric S. Rosengren January 9, 2019 Boston, MA Boston Economic Club Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Federal Reserve Bank of Boston President Eric Rosengren spoke Wednesday about the economy’s outlook, recent stock-market volatility, and the implications for the Fed’s monetary policy. In his talk, Rosengren contrasts the pessimism reflected in financial markets with the relatively optimistic outlooks of professional forecasters and Fed policymakers. “At least to date, the economic data and the outlook of forecasters have both been more optimistic than recent financial market movements might indicate.” Rosengren suspects financial market sentiment “may have become unduly pessimistic.” His own view is for growth in 2019 “solid enough to tighten the U.S. labor market somewhat.” However, concerns with global growth, international trade, and geopolitical upheaval are important, and make the economic outlook “quite uncertain.” Actual economic outcomes could diverge significantly from what is being forecast. Rosengren said monetary policy is currently appropriately balancing risks. At this juncture, with two very different scenarios implied by market volatility and by economic forecasts, “I believe we can wait for greater clarity before adjusting policy.” “There should be no particular bias toward raising or lower rates until the data more clearly indicate the path for” economic growth. “Monetary policy should not be on a set course, but rather should take into account and reflect how the real economic data unfold.” “If the pessimism evident in financial markets eventually shows through to economic outcomes, there would be less need—and perhaps no need—for further increases in interest rates,” Rosengren said. “However, my current expectation is that the more optimistic view will prevail, with economic outcomes consistent with the more upbeat forecasts” – given factors like robust labor markets and strong consumer confidence. But in sum, “the Federal Reserve’s current monetary policy seems appropriate for now, and can patiently observe future economic developments,” Rosengren said. Eric Rosengren was speaking to the Boston Economic Club. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords monetary policy , interest rates , financial stability , fiscal policy , Markets

Risk Management in Monetary Policymaking By Eric S. Rosengren March 5, 2019 Boston, MA National Association of Corporate Directors' New England Chapter Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Eric Rosengren, the Boston Fed president, on Tuesday offered up a “relatively strong forecast” for the economy in 2019: growth somewhat above 2 percent, inflation close to the Fed’s 2 percent target, and a labor market that continues to tighten. However, “risks to that outlook have increased recently,” he said, in a talk focused on assessing and managing those risks. The fourth quarter of 2018 featured drops in stock indices, rising stock volatility, falling oil prices, dropping long Treasury rates, and widening credit spreads. But “after the calendar turned to 2019, many financial markets recovered smartly.” “However, many of the underlying global growth issues that generated the recent spate of financial-market concerns are as yet unresolved,” Rosengren observed. These issues include slowing growth in China and Europe, constraints on international trade, the potential for Brexit-generated challenges, and problems at some European banks. While there has been some recovery in equity prices, financial markets continue to price in downside risks to the economy. This is most obvious in longer Treasury rates and wider credit spreads, consistent with the ongoing risks posed by slower global growth. It remains to be seen if signs of economic weakness at the end of 2018 reflect an underlying slowdown, or were a response to “temporary concerns that may fade.” “There is some risk that more pronounced slowdowns in the rest of the world could dampen U.S. growth more than I am forecasting,” said Rosengren. While labor markets are tight and wage pressures are rising, inflation is so far quite well behaved. And “earlier concerns that the economy might overheat in a number of ways seem somewhat less pressing at this juncture,” he added. “Together these factors are sufficient to justify a pause in the recent monetary tightening cycle,” said Rosengren. “In the face of heightened risks, policymakers can be patient,” waiting to better discern the direction of the economy before taking further monetary policy action. Rosengren was speaking before the National Association of Corporate Directors, New England Chapter, in Boston. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords monetary policy , interest rates , financial stability , fiscal policy , Markets , Economic outlook
