1 Economic Outlook, January 2014 January 3, 2014 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Maryland Bankers Association Seventh Annual First Friday Economic Outlook Forum Baltimore, Maryland It's a pleasure to be with you today to discuss the economic outlook on this, the first Friday of the new year. This year is a special one for the Federal Reserve — our centennial year. President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act on December 23, 1913. Work then began to organize the Board of Governors in Washington and the 12 Reserve Banks around the country, which opened for business on November 16, 1914. The founding of the Federal Reserve System 100 years ago was the culmination of decades of debate on an array of proposals for banking and currency reform. We are taking this opportunity to reflect on our past, both the successes and the “improvement opportunities,” and to make our history more accessible to the public. If you're interested in learning more, I urge you to visit federalreservehistory.org. 1 For most people, the turning of the calendar is an occasion for hope regarding prospects for the year ahead, and economists are no different. Economists' hopes have been bolstered this year by a recent string of data releases indicating that 2013 ended on a strong note. Third-quarter growth in real GDP — our broadest measure of overall economic activity — was stronger than we've seen in quite some time. While that figure was boosted significantly by inventory accumulation that is unlikely to persist, there was some evidence of momentum that might carry forward into the fourth quarter. Consumer spending, in particular, seems to have surged early in the fourth quarter. That's notable because growth in consumer spending has averaged just above 2 percent per year for most of this expansion, which is a good part of the reason real GDP has only grown at about a 2 percent rate. Many forecasters are citing the recent surge as support for projections of sustained growth at around 3 percent starting later this year. 2 It's worth pointing out, however, that this has been true at virtually every point in this expansion. Ever since the recovery began, most forecasters have the economy picking up speed in the next couple of quarters with the easing of headwinds that have been temporarily restraining growth. My own forecasts (at least initially) followed this script as well. Despite these perennially hopeful forecasts, the actual results have been more modest. Real GDP grew by 2.0 percent in 2011, 2.0 percent in 2012 and 1.8 percent for the first half of 2013. This record of relatively steady but modestly paced growth, despite forecasts of an imminent increase in growth, helps motivate the more cautious economic outlook that I will share with you today. But before I begin, I should make clear that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to others in the Federal Reserve System. 3 2 A bit of background helps explain the forecasting disappointments of the last several years. Before the Great Recession of 2008 and 2009, we enjoyed a period known as the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2007, real GDP grew at an average annual rate of 3.3 percent. Over that 24-year period, we experienced only two short, shallow recessions that together lasted just five quarters. Real personal income kept pace with GDP, also growing at a 3.3 percent annual rate. And consumer spending advanced even more rapidly than income, growing at a 3.6 percent annual rate. Part of the reason consumer spending was able to grow more rapidly than income over that period was the rise in household wealth. Stock prices, bond prices and housing prices all increased significantly during the Great Moderation. Another reason for the divergence was the increase in credit availability for most consumers. For example, the ratio of credit card debt to personal income rose from 2.4 percent in 1983 to 8.0 percent in 2007.* During the Great Recession, GDP fell by 4.3 percent over a six-quarter interval, but other indicators document even greater hardship. Payroll employment fell by 8.7 million jobs in the recession and its immediate aftermath. The unemployment rate, which was below 5 percent in 2007, rose to 10 percent in October 2009. Real personal income fell by 3.1 percent from December 2007 to July 2009. The value of household holdings of stocks and mutual fund shares fell by $5 trillion, and the value of household equity in real estate fell by $3.9 trillion. The scale and scope of the loss in income and wealth experienced by Americans was far greater than anything seen in the previous 20 years. Given that experience, lenders are bound to re-evaluate the riskiness associated with extending credit to a typical household. Indeed, consumers themselves appear to be re-evaluating the riskiness associated with indebtedness, no doubt reflecting a sense that their income and asset returns may be substantially riskier than they had come to believe during the Great Moderation. Under these conditions, it's no surprise that credit is no longer available on the same terms. And it's no surprise that consumers have been paying off debt and building up savings in order to restore some sense of balance to their household finances. These developments appear to have contributed to a persistent cautiousness in household spending behavior. Over the last three years, real consumer spending has increased at an annual rate of 2.25 percent. Although consumption grew rapidly at the end of last year, we have seen similar surges since the last recession, only to see spending return to a more moderate trend. Consumer spending trends are likely to depend on whether the dramatic events of the last few years are only a temporary disturbance to household sentiment or if they instead represent a more persistent shift in attitudes about borrowing and saving. At this point, I am inclined toward the latter view. Businesses also appear to be quite reticent to hire and invest. A widely followed index of small business optimism fell sharply during the recession and has only partially recovered since then. Interestingly, when small business owners were asked about the single most important problem they face, the most frequent answer in the latest survey was “government regulations and red tape.” This observation accords with reports we've been hearing from many business contacts for 3 several years now. They've seen a substantial increase in the pace of regulatory change and a substantial increase in uncertainty about the shape of new regulations. Both are said to discourage new hiring and investment commitments. Adding to the uncertainty is the continuing cloud over our nation's fiscal policy. The most recent round of budget deliberations has certainly been a welcome relief from the recurrent legislative cliffhangers of the last several years. The lower odds of an imminent budget showdown may ease some business and consumer concerns, and that may aid growth. But overall government spending has been declining lately, and, given continuing fiscal pressures, that category is likely to make little, if any, contribution to GDP growth in coming years. From a longer-run perspective, it's worth noting that current law still implies an unsustainable path for federal expenditures and receipts. My fear is that the recent decline in the federal deficit will dampen the sense of urgency about fixing the longer-run budgetary imbalance. The sooner we resolve uncertainty about how the costs of those fixes will be allocated, the better off we will be, I believe. Dealing with the federal budget sooner rather than later would allow spreading the cost out over time, which would reduce the ultimate cost. Moreover, it would remove a potentially important source of uncertainty hanging over investment and spending decisions. I've discussed consumer spending and business investment, which together account for about four-fifths of the economy. Residential investment is one area in which we have seen strong growth. Real residential investment increased by more than 15 percent in 2012, and through the third quarter of last year it increased at a 12 percent annual rate. Many housing market indicators, such as housing starts and new home sales, remain well below levels that were typical during the expansions of the Great Moderation, so there is a reasonable basis to expect residential investment to continue to grow. But since this category is only 3 percent of GDP, it has only a marginal effect on the overall outlook. That leaves net exports, which for various reasons also are likely to make little contribution to GDP growth next year. Adding up all these categories of spending yields a forecast for GDP growth of just a little above 2 percent — not much different from what we've seen for the last three years. That's my forecast for this year, but when thinking about growth prospects, I believe it's important to keep an eye on longer-run trends as well. To do that, it's useful to break down real GDP growth into the sum of the growth in labor productivity — that is, output per worker — and the growth in the number of workers. It turns out both of these components have slowed since the Great Moderation. If growth in overall output is going to rise substantially, then we would need to see an increase in labor productivity growth, or in employment growth, or both. Let's start with productivity. Broadly speaking, growth in labor productivity results from applying additional capital goods to the production process or by changing the way production is organized in order to improve the efficiency of input use. Gains in labor productivity represent the ultimate source of gains in real family incomes over time. From 1983 to 2000, labor productivity grew at a 1.8 percent annual rate. But toward the end of the Great Moderation, 4 productivity growth slowed, and over the last three years productivity has increased at a very modest 1.0 percent annual rate. Forecasting trends in productivity growth is exceedingly difficult because innovations are hard to foresee. Having said that, it's not clear why productivity growth would improve dramatically in the near term; there's no sign of a major surge of technical innovations in the pipeline, or significant improvement in educational attainment or substantial deregulation — the kinds of developments that would lead to a major acceleration in productivity. But it's also hard to believe productivity has hit some sort of plateau. It doesn't take much digging to find examples of continued innovation in today's economy, even if it hasn't generated the rapid aggregate productivity growth we saw during the Great Moderation. In my view, the productivity trend of the last several years provides the best basis for near-term projections, and thus my outlook is that productivity growth will be about 1 percent for the next few years. Employment growth also has slowed since the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2000, employment increased at a 1.8 percent annual rate (as estimated in the survey of households). Over the last four years, employment growth has been just 1.0 percent per year — so employment growth has fallen by almost half. One reason is that the size of the working age population is now growing more slowly than before. Moreover, the fraction of the working age population that is employed or looking for work — economists call this the labor force participation rate — has been declining due to demographic shifts and other structural factors. In addition, I've been struck by the large number of accounts I've heard about firms having difficulty finding workers with the appropriate skills, in many cases constraining production. It appears as if the nature of current technological advances may be shifting the mix of requisite workforce skills more rapidly than in the past, which would impede the rate at which unemployed workers can be drawn back into employment. So there are a number of reasons to doubt that employment growth will return soon to the strong pace we saw during the Great Moderation. Before I wrap things up, I'd like to share some brief observations on inflation and monetary policy. First, it's important to recognize that inflation has been well-behaved over the last 20 years. Since 1993, inflation has averaged 1.9 percent, which is remarkably close to the Federal Open Market Committee's goal of 2 percent. Second, we've seen some fluctuations in inflation over that time period, but they have all proven to be transitory. For example, inflation averaged 2.8 percent over the three years ending in December 2007. I mention this because many people have noticed that over the last 12 months inflation has only averaged 0.9 percent. My sense is that inflation will move back toward 2 percent over the next year or two, in part because measures of expected inflation remain well contained. This is not a certainty, however, and I believe the FOMC will want to watch this closely. And that brings us to monetary policy, which has been particularly challenging of late. As you may recall, the Fed reduced its target for the federal funds rate to essentially zero at the end of 2008. Given the state of the economy, that was the appropriate monetary policy response. Since then, the Fed has purchased a significant quantity of assets, which increases the supply of monetary assets to the banking system and in some circumstances can have a stimulative effect. 5 The size of our balance sheet has gone from $2.2 trillion to around $4.0 trillion, and it has been increasing by about $85 billion per month. When the FOMC met in December, it decided to reduce the pace of asset purchases from $85 billion per month to $75 billion per month. I supported this decision because it was consistent with the linkage the Committee established between the asset purchase program and the outlook for labor market conditions. Since the program began in late 2012, we've seen a substantial improvement in a variety of indicators of labor market conditions, including the unemployment rate and the level of employment. So it made sense to initiate the process of bringing the program to a close. I expect further reductions in the pace of purchases to be under consideration at upcoming meetings. In conclusion, I'd like to return to the theme with which I began. The pickup in growth late last year is certainly a welcome development, and it may well be a harbinger of stronger growth ahead. But experience with similar growth spurts in the recent past suggests that it is too soon to make that call. My suspicion is that we will see growth subside this year to closer to 2 percent, about the rate we've seen since the Great Recession. Growth has been disappointing relative to our experience during the period of the Great Moderation, and growth may continue at a rate that is slower than in the past. But our economy is by no means stagnating; productivity is rising, incomes are growing and innovation is occurring. Our institutions of higher learning are worldwide leaders in research and education, and they continue to attract exceptional students from abroad. Our markets remain flexible and resilient. The public policy problems we face may be difficult, but they are certainly not insoluble. Consequently, a broad perspective suggests a fundamentally optimistic view about our future. *An earlier version of this speech incorrectly stated the ratio of credit card debt to personal income in 2007 as 5.5 percent. The text has been updated as of February 6, 2014 with the correct number, 8.0 percent. 1 For more on the Fed’s history, see Jeffrey M. Lacker, “A Look Back at the History of the Federal Reserve,” Speech at Christopher Newport University, Newport News, Va., August 29, 2013; and “Global Interdependence and Central Banking,” Speech at the Global Interdependence Center, The Union League of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pa., November 1, 2013. 2 The latest Blue Chip compilation of economists’ projections, for example, calls for 2.8 percent growth in real GDP. 3 I would like to thank Roy Webb for assistance in preparing these remarks.

1 Economic Outlook, January 2014 January 10, 2014 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Greater Raleigh Chamber of Commerce 2014 Economic Forecast Raleigh, North Carolina It's a pleasure to be with you today to discuss the economic outlook for the year ahead. This year is a special one for the Federal Reserve — our centennial year. President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act on December 23, 1913. Work then began to organize the Board of Governors in Washington and the 12 Reserve Banks around the country, which opened for business on November 16, 1914. The founding of the Federal Reserve System 100 years ago was the culmination of decades of debate on an array of proposals for banking and currency reform. We in the Federal Reserve are taking this opportunity to reflect on our past, both the successes and the “improvement opportunities,” and to make our history more accessible to the public. If you're interested in learning more, I urge you to visit federalreservehistory.org. 1 For most people, the turning of the calendar is an occasion for hope regarding prospects for the year ahead, and economists are no different. Economists' hopes have been bolstered of late by a recent string of data releases indicating that 2013 ended on a positive note. Third-quarter growth in real GDP — our broadest measure of overall economic activity — was stronger than we've seen in quite some time. While that figure was boosted significantly by inventory accumulation that is unlikely to persist, there was some evidence of momentum that might carry forward into the fourth quarter. Consumer spending, in particular, seems to have surged. That's notable because growth in consumer spending has averaged just above 2 percent per year for most of this expansion, which is a good part of the reason real GDP has only grown at about a 2 percent annual rate. Many forecasters are citing the recent surge as support for projections of sustained growth at around 3 percent starting later this year. 2 It's worth pointing out, however, that this has been true at virtually every point in this expansion. That is, since the recovery began, most forecasters have been expecting the economy to pick up speed in the next couple of quarters with the easing of headwinds that have been temporarily restraining growth. My own forecasts (at least initially) followed this script as well. Despite these perennial hopes, the actual results have been more modest. Real GDP grew by 2.0 percent in 2011, 2.0 percent in 2012 and 1.8 percent for the first half of 2013. This record of relatively steady but modestly paced expansion, despite forecasts of an imminent increase in growth, helps motivate the more cautious economic outlook that I will share with you today. But before I begin, I should make clear that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to others in the Federal Reserve System. 3 2 A bit of background helps explain the forecasting disappointments of the last several years. Before the Great Recession of 2008 and 2009, we enjoyed a period known as the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2007, real GDP grew at an average annual rate of 3.3 percent. Over that 24-year period, we experienced only two short, shallow recessions that together lasted just five quarters. Real personal income kept pace with GDP, also growing at a 3.3 percent annual rate. And consumer spending advanced even more rapidly than income, growing at a 3.6 percent annual rate. Part of the reason consumer spending was able to grow more rapidly than income over that period was the rise in household wealth. Stock prices, bond prices and housing prices all increased significantly during the Great Moderation. Another reason for the divergence was the increase in credit availability for most consumers. For example, the ratio of credit card debt to personal income rose from 2.4 percent in 1983 to 8.0 percent in 2007.* During the Great Recession, GDP fell by 4.3 percent over a six-quarter interval, but other indicators document even greater hardship. Payroll employment fell by 8.7 million jobs in the recession and its immediate aftermath. The unemployment rate, which was below 5 percent in 2007, rose to 10 percent in October 2009. Real personal income fell by 3.1 percent from December 2007 to July 2009. The value of household holdings of stocks and mutual fund shares fell by $5 trillion, and the value of household equity in real estate fell by $3.9 trillion. The scale and scope of the loss in income and wealth experienced by Americans was far greater than anything they had seen in the previous 20 years. Given that experience, lenders are bound to re-evaluate the riskiness associated with extending credit to a typical household. Indeed, consumers themselves appear to be re-evaluating the riskiness associated with indebtedness, no doubt reflecting a sense that their income and asset returns may be substantially riskier than they had come to believe during the Great Moderation. Under these conditions, it's no surprise that credit is no longer available on the same terms. And it's no surprise that consumers have been paying off debt and building up savings in order to restore some sense of balance to their household finances. These developments appear to have contributed to a persistent cautiousness in household spending behavior. Over the last three years, real consumer spending has increased at an annual rate of 2.25 percent. Although consumption grew rapidly at the end of last year, we have seen similar surges since the last recession, only to see spending return to a more moderate trend. Consumer spending trends are likely to depend on whether the dramatic events of the last few years are only a temporary disturbance to household sentiment or if they instead represent a more persistent shift in attitudes about borrowing and saving. At this point, I am inclined toward the latter view. Businesses also appear to be quite reticent to hire and invest. A widely followed index of small business optimism fell sharply during the recession and has only partially recovered since then. Interestingly, when small business owners were asked about the single most important problem they face, the most frequent answer in the latest survey was “government regulations and red tape.” This observation accords with reports we've been hearing from many business contacts for 3 several years now. They've seen a substantial increase in the pace of regulatory change and a substantial increase in uncertainty about the shape of new regulations. Both are said to discourage new hiring and investment commitments. Adding to the uncertainty is the continuing cloud over our nation's fiscal policy. The most recent round of budget deliberations has certainly been a welcome relief from the recurrent legislative cliffhangers of the last several years. The lower odds of an imminent budget showdown may ease some business and consumer concerns, and that may aid growth. But overall government spending has been declining lately, and, given continuing fiscal pressures, that category is likely to make little, if any, contribution to GDP growth in coming years. From a longer-run perspective, it's worth noting that current law still implies an unsustainable path for federal expenditures and receipts. My fear is that the recent decline in the federal deficit will dampen the sense of urgency about fixing the longer-run budgetary imbalance. The sooner we resolve uncertainty about how the costs of those fixes will be allocated, the better off we will be, I believe. Dealing with the federal budget sooner rather than later would allow spreading the cost out over time, which would reduce the ultimate burden. Moreover, it would remove a potentially important source of uncertainty hanging over investment and spending decisions. I've discussed consumer spending and business investment, which together account for about four-fifths of the economy. Residential investment is one area in which we have seen strong growth. Real residential investment increased by more than 15 percent in 2012, and through the third quarter of last year it increased at a 12 percent annual rate. Many housing market indicators, such as housing starts and new home sales, remain well below levels that were typical during the expansions of the Great Moderation, so there is a reasonable basis to expect residential investment to continue to grow. But since this category is only 3 percent of GDP, it has only a marginal effect on the overall outlook. That leaves net exports, which for various reasons also are likely to make little contribution to growth next year. Adding up all these categories of spending yields a forecast for GDP growth of just a little above 2 percent — not much different from what we've seen for the last three years. That's my forecast for this year, but when thinking about growth prospects, I believe it's important to keep an eye on longer-run trends as well. To do that, it's useful to break down real GDP growth into the sum of the growth in labor productivity — that is, output per worker — and the growth in the number of workers. It turns out both of these components have slowed since the Great Moderation. If growth in overall output is going to rise substantially, then we would need to see an increase in labor productivity growth, or in employment growth, or both. Let's start with productivity. Broadly speaking, growth in labor productivity results from applying additional capital goods to the production process or by changing the way production is organized in order to improve the efficiency of input use. Gains in labor productivity represent the ultimate source of gains in real family incomes over time. From 1983 to 2000, labor productivity grew at a 1.8 percent annual rate. But toward the end of the Great Moderation, productivity growth slowed, and over the last three years productivity has increased at a very modest 1.0 percent annual rate. 4 Forecasting trends in productivity growth is exceedingly difficult because innovations are hard to foresee. Having said that, it's not clear why productivity growth would improve dramatically in the near term; there's no sign of a major surge of technical innovations in the pipeline, or significant improvement in educational attainment or substantial deregulation — the kinds of developments that would lead to a major acceleration in productivity. But it's also hard to believe productivity has hit some sort of plateau. It doesn't take much digging to find examples of continued innovation in today's economy, even if they haven't generated the rapid aggregate productivity growth we saw during the Great Moderation. In my view, the productivity trend of the last several years provides the best basis for near-term projections, and thus my outlook is that productivity growth will be about 1 percent for the next few years. Employment growth also has slowed since the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2000, employment increased at a 1.8 percent annual rate (as estimated in the survey of households). Over the last four years, employment growth has been just 1.0 percent per year — so employment growth has fallen by almost half as well. One reason is that the size of the working age population is now growing more slowly than before. Moreover, the fraction of the working age population that is employed or looking for work — economists call this the labor force participation rate — has been declining due to demographic shifts and other structural factors. In addition, I've been struck by the large number of accounts I've heard of firms having difficulty finding workers with the appropriate skills, in many cases constraining production. It appears as if the nature of current technological advances may be shifting the mix of requisite workforce skills more rapidly than in the past, which would impede the rate at which unemployed workers can be drawn back into employment. So there are a number of reasons to doubt that employment growth will return soon to the strong pace we saw during the Great Moderation. Before I wrap things up, I'd like to share some brief observations on inflation and monetary policy. First, it's important to recognize that inflation has been well-behaved over the last 20 years. Since 1993, inflation has averaged 1.9 percent, which is remarkably close to the Federal Open Market Committee's goal of 2 percent. Second, we've seen some fluctuations in inflation over that time period, but they have all proven to be transitory. For example, inflation averaged 2.8 percent over the three years ending in December 2007. I mention this because many people have noticed that over the last 12 months inflation has only averaged 0.9 percent. My sense is that inflation will move back toward 2 percent over the next year or two, in part because measures of expected inflation remain well contained. This is not a certainty, however, and I believe the FOMC will want to watch this closely. And that brings us to monetary policy, which has been particularly interesting of late. As you may recall, the Fed reduced its target for the federal funds rate to essentially zero at the end of 2008. Given the state of the economy, that was the appropriate monetary policy response. Since then, the Fed has purchased a significant quantity of assets, which increases the supply of monetary assets to the banking system and in some circumstances can have a stimulative effect. The size of our balance sheet has gone from under $1 trillion before the recession to around $4.0 trillion, and it has been increasing by about $85 billion per month. 5 When the FOMC met in December, it decided to reduce the pace of asset purchases from $85 billion per month to $75 billion per month. I supported this decision because it was consistent with the linkage the Committee established between the asset purchase program and the outlook for labor market conditions. Since the program began in late 2012, we've seen a substantial improvement in a variety of indicators of labor market conditions, including the unemployment rate and the level of employment. So it made sense to initiate the process of bringing the program to a close. I expect further reductions in the pace of purchases to be under consideration at upcoming meetings. In conclusion, I'd like to return to the theme with which I began. The pickup in growth late last year is certainly a welcome development, and it may well be a harbinger of stronger growth ahead. But experience with similar growth spurts in the recent past suggests that it is too soon to make that call. My suspicion is that we will see growth subside this year to closer to 2 percent, about the rate we've seen since the Great Recession. Growth has been disappointing relative to our experience during the period of the Great Moderation, and growth may continue at a rate that is slower than in the past. But our economy is by no means stagnating; productivity is rising, incomes are growing and innovation is occurring. Our institutions of higher learning are worldwide leaders in research and education, and they continue to attract exceptional students from abroad. Our markets remain flexible and resilient. The public policy problems we face may be difficult, but they are certainly not insoluble. Consequently, I believe, a broad perspective suggests a fundamentally optimistic view about our future. *An earlier version of this speech incorrectly stated the ratio of credit card debt to personal income in 2007 as 5.5 percent. The text has been updated as of February 6, 2014 with the correct number, 8.0 percent. 1 For more on the Fed’s history, see Jeffrey M. Lacker, “A Look Back at the History of the Federal Reserve,” Speech at Christopher Newport University, Newport News, VA, August 29, 2013; and “Global Interdependence and Central Banking,” Speech at the Global Interdependence Center, The Union League of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, November 1, 2013. 2 The latest Blue Chip compilation of economists’ projections, for example, calls for 2.8 percent growth in real GDP. 3 I would like to thank Roy Webb for assistance in preparing these remarks.

1 Economic Outlook, January 2014 January 17, 2014 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Risk Management Association Richmond, Virginia It’s a pleasure to be with you today to discuss the economic outlook for the year ahead. This year is a special one for the Federal Reserve — our centennial year. President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act on December 23, 1913. Work then began to organize the Board of Governors in Washington and the 12 Reserve Banks around the country, which opened for business on November 16, 1914. The founding of the Federal Reserve System 100 years ago was the culmination of decades of debate on an array of proposals for banking and currency reform. We in the Federal Reserve are taking this opportunity to reflect on our past, both the successes and the “improvement opportunities,” and to make our history more accessible to the public. If you’re interested in learning more, I urge you to visit federalreservehistory.org. 1 For most people, the turning of the calendar is an occasion for hope regarding prospects for the year ahead, and economists are no different. Economists’ hopes have been bolstered of late by a recent string of data releases indicating that 2013 ended on a positive note. Third-quarter growth in real GDP — our broadest measure of overall economic activity — was stronger than we’ve seen in quite some time. While that figure was boosted significantly by inventory accumulation that is unlikely to persist, there was some evidence of momentum that might carry forward into the fourth quarter. Consumer spending, in particular, seems to have surged. That’s notable because growth in consumer spending has averaged just above 2 percent per year for most of this expansion, which is a good part of the reason real GDP has only grown at about a 2 percent annual rate. Many forecasters are citing the recent surge as support for projections of sustained growth at around 3 percent starting later this year. 2 It’s worth pointing out, however, that this has been true at virtually every point in this expansion. That is, since the recovery began, most forecasters have been expecting the economy to pick up speed in the next couple of quarters with the easing of headwinds that have been temporarily restraining growth. My own forecasts (at least initially) followed this script as well. Despite these perennial hopes, the actual results have been more modest. Real GDP grew by 2.0 percent in 2011, 2.0 percent in 2012 and 1.8 percent for the first half of 2013. This record of relatively steady but modestly paced expansion, despite forecasts of an imminent increase in growth, helps motivate the more cautious economic outlook that I will share with you today. But 2 before I begin, I should make clear that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to others in the Federal Reserve System.3 A bit of background helps explain the forecasting disappointments of the last several years. Before the Great Recession of 2008 and 2009, we enjoyed a period known as the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2007, real GDP grew at an average annual rate of 3.3 percent. Over that 24-year period, we experienced only two short, shallow recessions that together lasted just five quarters. Real personal income kept pace with GDP, also growing at a 3.3 percent annual rate. And consumer spending advanced even more rapidly than income, growing at a 3.6 percent annual rate. Part of the reason consumer spending was able to grow more rapidly than income over that period was the rise in household wealth. Stock prices, bond prices and housing prices all increased significantly during the Great Moderation. Another reason for the divergence was the increase in credit availability for most consumers. For example, the ratio of credit card debt to personal income rose from 2.4 percent in 1983 to 8.0 percent in 2007.* During the Great Recession, GDP fell by 4.3 percent over a six-quarter interval, but other indicators document even greater hardship. Payroll employment fell by 8.7 million jobs in the recession and its immediate aftermath. The unemployment rate, which was below 5 percent in 2007, rose to 10 percent in October 2009. Real personal income fell by 3.1 percent from December 2007 to July 2009. The value of household holdings of stocks and mutual fund shares fell by $5 trillion, and the value of household equity in real estate fell by $3.9 trillion. The scale and scope of the loss in income and wealth experienced by Americans was far greater than anything they had seen in the previous 20 years. Given that experience, lenders are bound to re-evaluate the riskiness associated with extending credit to a typical household. Indeed, consumers themselves appear to be re-evaluating the riskiness associated with indebtedness, no doubt reflecting a sense that their income and asset returns may be substantially riskier than they had come to believe during the Great Moderation. Under these conditions, it’s no surprise that credit is no longer available on the same terms. And it’s no surprise that consumers have been paying off debt and building up savings in order to restore some sense of balance to their household finances. These developments appear to have contributed to a persistent cautiousness in household spending behavior. Over the last three years, real consumer spending has increased at an annual rate of about 2 ¼ percent. Although consumption grew rapidly at the end of last year, we have seen similar surges since the last recession, only to see spending return to a more moderate trend. Consumer spending trends are likely to depend on whether the dramatic events of the last few years are only a temporary disturbance to household sentiment or if they instead represent a more persistent shift in attitudes about borrowing and saving. At this point, I am inclined toward the latter view. Businesses also appear to be quite reticent to hire and invest. A widely followed index of small business optimism fell sharply during the recession and has only partially recovered since then. Interestingly, when small business owners were asked about the single most important problem 3 they face, the most frequent answer in the latest survey was “government regulations and red tape.” This observation accords with reports we’ve been hearing from many business contacts for several years now. They’ve seen a substantial increase in the pace of regulatory change and a substantial increase in uncertainty about the shape of new regulations. Both are said to discourage new hiring and investment commitments. Adding to the uncertainty is the continuing cloud over our nation’s fiscal policy. The most recent round of budget deliberations has certainly been a welcome relief from the recurrent legislative cliffhangers of the last several years. The lower odds of an imminent budget showdown may ease some business and consumer concerns, and that may aid growth. But overall government spending has been declining lately, and, given continuing fiscal pressures, that category is likely to make little, if any, contribution to GDP growth in coming years. From a longer-run perspective, it’s worth noting that current law still implies an unsustainable path for federal expenditures and receipts. My fear is that the recent decline in the federal deficit will dampen the sense of urgency about fixing the longer-run budgetary imbalance. The sooner we resolve uncertainty about how the costs of those fixes will be allocated, the better off we will be, I believe. Dealing with the federal budget sooner rather than later would allow spreading the cost out over time, which would reduce the ultimate burden. Moreover, it would remove a potentially important source of uncertainty hanging over investment and spending decisions. I’ve discussed consumer spending and business investment, which together account for about four-fifths of the economy. Residential investment is one area in which we have seen strong growth. Real residential investment increased by more than 15 percent in 2012, and through the third quarter of last year it increased at a 12 percent annual rate. Many housing market indicators, such as housing starts and new home sales, remain well below levels that were typical during the expansions of the Great Moderation, so there is a reasonable basis to expect residential investment to continue to grow. But since this category is only 3 percent of GDP, it has only a marginal effect on the overall outlook. That leaves net exports, which for various reasons also are likely to make little contribution to growth next year. Adding up all these categories of spending yields a forecast for GDP growth of just a little above 2 percent — not much different from what we’ve seen for the last three years. That’s my forecast for this year, but when thinking about growth prospects, I believe it’s important to keep an eye on longer-run trends as well. To do that, it’s useful to break down real GDP growth into the sum of the growth in labor productivity — that is, output per worker — and the growth in the number of workers. It turns out both of these components have slowed since the Great Moderation. If growth in overall output is going to rise substantially, then we would need to see an increase in labor productivity growth, or in employment growth, or both. Let’s start with productivity. Broadly speaking, growth in labor productivity results from applying additional capital goods to the production process or by changing the way production is organized in order to improve the efficiency of input use. Gains in labor productivity represent the ultimate source of gains in real family incomes over time. From 1983 to 2000, labor productivity grew at a 1.8 percent annual rate. But toward the end of the Great Moderation, 4 productivity growth slowed, and over the last three years productivity has increased at a very modest annual rate of about 1 percent. Forecasting trends in productivity growth is exceedingly difficult because innovations are hard to foresee. Having said that, it’s not clear why productivity growth would improve dramatically in the near term; there’s no sign of a major surge of technical innovations in the pipeline, or significant improvement in educational attainment or substantial deregulation — the kinds of developments that would lead to a major acceleration in productivity. But it’s also hard to believe productivity has hit some sort of plateau. It doesn’t take much digging to find examples of continued innovation in today’s economy, even if they haven’t generated the rapid aggregate productivity growth we saw during the Great Moderation. In my view, the productivity trend of the last several years provides the best basis for near-term projections, and thus my outlook is that productivity growth will be about 1 percent for the next few years. Employment growth also has slowed since the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2000, employment increased at a 1.8 percent annual rate (as estimated in the survey of households). Over the last four years, employment growth has been just 1.2 percent per year — so employment growth has fallen by about a third. One reason is that the size of the working age population is now growing more slowly than before. Moreover, the fraction of the working age population that is employed or looking for work — economists call this the labor force participation rate — has been declining due to demographic shifts and other structural factors. In addition, I’ve been struck by the large number of accounts I’ve heard of firms having difficulty finding workers with the appropriate skills, in many cases constraining production. It appears as if the nature of current technological advances may be shifting the mix of requisite workforce skills more rapidly than in the past, which would impede the rate at which unemployed workers can be drawn back into employment. So there are a number of reasons to doubt that employment growth will return soon to the strong pace we saw during the Great Moderation. Before I wrap things up, I’d like to share some brief observations on inflation and monetary policy. First, it’s important to recognize that inflation has been well-behaved over the last 20 years. Since 1993, inflation has averaged 1.9 percent, which is remarkably close to the Federal Open Market Committee’s goal of 2 percent. Second, we’ve seen some fluctuations in inflation over that time period, but they have all proven to be transitory. For example, inflation averaged 2.8 percent over the three years ending in December 2007. I mention this because many people have noticed that over the last 12 months inflation has only averaged 0.9 percent. My sense is that inflation will move back toward 2 percent over the next year or two, in part because measures of expected inflation remain well contained. This is not a certainty, however, and I believe the FOMC will want to watch this closely. And that brings us to monetary policy, which has been particularly interesting of late. As you may recall, the Fed reduced its target for the federal funds rate to essentially zero at the end of 2008. Given the state of the economy, that was the appropriate monetary policy response. Since then, the Fed has purchased a significant quantity of assets, which increases the supply of monetary assets to the banking system and in some circumstances can have a stimulative effect. The size of our balance sheet has gone from under $1 trillion before the recession to around $4.0 trillion, and it has been increasing by about $85 billion per month. 5 When the FOMC met in December, it decided to reduce the pace of asset purchases from $85 billion per month to $75 billion per month. I supported this decision because it was consistent with the linkage the Committee established between the asset purchase program and the outlook for labor market conditions. Since the program began in late 2012, we’ve seen a substantial improvement in a variety of indicators of labor market conditions, including the unemployment rate and the level of employment. So it made sense to initiate the process of bringing the program to a close. I expect further reductions in the pace of purchases to be under consideration at upcoming meetings. In conclusion, I’d like to return to the theme with which I began. The pickup in growth late last year is certainly a welcome development, and it may well be a harbinger of stronger growth ahead. But experience with similar growth spurts in the recent past suggests that it is too soon to make that call. My suspicion is that we will see growth subside this year to closer to 2 percent, about the rate we’ve seen since the Great Recession. Growth has been disappointing relative to our experience during the period of the Great Moderation, and growth may continue at a rate that is slower than in the past. But our economy is by no means stagnating; productivity is rising, incomes are growing and innovation is occurring. Our institutions of higher learning are worldwide leaders in research and education, and they continue to attract exceptional students from abroad. Our markets remain flexible and resilient. The public policy problems we face may be difficult, but they are certainly not insoluble. Consequently, I believe, a broad perspective suggests a fundamentally optimistic view about our future. *An earlier version of this speech incorrectly stated the ratio of credit card debt to personal income in 2007 as 5.5 percent. The text has been updated as of February 6, 2014 with the correct number, 8.0 percent. 1 For more on the Fed’s history, see Jeffrey M. Lacker, “A Look Back at the History of the Federal Reserve,” Speech at Christopher Newport University, Newport News, Va., August 29, 2013; and “Global Interdependence and Central Banking,” Speech at the Global Interdependence Center, The Union League of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pa., November 1, 2013. 2 The latest Blue Chip compilation of economists’ projections, for example, calls for 2.8 percent growth in real GDP. 3 I would like to thank Roy Webb for assistance in preparing these remarks.

1 Economic Outlook, February 2014 February 4, 2004 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Shenandoah University Winchester, Virginia It’s a pleasure to be with you today to discuss the economic outlook for the year ahead. This year is a special one for the Federal Reserve ― our centennial year. The Federal Reserve Act was signed into law on December 23, 1913, by President Woodrow Wilson, who, as you know, was born just down Interstate 81 in Staunton. Work then began to organize the Board of Governors in Washington and the 12 Reserve Banks around the country, which opened for business on November 16, 1914. The founding of the Federal Reserve System 100 years ago was the culmination of decades of debate on an array of proposals for banking and currency reform. We in the Federal Reserve are taking this opportunity to reflect on our past, both the successes and the “improvement opportunities,” and to make our history more accessible to the public. If you’re interested in learning more, I urge you to visit federalreservehistory.org. 1 For most people, the turning of the calendar is an occasion for hope regarding prospects for the year ahead, and economists are no different. Economists’ hopes have been bolstered of late by a recent string of data releases indicating that 2013 ended on a positive note. Second-half growth in real GDP ― our broadest measure of overall economic activity ― was stronger than we’ve seen in quite some time. While that figure was boosted significantly by inventory accumulation that is unlikely to persist, there was some evidence of momentum that might carry forward. Consumer spending, in particular, seems to have surged. That’s notable because growth in consumer spending has averaged just above 2 percent per year for most of this expansion, which is a good part of the reason real GDP has only grown at about a 2 percent annual rate. Many forecasters are citing the recent surge as support for projections of sustained growth at around 3 percent starting later this year. 2 It’s worth pointing out, however, that this has been true at virtually every point in this expansion. In other words, ever since the recovery began, most forecasters have been expecting the economy to pick up speed in the next couple of quarters with the easing of headwinds that have been temporarily restraining growth. My own forecasts (at least initially) followed this script as well. Despite these perennial hopes, the actual results have been more modest. Real GDP grew by 2.0 percent in 2011, 2.0 percent in 2012 and 1.8 percent for the first half of 2013. This record of relatively steady but modestly paced expansion, despite forecasts of an imminent increase in growth, helps motivate the more cautious economic outlook that I will share with you today. But 2 before I begin, I should make clear that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to others in the Federal Reserve System.3 A bit of background helps explain the forecasting disappointments of the last several years. Before the Great Recession of 2008 and 2009, we enjoyed a period known as the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2007, real GDP grew at an average annual rate of 3.3 percent. Over that 24-year period, we experienced only two short, shallow recessions that together lasted just five quarters. Real personal income kept pace with GDP, also growing at a 3.3 percent annual rate. And consumer spending advanced even more rapidly than income, growing at a 3.6 percent annual rate. Part of the reason consumer spending grew more rapidly than income over that period was the rise in household wealth. Stock prices, bond prices and housing prices all increased significantly during the Great Moderation. Another reason for the divergence was the increase in credit availability for most consumers. For example, the ratio of credit card debt to personal income rose from 2.4 percent in 1983 to 8.0 percent in 2007. During the Great Recession, GDP fell 4.3 percent over a six-quarter interval, but other indicators document even greater hardship. Payroll employment fell by 8.7 million jobs in the recession and its immediate aftermath. The unemployment rate, which was below 5 percent in 2007, rose to 10 percent in October 2009. Real personal income fell by 3.1 percent from December 2007 to July 2009. The value of household holdings of stocks and mutual fund shares fell by $5 trillion, and the value of household equity in real estate fell by $3.9 trillion. The scale and scope of the loss in income and wealth experienced by Americans was far greater than anything they had seen in the previous 20 years. Given that experience, lenders are bound to re-evaluate the riskiness associated with extending credit to typical households. Indeed, consumers themselves appear to be re-evaluating the riskiness associated with indebtedness, no doubt reflecting a sense that their income and asset returns may be substantially riskier than they had come to believe during the Great Moderation. Under these conditions, it’s no surprise that credit is no longer available on the same terms. And it’s no surprise that consumers have been paying off debt and building up savings in order to restore some sense of balance to their household finances. These developments appear to have contributed to a persistent cautiousness in household spending. Over the last three years, real consumer spending has increased at an annual rate of 2.1 percent. Although consumption grew rapidly at the end of last year, we have seen similar surges since the last recession, only to see spending return to a more moderate trend. Consumer spending trends are likely to depend on whether the dramatic events of the last few years are only a temporary disturbance to household sentiment or if they instead represent a more persistent shift in attitudes about borrowing and saving. At this point, I am inclined toward the latter view. Businesses also appear to be quite reticent to hire and invest. A widely followed index of small business optimism fell sharply during the recession and has only partially recovered since then. Interestingly, when small business owners were asked in the latest survey about the single most 3 important problem they face, 20 percent answered “government regulations and red tape.” This observation accords with reports we’ve been hearing from many business contacts for several years now. They’ve seen a substantial increase in the pace of regulatory change and a substantial increase in uncertainty about the shape of new regulations. Both are said to discourage new hiring and investment commitments. Adding to the uncertainty is the continuing cloud over our nation’s fiscal policy. The most recent round of budget deliberations has certainly been a welcome relief from the recurrent legislative cliffhangers of the last several years. The lower odds of an imminent fiscal showdown may ease some business and consumer concerns, and that may aid growth. But overall government spending has been declining lately, and, given continuing fiscal pressures, that category is likely to make little, if any, contribution to GDP growth in coming years. From a longer-run perspective, it’s worth noting that current law still implies an unsustainable path for federal expenditures and receipts. My fear is that the recent decline in the federal deficit will dampen the sense of urgency about fixing the longer-run budgetary imbalance. The sooner we resolve uncertainty about how the costs of those fixes will be allocated, the better off we will be, I believe. Dealing with the federal budget sooner rather than later would allow us to spread the cost out over time and reduce the ultimate burden. Moreover, it would remove a potentially important source of uncertainty hanging over investment and spending decisions. I’ve discussed consumer spending and business investment, which together account for about four-fifths of the economy. Residential investment is one area in which we have seen strong growth. Real residential investment increased by more than 15 percent in 2012, and last year it increased by 6.3 percent. Many housing market indicators, such as housing starts and new home sales, remain well below levels that were typical during the expansions of the Great Moderation, so there is a reasonable basis for expecting residential investment growth to continue. But since this category is only 3 percent of GDP, it has only a marginal effect on the overall outlook. That leaves net exports, which for various reasons also are likely to contribute little to growth next year. Adding up all these categories of spending yields a forecast for GDP growth of just a little above 2 percent ― not much different from what we’ve seen for the last three years. That’s my forecast for this year, but when thinking about growth prospects, I believe it’s important to keep an eye on longer-run trends as well. To do that, it’s useful to break down real GDP growth into the sum of the growth in labor productivity ― that is, output per worker ― and the growth in the number of workers. It turns out both of these components have slowed since the Great Moderation. If growth in overall output is going to rise substantially, then we would need to see an increase in labor productivity growth, or in employment growth, or both. Let’s start with productivity. Broadly speaking, growth in labor productivity results from applying additional capital goods to the production process or by changing the way production is organized in order to improve the efficiency of input use. Gains in labor productivity represent the ultimate source of gains in real family incomes over time. From 1983 to 2000, labor productivity grew at a 1.8 percent annual rate. But toward the end of the Great Moderation, 4 productivity growth slowed, and over the last three years productivity has increased at a very modest annual rate of about 1 percent. Forecasting trends in productivity growth is exceedingly difficult because innovations are hard to foresee. Having said that, it’s not clear why productivity growth would improve dramatically in the near term; there’s no sign of a major surge of technical innovations in the pipeline or significant improvement in educational attainment or substantial deregulation ― the kinds of developments that would lead to a major acceleration in productivity. But it’s also hard to believe productivity has hit some sort of plateau. It doesn’t take much digging to find examples of continued innovation in today’s economy, even if they haven’t generated the rapid aggregate productivity growth we saw during the Great Moderation. In my view, the productivity trend of the last several years provides the best basis for near-term projections, and thus my outlook is that productivity growth will be about 1 percent for the next few years. Employment growth also has slowed since the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2000, employment increased at a 1.8 percent annual rate (as estimated in the survey of households). Over the last four years, employment growth has been just 1.2 percent per year ― so employment growth has fallen by about a third. One reason is that the size of the working age population is now growing more slowly than before. Moreover, the fraction of the working age population that is employed or looking for work ― economists call this the labor force participation rate ― has been declining due to demographic shifts and other structural factors. In addition, I’ve been struck by the large number of accounts I’ve heard of firms having difficulty finding workers with the appropriate skills, in many cases constraining production. It appears as if the nature of current technological advances may be shifting the mix of requisite workforce skills more rapidly than in the past, which would impede the rate at which unemployed workers can be drawn back into employment. So there are a number of reasons to doubt that employment growth will return soon to the strong pace we saw during the Great Moderation. Before I wrap things up, I’d like to share some brief observations on inflation and monetary policy. First, it’s important to recognize that inflation has been well-behaved over the last 20 years. Since 1993, inflation has averaged 1.9 percent, which is remarkably close to the Federal Open Market Committee’s goal of 2 percent. Second, we’ve seen some fluctuations in inflation over that time period, but they have all proven to be transitory. For example, inflation averaged 2.8 percent over the three years ending in December 2007. I mention this because many people have noticed that inflation has been running well below the Committee’s goal. My sense is that inflation will move back toward 2 percent over the next year or two, in part because measures of expected inflation remain well-contained. This is not a certainty, however, and I believe the FOMC will want to watch this closely. And that brings us to monetary policy, which has been particularly interesting of late. As you may recall, the Fed reduced its target for the federal funds rate to essentially zero at the end of 2008. Given the state of the economy, that was the appropriate monetary policy response. Since then, the Fed has purchased a significant quantity of assets, which increases the supply of monetary assets to the banking system and in some circumstances can have a stimulative effect. The size of our balance sheet has gone from under $1 trillion before the recession to around $4 trillion, and last year was increasing by about $85 billion per month. 5 When the FOMC met in December, it decided to reduce the pace of asset purchases from $85 billion per month to $75 billion per month. At the Committee’s meeting last week, the pace of purchases was further reduced to $65 billion per month. I supported both decisions because they are consistent with the linkage the Committee established between the asset purchase program and the outlook for labor market conditions. Since the program began in late 2012, we’ve seen a substantial improvement in a variety of indicators of labor market conditions, including the unemployment rate and the level of employment. So it made sense to initiate the process of bringing the program to a close. I expect to see further reductions in the pace of purchases at upcoming meetings. In conclusion, I’d like to return to the theme with which I began. The pickup in growth late last year is certainly a welcome development, and it may well be a harbinger of stronger growth ahead. But experience with similar growth spurts in the recent past suggests that it is too soon to make that call. My suspicion is that we will see growth subside this year to closer to 2 percent, about the rate we’ve seen since the Great Recession. Growth has been disappointing relative to our experience during the period of the Great Moderation, and growth may continue at a rate that is slower than in the past. But our economy is by no means stagnating; productivity is rising, incomes are growing and innovation is occurring. Our institutions of higher learning are worldwide leaders in research and education, and they continue to attract exceptional students from abroad. Our markets remain flexible and resilient. The public policy problems we face may be difficult, but they are certainly not insoluble. Consequently, I believe, a broad perspective suggests a fundamentally optimistic view of our future. 1 For more on the Fed’s history, see Jeffrey M. Lacker, “A Look Back at the History of the Federal Reserve,” Speech at Christopher Newport University, Newport News, Va., August 29, 2013; and “Global Interdependence and Central Banking,” Speech at the Global Interdependence Center, The Union League of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pa., November 1, 2013. 2 The latest Blue Chip compilation of economists’ projections, for example, calls for 2.8 percent growth in real GDP this year. 3 I would like to thank Roy Webb for assistance in preparing these remarks.

1 The Path to Financial Stability February 11, 2014 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Stanford University, Stanford, California Thank you very much for inviting me to speak with you today. This institute is doing excellent and important work to further our understanding of economic policy, and I appreciate the opportunity to share my perspectives as both an economist and a policymaker. Today, I’d like to talk about the financial turmoil of 2007 and 2008, and some of the policies that contributed to those unhappy events. I will argue that our response to the crisis has failed to address what remains the most critical issue facing our financial system: institutions that are deemed “too big to fail,” or, more precisely, too big to fail without a government-funded creditor rescue. I will also talk about a path toward a more stable and less dependent financial system. Before I begin, I should note that my views are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. 1 What is the nature of the problem? In my view it is best described as two mutually reinforcing conditions that seriously distort the incentives of financial market participants to monitor and control risk. First, creditors of some financial institutions feel protected by an implicit government commitment of support should the institution become financially troubled. Second, policymakers often feel compelled to provide support to certain financial institutions to insulate creditors from losses. The way the second condition reinforces the first should be fairly clear. Instances of government intervention reinforce creditors' expectations of support and thereby dampen incentives to contain risk-taking. This promotes financial firms of greater size, complexity and interconnectedness, and it also encourages greater leverage and more reliance on highly liquid short-term funding. Thus, the apparent fragility of modern financial market arrangements is not entirely a force of nature. Instead, financial instability should be seen as a consequence of the moral hazard effect of official intervention. Creditor expectations of support, in turn, often compel policymakers to intervene in the event of distress, since disappointing those expectations by withholding support could provoke a sudden, turbulent readjustment of investor beliefs regarding support for other, similarly situated firms. Concern about exacerbating moral hazard takes a back seat to the urgently felt need to stem the volatility that would result from disappointed expectations. Perceived guarantees thus encourage fragility, which induces interventions, which encourages further fragility. The ultimate result of this cycle is taxpayer-funded subsidies to financial firms that are widely viewed as deeply unfair. 2 What we have is a fundamental flaw in the relationship between government and the financial sector. And the impact of this flaw is growing. At the end of 1999, the government safety net — including both the implicit support I just outlined and explicit support provided by programs such as deposit insurance and pension guarantees — covered 45 percent of financial sector liabilities, according to Richmond Fed researchers. By the end of 2011, that number had grown to 57 percent, about the same size it was at the end of 2009, despite the many new regulations we have put in place since the crisis. 2 I believe many of these new regulations are quite valuable, given where we found ourselves in 2009, but I do not believe that enhanced regulations will, by themselves, solve the “too big to fail” problem. Instead, we need measures that give market participants an incentive to develop resilient financial arrangements and that end the expectation of government support. The Dodd-Frank Act of 2010 provides some important tools to help us do so, but further legislation would be useful as well. This work will not be easy, but I believe it is absolutely necessary if we hope to make financial stability compatible with democracy. How Did We Get Here? The origins of “too big to fail” can be traced back to the Emergency Banking Act of 1933, which marks the beginning of federal deposit insurance in this country. This Act was signed after a tidal wave of bank failures between 1929 and 1933, when more than one-third of the country’s roughly 25,000 banks failed; entire states declared bank holidays, followed by the declaration of a nationwide bank holiday in March 1933. 3 Depositor losses and the disturbances in the payment system were enormously disruptive. At the time, the U.S. banking system was highly fragmented: Interstate branching was prohibited and only eight states and the District of Columbia allowed statewide branching. This meant banks were unable to diversify risks across regions or head off bank runs by moving funds between branches. Most communities in the country were served by just a few small local banks that were highly vulnerable to local economic shocks. 4 One popular account of this episode holds that the crisis was caused by self-fulfilling depositor panic: Fearing failure, people rushed to withdraw their funds, thus ensuring that failure occurred. But modern scholarship has concluded that the crisis was in fact the result of fundamental shocks to the solvency of the banking system. The Federal Reserve allowed the money supply to collapse. The resulting severe deflation — a 28 percent decline in average prices over three years — drove many bank borrowers into default . Bank runs contributed to the decline in the money stock, but the Fed could have offset the effects through open market purchases of securities. 5 These shocks were then exacerbated by the fragmented banking system.6 The most striking evidence for this is the contrasting case of Canada, a country that experienced similar economic shocks but whose banking laws allowed consolidation. As a result, there were no serious banking panics, despite the lack of a central bank. 7 Legislators were well aware that branching restrictions contributed to banking panics, but policymakers did not respond to the crisis by eliminating the restrictions on branching. The unit banking system was popular with politically influential populist and agrarian groups, and these forces lobbied instead for a system of government-provided deposit insurance that would preserve small local banks by protecting their depositors. Although there was significant opposition to the idea of deposit insurance — including by President Roosevelt and Sen. Carter 3 Glass, an architect of the Federal Reserve System — the supporters prevailed. In fact, i t was not until the 1990s that banks were allowed to open branches both within states and across state lines.8 The obvious drawback to deposit insurance is that it creates moral hazard: Bankers have an incentive to make riskier investments, and depositors have less incentive to monitor the risk- taking behavior of their banks. 9 We saw these incentive problems come to a head during the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s, when hundreds of federally insured savings and loan institutions failed, bankrupting the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation and costing taxpayers an estimated $124 billion. While many factors contributed to the savings and loan debacle, it is unlikely that it could have reached the proportions it did without the distorted incentives created by federal deposit insurance. 10 The proponents of deposit insurance cannot take all the blame for “too big to fail,” however. Beginning in 1970, the Fed and other regulators began to intervene in credit markets in ways that protected uninsured creditors of large financial firms. First, the railroad Penn Central Transportation Company defaulted on $82 million in commercial paper obligations. The Fed responded by encouraging banks to borrow from the Fed to purchase commercial paper, thus providing support to securities markets. In 1972, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) gave the $1.2 billion Bank of the Commonwealth a $60 million line of credit that prevented its failure. 11 In 1974, the Fed lent $1.7 billion to Franklin National Bank and assumed $725 million of its foreign exchange book. In 1984, the failing $40 billion bank Continental Illinois was able to borrow from the discount window even as it was receiving a capital injection from the FDIC. The precedents set by these actions, along with many others, led many economists to be concerned about the issue of “too big to fail” even before the recent financial crisis. In 2004, Gary Stern, then the president of the Minneapolis Fed, and Ron Feldman, an executive vice president at the Minneapolis Fed, published the book “Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts.” In it, they warned that “the TBTF problem is real, costly, and becoming more severe.” 12 Unfortunately, they were proven correct just a few short years later. Because the financial crisis of 2007–08 has been the subject of numerous popular accounts, you are no doubt familiar with the dramatic sequence of events. So instead of telling the tale yet again, I will just point out some important highlights that are suggested by the perspective of the two mutually reinforcing expectations I referenced at the outset of my remarks. In 2007 estimates of the losses likely to be experienced on subprime mortgages rose significantly. This caused investors to revise their assessments of financial entities deemed likely to be exposed to those losses. As a consequence, the credit terms available to these entities deteriorated. The risk premia on their obligations in wholesale funding markets rose, and the maturity of the obligations they were able to issue was sharply reduced. In August 2007, the Federal Open Market Committee took its first step in response to the tumult in financial markets by lowering the interest rate charged on discount window loans to banks and encouraging banks to borrow. Then in December 2007, in response to rising interest rates in interbank lending markets, the Fed launched the Term Auction Facility to provide term loans to 4 depository institutions. The guiding principle behind these actions, and others that followed, was that credit markets were malfunctioning and the remedy was additional central bank lending. Arguably, however, market participants inferred that the Fed was standing by, ready to rescue the creditors of financial institutions that showed signs of distress — which actually occurred the following spring when the New York Fed helped finance the purchase of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan. These actions are likely to have reduced the incentives of other large financial firms, such as Lehman Brothers, to strengthen their positions by raising additional equity or reducing their reliance on short-term funding. Capital markets were clearly open for the large financial institutions prior to the middle of 2008, as demonstrated by the equity issuance that did occur. But not enough new capital was raised; apparently the costliness of shareholder dilution made it more attractive for large financial firms to rely instead on the implied backstop of government support. Policymakers were certainly aware that their actions might exacerbate moral hazard. And certainly, we can all understand a bias against inaction when faced with an unknown, but potentially grave, outcome. But the distortion in banks’ risk-taking incentives was viewed as a long-run issue to trade off against the immediate value of cushioning an imminent blow to financial market functioning. Because financial crises are relatively infrequent, it was thought, the incentive distortion would only affect outcomes in the relatively distant future, leaving sufficient time for policymakers to contain moral hazard effects through tougher regulation. But the crisis we have just been through tells a different story. It wasn’t just some distant future crisis that was affected by the precedents being set; it was the next chapter in the current crisis. Each new move to expand institutions’ use of Fed lending also had the effect of increasing expectations of official support in the months ahead. During the crisis, and still today, many people view government-provided backstops to large financial firms as a necessity to prevent financial system malfunctions. You’ve likely heard that central banks should act as a “lender of last resort.” This idea is often attributed to Henry Thornton, a British economist who wrote an influential book on central banking in the 1800s, and Walter Bagehot, a British essayist and journalist who wrote his book on central banking in the 1870s. 13 But Thornton and Bagehot wrote when lending was the primary mechanism by which the Bank of England increased the circulating stock of money — coins and paper bank notes — when the demand for those instruments increased. T heir writings make clear that they were not recommending rescues for insolvent institutions. Their prescriptions thus were about monetary policy, not credit policy. 14 In contrast, the Fed’s emergency lending programs did not increase the net supply of liquid assets to the economy. Fed lending was offset by sales of Treasury securities, so the supply of currency plus reserves did not increase. Instead, the lending programs reallocated credit, effectively selling Treasury securities to the public and using the proceeds to provide funds to private entities on terms they would not otherwise have obtained in the marketplace. The Fed’s lending thus constituted credit allocation, a form of fiscal policy, not the monetary policy Thornton and Bagehot had in mind. 15 The idea that public sector backstops are a necessity is often motivated more broadly by theoretical models based on “multiple equilibria” or market segmentation in which outcomes are 5 inherently unstable or suboptimal in the absence of government support.16 I have not found these models terribly persuasive as accounts of the financial market phenomena that we grappled with at various points during the crisis, because the critical frictions on which these theories are based seem at odds with observations. More broadly, the thesis that financial market instability is inherent, rather than induced by poor policies, must confront the fact that instances of instability are quite unevenly distributed across different countries and different regulatory regimes, as exemplified by the contrasting experiences of the United States and Canada not only during the 1930s but throughout these countries’ histories. 17 If financial fragility were an inherent feature of financial markets, financial panics would be ubiquitous, but that’s not what we see. The Regulatory Response The government’s main response in the aftermath of the recent financial crisis was the Dodd- Frank Act, a 2,300-page piece of legislation passed in 2010 that was designed to address the perceived weaknesses in the financial system that led to the crisis. Dodd-Frank put in place roughly 400 new rules, created a new federal agency and has required a tremendous amount of hard work from people throughout our regulatory system. But it also fails to address the central problem. One broad strategy of the Dodd-Frank Act is to address “too big to fail” by preventing failure in the first place. The Act provides for enhanced supervision of large financial firms via stronger capital and liquidity requirements, periodic stress-testing, counterparty credit limits and risk- management requirements, among other measures. Beefing up such ex-ante constraints on risk- taking is important, but it’s not infallible. New opportunities for risk-taking will always emerge as financial markets and economies evolve, and it is asking a lot to expect front-line supervisors to forever substitute for well-aligned incentives. Moreover, stronger restraints on risk-taking increase the incentive for market participants to find a way to operate outside the regulated sector. This regulatory bypass gives rise to what’s come to be called “shadow banking” — bank- like activities conducted outside the legal confines of the banking industry. Shadow banking arrangements played a major role in the financial crisis; paradoxically, some of these arrangements were the result of past financial regulations intended to prevent crises. Expanding regulation to chase down fragility wherever it appears is not a promising strategy. The Dodd-Frank Act also created a new mechanism to resolve large financial firms that become distressed in spite of enhanced supervision. Title II of the Act established the Orderly Liquidation Authority, or OLA, which gives the FDIC the ability, with the agreement of other financial regulators, to take a firm into receivership. The FDIC also is able to borrow funds from the U.S. Treasury to make payments to creditors of the failed firm or to guarantee the liabilities of the failed firm. The funds are to be repaid from recoveries on the assets of the firm or from assessments against the largest, most complex financial companies. While the FDIC must pay creditors at least what they would have received in a liquidation of the firm, the Act does give the FDIC broad discretion to pay some creditors more than bankruptcy would allow. Moreover, the ability to inject funds borrowed from the Treasury allows the FDIC to immediately pay off creditors whose claims would otherwise be subject to bankruptcy proceedings. Short-term creditors are likely to believe they will benefit from the FDIC’s 6 discretion, causing them to pay insufficient attention to risk and to invest in fragile funding arrangements. If expectations of support for the creditors of financially distressed institutions are widespread, regulators will likely feel forced to provide support to these short-term creditors to avoid the turbulence of disappointing expectations. Rather than ending “too big to fail,” this would replicate the two mutually reinforcing expectations that define it. The Path Forward If more regulation isn’t the answer, what is? In my view, ending these mutually reinforcing problems requires bringing about two alternative mutually reinforcing conditions. The first is that creditors do not expect government support in the event of financial distress. If we can achieve that, private sector financial firms and their creditors will have the incentive to avoid fragile financing arrangements and to limit risk-taking, thereby reducing the pressure for government intervention. The second necessary condition is that policymakers actually do allow financial firms to fail without government support. If we can make unassisted failures manageable, then policymakers could credibly commit to forgoing rescues, thereby improving private sector incentives. There are several steps we can take to create a credible path to failure without external government support. The first is to rigorously implement the provision in the Dodd-Frank Act that requires large and complex financial institutions to create resolution plans, also known as “living wills.” These are detailed plans that explain how a financial institution could be wound down under U.S. bankruptcy laws without threatening the rest of the financial system or requiring a public bailout. The plans explain how to disentangle the many different legal entities — sometimes numbering in the thousands — that make up a l arge financial firm. Under the Dodd-Frank Act, large banks and other “systemically important” firms are required to submit these plans on an annual basis for review by the Fed and the FDIC. The first wave of filers has made two rounds of submissions. Resolution planning provides a structured approach for understanding what’s likely to happen in the event that a large financial firm should fail. In contrast, in past crises policymakers found themselves with little or no preparatory work to draw on. In fact, resolution planning has proven valuable already by giving participating firms a more detailed understanding of their legal structure, and many have used them to “clean up” their structure and close down unneeded legal entities. More to the point, however, if resolution plans indicate that bankruptcy would pose a risk to the system as a whole, regulators can order changes in the structure and operations of a firm in order to make it resolvable in bankruptcy without government assistance. The Federal Reserve and the FDIC can jointly determine that a plan is "not credible" or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the bankruptcy code, in which case the firm would be required to submit a revised plan to address identified deficiencies. A resubmission could include plans to change the funding strategy, business operations and corporate structure in order to eliminate deficiencies. If the Fed and the FDIC jointly determine that the revised plan does not remedy identified deficiencies, they can require more capital, increase liquidity requirements or restrict the growth, activities or operations of the firm. 7 The immense complexity and scale of large banking organizations might make bankruptcy planning appear daunting. Indeed, this has led some to suggest that government-funded resolutions under Title II should be our main strategy in cases of financial distress. I do not think such a defeatist attitude is warranted, however. Certainly, the needed alterations to the structure and operations of large financial firms will be unpopular with the firms since they are likely to involve reductions in reliance on short-term funding and derivatives, and the adoption of more easily severable subsidiary structures. But I believe these changes are feasible without sacrificing any inherent benefits those institutions provide to the economy. The largest obstacle to credible living wills, in my view, might be mustering the political will to compel needed changes rather than defaulting to continued dependence on government backstops. Another useful step toward financial stability would be to critically examine the bankruptcy code itself and look for ways to better adapt it to the business of large financial firms, particularly those that rely heavily on short-term funding to finance longer-term assets. In fact, such work has been underway here at Stanford as part of the Resolution Project of the Hoover Institution. 18 This work and that of other scholars, such as Mark Roe of Harvard University, has highlighted the fact that many short-term financing instruments and derivatives are exempt from bankruptcy's automatic stay. This safe harbor treatment arguably over-encourages the use of such instruments, and thereby enhances the growth and fragility of shadow banking. Some have proposed limiting this exemption, as well as adding a new chapter to the bankruptcy code specifically adapted to large financial firms. 19 These reform proposals strike me as compelling and worthy of serious consideration. A third step toward financial stability is to identify regulatory or legal impediments to private sector arrangements that would reduce instability. One example is money market mutual funds, which benefited from substantial official support at the height of the crisis in 2008. 20 These funds’ asset holdings are restricted to short-term financial instruments, and they operate very much like bank accounts but without the overlay of banking regulation and supervision. (Indeed, money market mutual funds arose in the 1970s and became popular as a means of bypassing regulatory limits on bank deposit interest rates.) Regulations stipulate that if the value of a fund's assets falls below the value it has promised to investors — if it "break s the buck" — then the fund must be liquidated. Money funds thus are prevented from temporarily suspending full payment in the event of difficulty, although such suspensions have allowed institutions in other settings to staunch destabilizing runs. In the recent crisis, for example, many hedge funds avoided instability and preserved value by delaying redemptions. We should eliminate the regulations that artificially prevent money market funds and other financial intermediaries from structuring themselves in ways that reduce their fragility and vulnerability to runs. A final step may be required before financial stability can be assured. Market participants must have well-anchored expectations that government-funded rescues will not be forthcoming. Ideally, policymakers would act in a manner that is consistent with those expectations. But in turbulent times, as we’ve seen, it may be tempting to put seemingly urgent short-run considerations ahead of preserving a record of precedents that keep market expectations well- anchored. Complete credibility of a commitment to forgo rescues may be difficult if regulators retain discretionary authority to intervene. This is a particular danger for central banks, whose 8 independent balance sheet places their fiscal actions beyond the scope of the legislative appropriations process.21 Credible commitment to orderly unassisted resolutions thus may require eliminating the government’s ability to provide ad hoc rescues. This would mean repealing the Federal Reserve’s remaining emergency lending powers. And once robust and credible resolution plans are in place, we would be able to responsibly wind down the FDIC’s Orderly Liquidation Authority and related financing mechanisms. In concert, I believe these actions can enable us to create a financial system where market participants don’t expect government support and thus fund themselves responsibly; where taxpayers aren’t on the hook for institutions with the wrong incentives; but where financial institutions can effectively provide the services a dynamic and innovative economy requires. This is going to be hard work, and from some vantage points it might even look impossible. But the alternative seems even less promising — the specter of an ever -increasing share of the financial sector effectively guaranteed by taxpayers. That prospect is unlikely to serve our country well. So I believe we owe it to our citizens to do whatever work it takes to create a stable and resilient financial system. 1 I would like to thank Jessie Romero for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 The Richmond Fed’s estimates of the size of the safety net are available online . 3 Kris James Mitchener, “Bank Supervision, Regulation, and Instability During the Great Depression,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 10475, May 2004. 4 More information about the banking panics, the bank holiday of 1933 and the Emergency Banking Act of 1933 is available at federalreservehistory.org. 5 Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1963. As Friedman and Schwartz noted, monetary policy, not bank failures, was the primary cause of the severe economic contraction: “If [failures] had occurred to precisely the same extent without producing a drastic decline in the stock of money, t hey would have been notable but not crucial. If they had not occurred, but a correspondingly sharp decline had been produced in the stock of money by some other means, the contraction would have been at least equally severe and probably even more so” (p. 352). 6 See Charles Calomiris, “Banking Crises and the Rules of the Game,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 15403, October 2009; and Mitchener (2004). 7 Although Canada had zero bank runs or failures in the same time period, it did have a severe depression after its money supply declined by 13 percent (Friedman and Schwar tz 1963, p. 352). For more on the Canadian banking system, see Bruce Champ, Bruce D. Smith, and Stephen D. Williamson, “Current Elasticity and Banking Panics: Theory and Evidence ,” The Canadian Journal of Economics, November 1996, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 828-864; and Michael D. Bordo, Angela Redish, and Hugh Rockoff, “A Comparison of the Stability and Efficiency of the Canadian and American Banking Systems, 1870-1925,” Financial History Review, April 1996, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 49-68. 8 For more on the debate about deposit insurance, see Mark D. Flood, “The Great Deposit Insurance Debate,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August 1992, vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 51-77; and Charles Calomiris, “Is Deposit Insurance Necessary? A Historical Perspective,” The Journal of Economic History, June 1990, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 283-295. 9 John H. Kareken and Neil Wallace, "Deposit Insurance and Bank Regulation: A Partial- Equilibrium Exposition," The Journal of Business, July 1978, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 413-38. 10 Michael Dotsey and Anatoli Kuprianov, “Reforming Deposit Insurance: Lessons from the Savings and Loan Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, March/April 1990, pp. 3-28. 11 Federal Reserve Chairman Arthur Burns favored a bailout, according to Irving H. Sprague, “Bailout: An Insider’s Account of Bank Failures and Rescues,” Washington D.C.: Beard Books, 1986. 9 12 An excerpt is available on the Minneapolis Fed’s website. 13 Henry Thornton, “An Enquiry Into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain,” 1802, Edited and with an Introduction by F.A. Von Hayek, New York: Rinehart and Co., 1939. Walter Bagehot, “Lombard Street,” London: Harry S. King and Co., 1873. For explanation and discussion of Thornton and Bagehot’s views on the lender of last resort, see Thomas M. Humphrey, “Lender of Last Resort: The Concept in History ,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, March/April 1989, pp. 8-16; and Michael D. Bordo, “The Lender of Last Resort: Alternative Views and Historical Experience,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, January/February 1990, pp. 18-29. 14 Marvin Goodfriend, “The Elusive Promise of Independent Central Banking,” Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies, November 2012, vol. 30, pp. 39-54. 15 An exception was after October 2008, when the Fed began paying banks interest on excess reserves and stopped offsetting lending-induced increases in the supply of reserves. 16 For example, see Douglas W. Diamond and Philip H. Dybvig, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy, June 1983, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 401-419; and Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, Winter 2011, “Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25, no. 1, pp 29-48. 17 Charles W. Calomiris and Stephen H. Haber, Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises and Scarce Credit. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2014; and Bordo, Redish, and Rockoff (1996). 18 The Resolution Project at Stanford University’s Hoover Institution 19 For example, see Thomas H. Jackson and David A. Skeel Jr., “Dynamic Resolution of Large Financial Institutions,” University of Pennsylvania Law School Faculty Scholarship, no. 453, October 2012; Mark J. Roe, Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercia l and Antitrust Law of Committee on the Judiciary, United States House of Representatives Hearing on the Bankruptcy Code and Financial Institution Insolvencies, December 3, 2013; Mark J. Roe, “ The Derivatives Market’s Payment Priorities as Financial Crisis Accelerator ,” Stanford Law Review, March 6, 2011, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 539-590; and Kenneth E. Scott and John B. Taylor, eds., Bankruptcy Not Bailout: A Special Chapter 14, Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press, 2012. 20 See Eric S. Rosengren, “Money Market Mutual Funds and Stable Funding,” Speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Conference on Stable Funding, New York, September 27, 2013; and the Federal Reserve Bank presidents’ comment letter on the Securities and Exchange Commission’s Money Market Fund Reform; Amendments to Form PF release, September 12, 2013. 21 Goodfriend (2012)

1 Economics After the Crisis: Models, Markets, and Implications for Policy February 21, 2014 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Center for Advanced Study in Economic Efficiency Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. It’s been a long time since I was an active participant in the world of economic research. These days, as I play a role in policy deliberations, I am a consumer of research findings, not a producer. In that role I was privileged to witness, and at times take part in, some of the policy discussions that shaped the Fed’s management of the financial crisis of 2007–08. Although it has been more than five years since then, the recollections of that unhappy time should still be relatively fresh in our minds. If they are not, the annual release of the transcripts of the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee, with a five-year lag, can help jog our memories. In fact, the 2008 transcripts were released this morning. Within those 1,500 verbatim pages, you will see me and several other consumers of economic research grappling with some very difficult policy decisions. In my remarks today I would like to share some observations inspired by my experience attempting to use economic models in decision making during the crisis. Before I begin, I must note that my opinions are my own and may not be shared by all my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. 1 The period from the summer of 2007 through the winter of 2009 was a scary time, marked by significant volatility in financial markets and anxiety about asset values and counterparty risk. Policymakers heard a lot of scary words used to describe market conditions, words such as “disruption,” “distress,” “fragile,” “firesale,” and “stressful.” People talked about markets seizing and investors running; about logjams and credit crunches; about deterioration and dysfunction. 2 These words have frightening connotations, but, by themselves, they lack specific economic meaning and thus do not provide an obvious guide for policy. There are, however, economic models based on specific financial frictions, such as adverse selection and limited participation, that appear to generate similarly scary phenomena. Such models were at times invoked as justification for some of the array of programs that expanded Fed lending and allocated credit to specific sectors of the economy. In this respect, economic theory mattered a great deal. But I think it’s fair to say there was far less discussion of specific models of banking and financial markets than there could have been. I found it disappointing that there did not appear to be much interest in probing the applicability of different models to the question at hand or in critically examining models’ assumptions about frictions to see if they were a good match for what we actually observed. Moreover, in my view, there was not enough discussion about the long-term consequences of our response in a given circumstance and whether it would be consistent with a pattern of response that, if permanently adopted, would be ex-ante efficiency enhancing. 2 I am going to organize my remarks around selected moments during the financial crisis at which particularly critical decisions were made to intervene in credit markets. I will share some of the rationales used to justify them, as well as some alternative explanations for market conditions at the time. Along the way, I will share some of the reasons for my opposition to the Fed’s credit market interventions, and why I remain deeply skeptical about the advisability of those actions. I do so mindful of the possibility that future research could alter our understanding of the events and policy prescriptions of 2007–08. Indeed, it was 30 years after the Great Contraction of 1929– 33 that Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz gave us the first compelling understanding of those events, 3 and in the last two decades researchers have significantly improved our understanding of the Great Depression. But even at this early date, the evidence strikes me as fairly persuasive that the Fed missed an opportunity to respond far more constructively than it did. Finally, I’ll share some suggestions regarding research directions that would be useful to policymakers in future crises. Discount Window Lending Let’s start with the summer of 2007. The dramatic events of the fall of 2008 have garnered the lion’s share of the attention devoted to the financial crisis, but I would argue that the policy direction was set earlier, which significantly influenced the subsequent evolution of events. On the evening of August 16, 2007, the FOMC held a video conference call. To simplify considerably the conditions we discussed, the financial-market volatility of the previous weeks seemed to be escalating. 4 Particular attention focused on the market for asset-backed commercial paper ― short-term instruments backed by designated pools of other financial assets. As staff explained to the committee, investors were withdrawing from the ABCP market. The spreads on ABCP were rising and the amounts being issued were smaller and of shorter maturity. Some large banks had sponsored ABCP financing vehicles and market conditions were affecting their need for funding. At the conclusion of the call, the Committee decided to lower the interest rate charged on discount window loans to banks. In recent years this rate had been kept at 1 percentage point above the Committee’s target for the federal funds rate; the Committee lowered the spread to 50 basis points. This move was intended to improve the cost and availability of credit to banks. 5 What was the justification for this policy action? For some meeting participants and staff, the aforementioned scary words seemed to suffice. Others viewed the action as directly in line with the central bank’s historical role as the “lender of last resort.” As one person noted while explaining the proposed change, “We have given considerable thought here to what we might do with the lender-of-last-resort facility to try to help break up some of the logjams in the market, where people simply aren’t making markets…We felt that one issue was a funding uncertainty in the banks.” 6 [Emphasis added.] The presumption was that the markets were suffering from a problem for which increased Fed credit was the solution. But this presumption was open to question. In the late summer of 2007, we were hearing that there were plenty of funds on the sidelines and plenty of actors who could have purchased asset-backed paper if they thought the price made it a worthwhile opportunity. Moreover, banks also had access to significant funding through the Federal Home Loan Banks, entities that could borrow in capital markets at advantageous rates because they were viewed as 3 “too big to fail” and pass those rates on to member banks. Indeed, borrowing from the FHLBs expanded by about $180 billion in the third quarter of 2007. The lack of interest in borrowing from the Federal Reserve Banks probably reflected the fact that we were simply out priced. More broadly, expanded Federal Reserve lending would not have increased the net supply of liquidity to the banking system. Open market operations by the trading desk at the New York Fed maintained the interbank federal funds rate at the FOMC’s target by adding or draining reserves. Thus, lending to individual banks was automatically offset by a sterilizing drain of reserves through the sale of U.S. government securities. The “logjam” was not an insufficient supply of reserves to the banking system; if anything, the supply of reserves to individual banks was the problem. This observation points toward an alternative diagnosis of the situation: The deterioration in housing market conditions was inducing fundamental revisions in beliefs about the probability distributions governing the returns on housing-related financial assets. These revisions were sometimes sudden, sometimes not, but they resulted in a cumulative deterioration in the perceived creditworthiness of asset pools exposed to housing-related losses. For various reasons, ABCP issuers were unwilling to sell at prices that buyers wanted to pay, and they were willing to bear the consequences by taking the assets onto their balance sheets for a time or by drawing down lines of credit. In essence, volume fell in the ABCP market because the supply was so elastic. The ABCP market didn’t “seize up” under this interpretation, it simply moved elsewhere. 7 In short, the so-called logjam in the ABCP market looked like a price-discovery process: Information was emerging and being digested, and market participants were groping toward a new view. That process might take a long time to resolve and require substantial reintermediation, but it does not indicate a market failure that the Fed needs to step in and fix. Evidence from research conducted since 2007 is consistent with the notion that increases in counterparty credit risk drove the financial market turmoil that summer and fall. A study by Daniel M. Covitz, Nellie Liang and Gustavo A. Suarez shows that the extent to which counterparties pulled away from issuers of ABCP was directly related to the extent of their holdings of risky housing-related assets. 8 And work by John Taylor and John Williams suggests that the evidence on the behavior of interest rate spreads around that time is consistent with fluctuations in counterparty risk.9 While these research results were not available to policymakers in real time, they do support the hypothesis that markets were responding in a plausibly efficient manner to significant revisions in expectations about the underlying economic fundamentals. Apart from the specifics of what was happening in the ABCP market, I’d also like to comment more generally on the modern interpretation of the phrase “lender of last resort.” During the conference call, it was noted that “The benefit of [lender-of-last-resort activity] is that it’s directly related to the functioning of markets. It’s a traditional central bank approach to dealing with disorderly markets.” 10 The idea of the central bank as the lender of last resort comes from writings of Henry Thornton in the early 1800s and Walter Bagehot in the 1870s regarding the Bank of England.11 Bagehot’s work is generally paraphrased as “Lend freely on good collateral at penalty interest rates,” which would seem to describe the Fed’s actions during the financial crisis. 4 Our current financial system is quite different from that of 19th century England, however. At that time, a central bank loan to a bank necessarily increased the money supply, and lending was the primary way the central bank managed the stock of coins and paper bank notes in circulation. At times, a large number of bank customers would seek to convert their deposits into notes and coins. When Bagehot advocated central bank lending during a crisis, he was advocating an expansion in the supply of circulating bank notes and coins to meet the increase in demand. Both Thornton’s and Bagehot’s writings make clear that they were not recommending rescues for insolvent institutions and that their prescriptions were about monetary policy, not credit policy. 12 In contrast, the Fed’s emergency lending programs during the crisis did not increase the net supply of liquid assets to the economy. Under modern interest rate targeting procedures, open market operations take care of expanding the aggregate supply of money to meet demand. Fed lending during the crisis was offset by sales of Treasury securities, so the supply of currency plus reserves did not increase. Instead, the lending programs simply reallocated credit, effectively selling Treasury securities to the public and using the proceeds to provide funds to private entities on terms they would not otherwise have obtained in the marketplace. The Fed’s lending thus constituted credit allocation ― that is, fiscal policy ― and not the monetary policy Thornton and Bagehot had in mind. 13 The Term Auction Facility Policymakers’ concerns about bank funding did not subside following the August 2007 reduction in the discount rate. In September, the Committee discussed, and in December initiated, the Term Auction Facility (TAF) in order to further improve the terms on which banks could obtain credit from the Fed. Under this program, term discount window loans were auctioned off to eligible banking institutions. 14 The resulting rates tended to be much lower than the prevailing discount rate. One rationale for the TAF was to overcome the perceived stigma of borrowing from the discount window, which was said to be limiting the response to the lower rates on discount window loans. Even though discount window lending was strictly confidential, market participants were sometimes able to infer that a particular bank had been unable to obtain market funding and as a result probably had turned to the window. I was not aware of any models of stigma in bank lending at that time. Some time later, Huberto Ennis and John Weinberg produced a model of stigma, but they did not analyze policy interventions. 15 In December 2007, I argued in a letter to the FOMC that the notion of stigma in bank lending suggested adverse selection might be interfering with market functioning.16 I was trying to give the benefit of the doubt to the case for intervention. Stigma suggests a separating equilibrium, however, and the design of the TAF program seemed inconsistent with attaining a better equilibrium. Instead, it seemed designed to subsidize the borrowing costs of riskier banks. The public policy rationale of such cross- subsidies was not obvious. Another rationale advanced at that time was the notion that some financial asset prices might have been driven inefficiently low as the result of “cash-in-the-market” pricing. In chapter 9 of their book Understanding Financial Crises, Franklin Allen and Douglas Gale describe a model 5 in which the only available buyers have insufficient cash to pay the fundamental value, and so the asset trades at an inefficient discount.17 The asset price is the ratio of investor cash to the quantity of assets for sale. In this model, central bank lending to banks collateralized by the asset in question alleviates the problem and restores prices to their “fundamental” value. In a similar vein, the broader notion of “firesales” rests on the premise that barriers to market participation result in prices that can, at least for a time, be depressed below their “fundamental” values. This class of models did not seem persuasive as a relevant representation of market conditions at the time.18 Banks did not seem to be facing forced asset sales, and there were widespread accounts of money sitting on the sidelines while investors waited for more attractive prices. There were no apparent barriers to the participation of a wide array of investors in markets for various financial instruments, and it wasn’t clear that asset valuations had deviated much from their fundamental values. Exceptionally low payoffs on mortgage-backed securities were not inconceivable and could easily have coincided with rather dire aggregate economic conditions. Thus, relatively high risk premia and relatively low security prices did not strike me as unwarranted. Inherent Versus Induced Fragility The next key moment in the crisis was the March 2008 acquisition of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan Chase, with assistance from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York that effectively protected Bear’s creditors from the fallout of an unassisted failure. That moment illustrates a broader theme underlying the events of 2007 and 2008: The extent to which fragility is not inherent in the functioning of financial markets, but rather induced by the government’s provision of the very backstop that is meant to be stability-enhancing. Deposit insurance is one obvious example, 19 and we saw the moral hazard created by federal deposit insurance reach the boiling point during the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s,20 at a cost to taxpayers of $124 billion. And beginning in 1970, the Fed and other regulators began to intervene in credit markets in ways that protected uninsured creditors of large financial firms. First was the railroad Penn Central Transportation Company, which defaulted on $82 million in commercial paper obligations. The Fed responded by encouraging banks to borrow from the Fed to purchase commercial paper, thus providing support to securities markets. In 1972, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) gave the $1.2 billion Bank of the Commonwealth a $60 million line of credit that prevented its failure.21 In 1974, the Fed lent $1.7 billion to Franklin National Bank and assumed $725 million of its foreign exchange book. In 1984, the failing $40 billion bank Continental Illinois was able to borrow from the discount window even as it was receiving a capital injection from the FDIC. In 1998, we organized a $3.6 billion rescue of the hedge fund Long Term Capital Management. 22 The net result of this history has been a large increase in the fraction of our financial system that is covered by explicit and implicit government guarantees. At the end of 1999, the government safety net covered 45 percent of financial sector liabilities, according to Richmond Fed researchers. By the end of 2011, that number had grown to 57 percent, about the same size it was at the end of 2009, despite the many new regulations we have put in place since the crisis. 23 6 Prior to 2007, but certainly by March 2008, investors arguably viewed the Federal Reserve as quite likely to intervene to prevent creditor losses at large financial institutions. While that expectation was undoubtedly strong for the large bank holding companies, instances of intervention in response to financial distress outside of the banking system are likely to have contributed to the expectation of support for the large investment banks as well, especially after the Gramm-Leach-Bliley legislation in 1999 placed them on more even regulatory footing with the bank holding companies. And the policy actions of late 2007 that I’ve already discussed plausibly conveyed the message that the Federal Reserve viewed its lending as an appropriate remedy for credit market disruptions. This would have discouraged troubled institutions such as Bear or Lehman Brothers from incurring the costs of raising additional equity or reducing their reliance on short-term funding. This safety net creates two mutually reinforcing conditions that seriously distort the incentives of financial market participants to monitor and control risk. First, creditors of some financial institutions feel protected by an implicit government commitment of support should the institution become financially troubled. Second, policymakers often feel compelled to provide support to certain financial institutions to insulate creditors from losses. These instances of government intervention over time have reinforced creditors' expectations of support and thereby dampened incentives to contain risk-taking. This has promoted financial firms of greater size, complexity and interconnectedness and encouraged greater leverage and more reliance on highly liquid short-term funding. In this view, the apparent fragility of modern financial market arrangements is not entirely a force of nature. Instead, the narrative I’ve sketched out here suggests that financial instability is a consequence of the moral hazard effect of expected official intervention. The thesis that financial market instability is inherent, rather than induced by poor policies, must also confront the fact that instances of instability are quite unevenly distributed across different countries and different regulatory regimes, as exemplified by the contrasting experiences of the United States and Canada. Over the past 180 years, the United States has experienced 14 major banking crises, compared with just two mild illiquidity episodes in Canada over the same period. 24 If financial fragility were an inherent feature of financial markets, financial panics would be ubiquitous, but that’s not what we see. I do want to emphasize that to my knowledge Fed policymakers during the crisis were genuinely concerned that the problems in financial markets might have costly consequences for the real economy and the American people. With that concern in mind, they acted in what they thought was the best interest of the economy and the public. But I see the dilemma as resulting in part from a dreadful time-consistency problem. Decades of rescues had given rise to expectations of further rescues, which just encouraged high leverage and fragile funding arrangements. Disappointing those expectations would have limited moral hazard but forced investors to revise their expectations about future Fed support and reconfigure and reposition their investments accordingly. This would likely have been a turbulent process. One more crisis moment deserves comment. Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy on September 15, 2008. One day later, the insurance company American International Group (AIG) received a large credit extension from the New York Fed. 25 At that point, regulators had resolved 7 six large failing financial firms in five different ways. Some positions in the capital structure were rescued in one firm’s resolution but not rescued in another’s. Each had been handled on an ad hoc basis, without comment on how similar cases might be handled in the future. Market conditions following Lehman and AIG cried out for a general policy statement providing guidance on future interventions. But at that point it would have been very hard for policymakers to articulate a credible policy that differentiated between firms or investors. The most expedient path to stability was to throw in the towel and backstop anything in question. To persuade Congress to provide the legislative authority to do so, even scarier words were invoked ― “another Great Depression,” for example. I believe the resulting shock to consumers’ and businesses’ expectations significantly deepened the recession already underway. Suggestions for Researchers I promised at the outset that I would share some suggestions for the economic researchers in the room, and I turn to that task now. First, though, commendations are necessary. The progress made on the theory of banking and financial intermediation in the last few decades has been profound, and we owe that progress to many of the people here today. Second, a characterization is in order: There is a sense in which the models that were cited to justify the interventions that began in 2007 are simply “possibility theorems.” They are stripped- down, bare-bones models demonstrating that under a specific set of assumptions government intervention of the type we saw can be efficiency enhancing. Let me be clear: I am not criticizing stripped-down models, per se; indeed, I doubt we could make much progress in economics without them. In fact, I wrote down a few simple models myself back in the day. In order to isolate a theoretical phenomenon you’ve identified, you eliminate all the unnecessary details, leaving only the essential features, as in a chess puzzle where every piece on the board plays a role in the solution. This puts the economics of the issue in stark relief so that it can be better understood and subjected to further study by other researchers. But there is a large gap between such models and the needs of policymakers, because they often provide us with little guidance on how critical assumptions compare to the real world. Often the predictions of models in which policy interventions play a useful role are qualitatively indistinguishable from the predictions of models in which markets are fairly well functioning and intervention does not enhance efficiency. To take a simple but relevant example, “firesales,” in which financial assets are trading below their fundamental value due to limited participation or market segmentation, can be hard to distinguish from downward revisions in expected returns. In both cases, prices and quantities fall. To choose between the two competing policy recommendations therefore requires some additional information. Some other aspect of the models needs to be compared to observations in order to discriminate between them. One possibility is to bring quantitative information to bear on the problem. For example, one could estimate the fundamental value of the financial assets in question to see if market prices seemed to diverge significantly. During the crisis, however, this tended to lead to an impasse. Estimates of fundamental values based on risk neutrality pointed to large deviations in market prices. But it seemed quite plausible that investors anticipated a high correlation between realized returns and their wealth — that is, if very large losses materialized, 8 aggregate economic conditions were likely to be very bad. In essence, large risk premia could not be ruled out and very low fundamental values were quite plausible. That leaves us with comparing the assumptions built into the model environments, which leads naturally to a suggestion for the economic research community. I think it would be very useful to see more effort devoted to comparing specific model features, particularly information and technology assumptions, to actual observations. For example, how do the frictions that generate market segmentation stack up against modern market settings, in which traders are often physically isolated but communications technologies are very inexpensive? And we know that the sequential service constraint — in which depositors seeking withdrawals are isolated from each other and have only one interaction per period with their banker — is essential to the classic Diamond-Dybvig model of bank runs as multiple equilibria. Is the sequential service constraint a good representation of networks of traders linked by modern telecommunications services? For me personally, and I believe for my fellow policymakers as well, more work focused on validating the technological and informational assumptions underlying models of financial market frictions would greatly help narrow the range of defensible disagreements on the relevance of any given model. In a sense, I am urging more horse races between various models of “possibility theorems” and models in which observed outcomes are reasonably efficient. I have another suggestion as well. The induced-fragility narrative places expectational considerations center stage. This suggests that for financial stability it’s critical to achieve a commitment to limiting intervention, since constraining risk-taking ex ante through tougher regulation is likely to prove fallible. I’ve spoken on several other occasions on this theme and about the path toward better policy. 26 Achieving financial stability also is likely to require overcoming distributional motivations. Training in modern welfare economics conditions one to dissect and debate the efficiency rationales for intervention. As I have reflected over time on policymaking during the crisis, I have come to see the impulse to intervene as driven less by ex- ante or even ex-post efficiency considerations and more by sheer distributional concerns. Externalities, in the strict sense, are hard to identify with rigor in markets in which everyone is connected by chains of voluntary transactions. As the FOMC transcripts will show, scary words and language about protecting financial markets and Main Street were far more prominent than discussions of the efficiency properties of policy proposals. In hindsight, I wish more consideration had been given to the possibility that, as with the fight against inflation, protecting people over the long run can unfortunately require incurring quite substantial short-run costs. My suggestion here is for more work on the political economy of financial market intervention. Charles Calomiris and Stephen Haber have a provocative new book called Fragile By Design in which they explore the connection between the structure of countries’ political institutions and the extent of policy-induced financial fragility. 27 This strikes me as an immensely promising research vein and one that is likely to yield substantial insights, because it focuses on the distributional considerations that I think were dominant in the crisis. Conclusion 9 I’ll conclude simply with a reminder that the stakes are high for making progress. I’ll also point out that episodes of macroeconomic and monetary instability in the 1930s and the 1970s generated bursts of research that immensely deepened our understanding and led, arguably, to better policy. I hope that the current crisis-induced burst of interest in financial intermediation will yield similar payoffs in the years ahead, perhaps with your help. I look forward to seeing the benefits of that research. 1 I am grateful to Jessie Romero, John Weinberg and Kartik Athreya for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 For example, see Federal Open Market Committee, “Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on August 16, 2007,” and “Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on December 11, 2007 .” 3 Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States , Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1963. 4 FOMC (August 16, 2007) 5 FOMC (August 16, 2007), pp. 3-4 6 FOMC (August 16, 2007), p. 8. Statement made by then-Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors Donald Kohn. 7 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Economics and the Federal Reserve after the Crisis,” Speech at Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, Pa., February 12, 2013. 8 Daniel M. Covitz, Nellie Liang, and Gustavo A. Suarez, “The Evolution of a Financial Crisis: Panic in the Asset- Backed Commercial Paper Market,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series, no. 2009-36, August 2009. 9 John B. Taylor and John C. Williams, “A Black Swan in the Money Market,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2009, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 58-83. The authors also discuss other analyses that reach different conclusions from their own. (Working paper version) 10 FOMC (August 16, 2007), p.7. Statement made by then-Chairman Ben Bernanke. 11 Henry Thornton, “An Enquiry Into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain,” 1802, Edited and with an Introduction by F.A. Von Hayek, New York: Rinehart and Co., 1939. Walter Bagehot, “Lombard Street,” London: Harry S. King and Co., 1873. 12 For explanation and discussion of Thornton and Bagehot’s views on the lender of last resort, see Thomas M. Humphrey, “Lender of Last Resort: The Concept in History,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, March/April 1989, pp. 8-16; and Michael D. Bordo, “The Lender of Last Resort: Alternative Views and Historical Experience,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, January/February 1990, pp. 18-29. 13 An exception was after October 2008, when the Fed began paying banks interest on excess reserves and stopped offsetting lending-induced increases in the supply of reserves. 14 More details on TAF are available on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors’ website. 15 Huberto Ennis and John Weinberg, “Over-the-Counter Loans, Adverse Selection, and Stigma in the Interbank Market,” Review of Economic Dynamics, October 2013, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 601-16. (Working paper version) 16 Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Comments on the Term Auction Facility,” Memorandum to the Federal Open Market Committee, December 5, 2007. 17 Franklin Allen and Douglas Gale, “Understanding Financial Crises,” Clarendon Lectures in Finance, New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. Then-Chairman Bernanke cited Chapter 9 of their book during the FOMC meeting on September 18, 2007. See Federal Open Market Committee, “Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on September 18, 2007,” p. 147. 18 Lacker (2007), p. 2. 19 John H. Kareken and Neil Wallace, "Deposit Insurance and Bank Regulation: A Partial-Equilibrium Exposition," The Journal of Business, July 1978, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 413-38. (Working paper version) 20 Michael Dotsey and Anatoli Kuprianov, “Reforming Deposit Insurance: Lessons from the Savings and Loan Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, March/April 1990, pp. 3-28. 21 Federal Reserve Chairman Arthur Burns favored a bailout, according to Irving H. Sprague, “Bailout: An Insider’s Account of Bank Failures and Rescues,” Washington D.C.: Beard Books, 1986. 22 The Fed convened a group of creditors to purchase a 90 percent stake in LTCM but did not put up any of its own funds. To learn more about each of these episodes visit www.federalreservehistory.org. 23 The Richmond Fed’s estimates of the size of the safety net are available online. 10 24 Charles W. Calomiris and Stephen H. Haber, “Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises and Scarce Credit,” Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2014. 25 Learn more about the support provided to specific institutions at federalreservehistory.org. 26 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “The Path Toward Financial Stability,” Speech to the Stanford Institute for Economic and Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., February 11, 2014; and “A Program for Financial Stability,” Speech to the Banking Institute, UNC School of Law, Charlotte, N.C., March 29, 2012. 27 Calomiris and Haber (2014)
