Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Harvard Law School Symposium on Building the Financial System of the Twenty-first Century: An Agenda for Europe and the United States, Armonk, New York Share The financial crisis exposed, in painful and dramatic fashion, the shortcomings of existing regulatory and supervisory regimes. In both the United States and the European Union (EU), the crisis also revealed some particular vulnerabilities created by foreign banking operations. This evening I would like to focus on these vulnerabilities and on how best we should address them. Let me note at the outset the now commonplace observation that we have a quite integrated international financial system, with many large, globally active firms operating within a system of national government and regulation or, in the case of the EU, a hybrid of regional and national regulation. I add the equally commonplace observation that there is no realistic prospect for having a global banking regulator and, consequently, the responsibility and authority for financial stability will continue to rest with national or regional authorities. 1 The question, then, is how responsibility for oversight of these large firms can be most effectively shared among regulators. This, of course, is the important issue underlying the perennial challenge of home-host supervisory relations. Another introductory observation is that--at least in a world of nations with substantially different economic circumstances, different currencies, and banking and capital markets of quite different levels of depth and development--there will be good reason to vary at least some forms of regulation across countries. Presumptively, at least, nations should be able to adjust their regulatory systems based on local circumstances and their relative level of risk aversion as it pertains to the potential for financial instability. Although the financial systems and economies of the United States and the EU are more similar to one another than they are to those of many other jurisdictions, they are hardly identical. Even between these two, for example, there may be legitimate differences within the broader convergence around minimum regulatory and supervisory standards developed at the Basel Committee, the International Organization of Securities Commissions, the Financial Stability Board, and other forums. These opening observations are important in responding to the curious charge of "Balkanization" that has been levelled at the United States and, to a lesser extent, some other jurisdictions, as a result of actions taken or proposed in response to problems presented by foreign banks during the crisis. I say "curious" for several reasons. One is that the charge reflects a misunderstanding of the allocation of responsibility between home and host supervisors that has evolved in the Basel Committee during the past several decades. Another is that the charge seems implicitly, and oddly, premised on the notion that what we had in 2007 was a well-functioning, integrated global financial system with effective consolidated supervision of global banks. A third is that the charge overlooks the fact that much of what the United States is now doing is matching what the EU has quite sensibly been doing for years. In the rest of my remarks I will elaborate on these points, though not in the spirit of a debater's arguments, but in an effort to answer the question I posed a moment ago: How, that is, can we successfully reduce the risks to financial stability posed by large, internationally active banks? As I hope will become apparent, a theme I wish to emphasize is that we need to redouble efforts at genuine supervisory cooperation if we are to manage effectively the vulnerabilities and challenges posed by the perennial home-host issue. International Principles on Home- and Host-Country Responsibilities While the circumstances and risks may have changed, the issue of the appropriate roles of home and host countries is not a new one. Indeed, it was a key motivation for creation of the Basel Committee in 1975 following the failures of the Herstatt and Franklin National banks. Many of the Basel Committee's early activities were focused on the challenges created by gaps in the supervision of internationally active banks, as evidenced by the fact that Basel "Concordats" on supervision preceded Basel "Accords" and "Frameworks" on capital and other subjects. This task has, of necessity, been ongoing, as experience revealed gaps in supervisory coverage and as the scale and scope of internationally active banks grew. The principle of consolidated supervision emerged in the early 1980s to ensure that some specific banking authority--generally the home-country regulator--had a complete view of the assets and liabilities of the bank. 2 This principle was reinforced and elaborated following the Bank of Credit and Commerce International episode in the early 1990s. 3 It is important to note that each Basel Committee declaration on the importance of home-country consolidated oversight has also included a statement of the obligations and prerogatives of host states in which significant foreign bank operations are located. This feature of the Basel Committee's approach makes sense as a reflection both of the host authority's responsibility for stability of its financial system and of the practical point that a host authority will be more familiar with the characteristics and risks in its market. In accordance with this history, the current version of the "Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision" sets out as one of its "essential criteria" for home-host relationships that "[t]he host supervisor's national laws or regulations require that the cross-border operations of foreign banks are subject to prudential, inspection and regulatory reporting requirements similar to those for domestic banks." 4 It is clear, then, that consolidated supervision is not intended to displace host-country supervision. Instead, as the Basel Committee has regularly noted, the two are intended to be complementary, so as to assure effective oversight of large, internationally active banks. Similarly, the stated purpose of the Basel Committee in requiring consolidated capital requirements is not to remove from host countries any responsibility or discretion to apply regulatory capital requirements, but to "preserve the integrity of capital in banks with subsidiaries by eliminating double gearing." 5 Likewise, and contrary to suggestions that are sometimes made, the capital accords and frameworks developed by the Basel Committee have always been explicitly minimum requirements. They are floors, not ceilings. Finally, it is worth noting that, in establishing a post-crisis framework for domestic systemically important banks (D-SIBs), the Basel Committee made clear that a host country may in appropriate circumstances designate domestic operations of a foreign bank as systemically important for that country, even if the parent foreign bank has already been designated a global systemically important bank (G-SIB). 6 The idea informing the newly created concept of a D-SIB is that an entity whose stress or failure could destabilize a domestic financial system might thereby indirectly destabilize the international financial system. Thus, the D-SIB category carries along with it higher loss-absorbency requirements than are generally applicable to domestic banks, although perhaps not as high as requirements for G-SIBs. Of course, our regulation for foreign banking organizations (FBOs) does not entail D-SIB designation or require higher than generally applicable loss absorbency. But I cite this feature of the D-SIB framework that permits designation of the domestic operations of foreign G-SIBs because it reflects rather clearly the principle that the specific characteristics of domestic markets may call for regulation of foreign banks in the host country, not just at a consolidated level. In short, the work of the Basel Committee over the years has not been directed at restraining host-country authorities from supervising and regulating foreign banking operations in their country. On the contrary, the committee has repeatedly asserted the complementary responsibilities of both home and host countries to oversee large, internationally active banking groups, in the interests of both national and international financial stability. And the committee has frequently returned to this set of issues in responding to developments that pose a threat to the safety and soundness of the international financial system. The Shift in Foreign Bank Activities Unfortunately, neither the Basel Committee nor national regulators responded in a timely fashion to the magnitude of the expansion in scale and scope of the world's largest banking organizations in the roughly 15 years before the financial crisis. As illustrated in figure 1 , at the end of 1974, just before the Basel Committee was created, the assets of the world's 10 largest banking organizations together equaled about 8 percent of global GDP. The three largest were all American--BankAmerica, Citicorp, and Chase Manhattan. But their combined assets were equal to less than 3-1/2 percent of world GDP and, as illustrated in figure 2 , about 10 percent of the GDP of their home country, the United States. By 1988 the combined assets of the world's 10 largest banking organizations as a proportion of world GDP had nearly doubled to about 15 percent, a ratio that held constant during the succeeding decade, at the beginning of the emerging market financial crisis in 1997. Then the explosive growth began. In the next decade--that is, up to the onset of the financial crisis in 2007--the combined assets of the world's 10 largest banks as a share of global GDP nearly tripled, to about 43 percent. The largest bank in the world at that time, Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), had assets equivalent to about 6.8 percent of global GDP, nearly twice the comparable figure for the three largest banks combined in 1974. Adding the assets of Deutsche Bank and BNP Paribas--the second and third largest banks in 2007--to those of RBS, the three had combined assets equal to about 17 percent of global GDP. And each of the three had assets nearly equal to, or in one instance substantially more than, the GDP of its home country. Even the eighth-ranked bank, UBS, had assets well over four times the GDP of its home country, Switzerland. Not only did the size of the largest banks change dramatically, so, too, did their scope, reflecting the overall integration of capital market and traditional lending activities that accelerated in the decade and a half preceding the crisis. This trend was particularly apparent in the United States and the United Kingdom, homes to the world's two largest financial centers. In the United States, the proportion of foreign banking assets to total U.S. banking assets has remained constant at approximately one-fifth since the late 1990s. But the concentration and character of those assets have changed noticeably. Today there are as many foreign as U.S.-owned banks with at least $50 billion in U.S. assets, the threshold established by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for banks for which more stringent prudential measures must be established. 7 Perhaps even more important was the shift in composition of foreign bank assets in the 15 years before the crisis, with the proportion of assets held in the U.S. broker-dealers of the 10 largest FBOs rising from approximately 15 percent to roughly 50 percent. 8 Today, 4 of the top 10 broker-dealers in the United States, and 12 of the top 20, are owned by foreign banks. Meanwhile, even the traditional branching model of large foreign commercial banks in the United States had changed. Reliance on less stable, short-term wholesale funding increased significantly. Many foreign banks shifted from the "lending branch" model to a "funding branch" model, in which U.S. branches of foreign banks were borrowing large amounts of U.S. dollars to upstream to their parents. These "funding branches" went from holding 40 percent of foreign bank branch assets in the mid-1990s to holding 75 percent of foreign bank branch assets by 2009. Foreign banks as a group moved from a position of receiving funding from their parents on a net basis in 1999 to providing significant funding to non-U.S. affiliates by the mid-2000s--more than $600 billion on a net basis by 2008. 9 A good bit of this short-term funding was used to finance long-term, U.S. dollar-denominated project and trade finance around the world. There is also evidence that a significant portion of the dollars raised by European banks in the pre-crisis period ultimately returned to the United States in the form of investments in U.S. securities. Indeed, the amount of U.S. dollar-denominated asset-backed securities and other securities held by Europeans increased significantly between 2003 and 2007, much of it financed by the short-term, dollar-denominated liabilities of European banks. 10 Just as regulatory systems did not, in the years preceding the crisis, address vulnerabilities such as reliance on short-term wholesale funding that were created by the integration of capital markets and traditional lending, so they did not respond to the transformation of foreign banking operations. Accordingly, just as home countries of systemically important banks have been playing catch-up on capital, liquidity, and other requirements, so host countries of very large foreign banking operations are playing catch-up in dealing with the very different character of many internationally active banks from that of 20 or 30 years ago. The Regulatory Response In a sense, the major strengthening during the past few years of capital and liquidity requirements for internationally active banks--including the capital surcharge for banks of global systemic importance--has to date been the most important international regulatory response to the revealed vulnerabilities associated with large foreign banking operations. Building capital and improving the liquidity positions of banks on a consolidated basis is surely a key step toward assuring the stability of major FBOs in host countries. Of course, these agreed changes have not yet been fully implemented. It is critical not just that all jurisdictions adopt appropriate regulations that fully incorporate the new Basel standards, but also that we ensure our banks will be substantively, and not just formally, compliant as the various transition target dates are reached. It is also the case that there is more to be done in addressing the risks posed by large global banking organizations, including additional measures to deal with the run risks associated with short-term wholesale funding and ensuring that even the largest firms can be successfully resolved without either creating major systemic problems or requiring an infusion of public capital. I will return to these subjects a bit later, in discussing the cooperative agenda that lies ahead for the United States, Europe, and our partners throughout the world. First, though, I want to describe how Europe, the United Kingdom, and the United States are dealing with the vulnerabilities associated with large foreign banking operations, and thus are fulfilling their responsibilities as host-country supervisors. I discuss the United Kingdom separately from the EU both because it is outside the euro zone and because, as a host jurisdiction, it is more similar to the United States than to other EU member states or, indeed, to any other country in the world. The EU has not, since the crisis, specifically adjusted the structure of regulation of foreign banks by its member states in their role as host supervisors. For more than a decade before the crisis, EU member states had prudently required that not only commercial banking, but also investment banking subsidiaries of foreign (non-EU-based) banking organizations, be subject to Basel capital requirements in the same way as EU-based firms. With the adoption of CRD IV, 11 the directive implementing the new EU capital requirements, Basel III will now be applied to all EU firms, including EU bank and investment bank subsidiaries of non-EU banking organizations. Branches of non-EU banks are generally not subject to local requirements. Before the crisis and the subsequent development of Basel III, there was no leverage ratio requirement in EU capital directives. Insofar as a new leverage ratio is part of the Basel III package agreed upon internationally, one would anticipate that it will be applied to commercial banking and investment banking firms in the EU, again including local subsidiaries of non-EU firms. Likewise, one would anticipate that the Basel III liquidity requirements will be implemented in the EU in accordance with the internationally agreed timeline and, again, that it will apply to EU subsidiaries of FBOs. A greater challenge for the EU has been dealing with banks headquartered in one EU country but doing business in other EU countries under the "single passport," which basically allows for full access in the rest of the EU, with supervision provided only by the home country. During the crisis, there were some notable instances of banking stresses and failures involving such institutions, with consequent negative effects on depositors, counterparties, and economies in other parts of the EU. Much of the ongoing post-crisis reform agenda in Europe seems directed at ensuring the safety and soundness of EU-based institutions. The most important of these changes may be the assumption by the European Central Bank of supervisory responsibility for larger euro area banks. And, as we saw just last week, work continues on the long process of creating a credible resolution mechanism for those banks. As a member state of the EU, the United Kingdom of course implements the EU policies I have just described. But that country has applied an additional set of requirements on the local operations of foreign banks, particularly with respect to liquidity. The Prudential Regulation Authority of the Bank of England applies local liquidity requirements to commercial and investment banking subsidiaries of non-U.K. banks, requiring them to hold local buffers as determined by internal stress tests with both 14- and 90-day components. The assumptions on which the stress tests are premised are quite strict. For example, the U.K. subsidiary generally must assume zero inflows from non-U.K. affiliates--even for claims on non-U.K. affiliates with short terms that mature within the stress test period--and 100 percent outflows to non-U.K. affiliates. The requirements generated by the test are subject to a supervisory review and add-on that for some firms has resulted in a significant increase in the buffer requirement. Branches of foreign commercial banks may in some circumstances be subject to local liquidity requirements as well. The U.K. initiative in applying local liquidity requirements is wholly understandable in light of the difficulties encountered because of stress on foreign institutions, including the Lehman bankruptcy, during the crisis. Because London is one of the world's two largest financial center hosts, the United Kingdom is the only country other than the United States hosting numerous, very large broker-dealers that are owned by foreign banks and also a broad array of commercial bank subsidiaries and branches that are owned by foreign banks. In fact, the six institutions headquartered outside the United States and the United Kingdom that are in the top three tiers of G-SIBs hold roughly 40 percent of their worldwide assets in those two jurisdictions. 12 Thus the U.K. initiative on liquidity and its internal debates on matters such as structural supervision, the Vickers proposals, and stress testing have all been very instructive for the Federal Reserve Board. Even where we have eventually adopted somewhat different approaches, we respect the motivation and scrupulousness of the U.K. banking authorities in addressing the systemic vulnerabilities posed by FBOs and in fulfilling their responsibility to the rest of the world to assure the stability of one of the world's two most important financial centers. Unlike the EU, the United States did not--prior to the financial crisis--require that all broker-dealers and investment banks meet Basel capital standards. The legacy of the Glass-Steagall Act, which had separated investment banking from commercial banking, meant that only commercial banks were subject to the prudential regulation of the federal banking agencies. In Europe, the dominance of universal banking, or variants thereon, led more naturally to application of capital and other prudential standards to all forms of banking activity. Even after the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act removed the remaining barriers to affiliation between investment banks and commercial banks in the United States, Basel capital requirements applied at a consolidated level to the activities of an investment bank or broker-dealer only if it did affiliate with a commercial bank. Thus, the five large "free-standing" U.S. investment banks were generally not subject to full application of Basel capital standards. During the crisis, the ill-advised nature of this regulatory state of affairs became apparent. The decline in value of many mortgage-backed securities and the consequent market uncertainty as to the true value of that entire class of securities raised questions about the solvency of major broker-dealers. Because the dealers were so highly leveraged and dependent on short-term financing, the uncertainty also led to serious liquidity strains, first at Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers and eventually at most dealers--domestic and foreign owned. Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch were acquired by existing bank holding companies after coming close to failure. Lehman Brothers went bankrupt. Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley became bank holding companies. Through its Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Federal Reserve provided substantial liquidity to the broker-dealer affiliates of the bank holding companies, as well as to the primary dealer subsidiaries of foreign banks. At the same time, the shift in strategy of many foreign banks toward using their U.S. branches to raise dollars in short-term markets for lending around the world created another set of vulnerabilities that resulted in substantial and, relative to total assets, disproportionate use of the Federal Reserve's discount window by foreign bank branches. The experience of the crisis made clear, first, that the perimeter of prudential regulation around U.S. financial institutions needed to be expanded. As noted a moment ago, this had occurred de facto during the crisis. The Dodd-Frank Act has given a legal foundation for this change, first by mandating that Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley will remain subject to consolidated prudential regulation even were they to divest their insured depository institutions and, second, by giving the Financial Stability Oversight Council the authority to designate other financial firms as systemically important, a step that would place them under Federal Reserve regulation and supervision. Dodd-Frank further required the Federal Reserve to apply progressively more stringent prudential regulation to bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in assets. Congress also required the Federal Reserve to apply special prudential standards to large FBOs. As I have already implied, much of what we have done is simply to catch up to EU and U.K. practice. Under our recently finalized Section 165 enhanced prudential standards regulation, an FBO with U.S. non-branch assets of $50 billion or more must hold its U.S. subsidiaries under an intermediate holding company (IHC), which must meet the risk-based and leverage capital standards generally applicable to bank holding companies under U.S. law. 13 Such an FBO must also certify that it meets consolidated capital adequacy standards established by its home-country supervisor that are consistent with the Basel Capital Framework. FBOs with combined U.S. assets of $50 billion or more must also meet liquidity risk-management standards and conduct internal liquidity stress tests. The IHC must maintain a liquidity buffer in the United States for a 30-day liquidity stress test. The U.S. branches and agencies of an FBO must maintain a liquidity buffer in the United States equal to the liquidity needs for 14 days, as determined by a 30-day liquidity stress test. 14 The IHCs of FBOs must also conform to certain risk-management and supervisory requirements at the IHC level. Structurally, the U.S. capital requirements for FBOs are similar to those that apply to foreign banks in the EU. That is, generally applicable Basel capital requirements are applied to the U.S. operations of FBOs that own local banking subsidiaries, investment banks, and broker-dealers. In fact, the new U.S. rules are somewhat more favorable to foreign institutions, in that they only apply once the non-branch U.S. assets of an FBO exceed $50 billion. That dollar amount, incidentally, is the same as the Dodd-Frank threshold for more stringent prudential measures, though note that this statutory threshold applies if the total assets of any U.S. banking organization--foreign, as well as domestic--exceed that level. As in the EU, the capital requirements do not apply to U.S. branches of foreign banks, even though the crisis experience provides some credible arguments for doing so. The leverage ratio requirement has received particular attention. One complaint is that the foreign operations of U.S. banks are not subject to leverage ratios for their local operations. It is true that many foreign countries--including the EU member states--do not currently have leverage ratio standards for their banks. As noted earlier, however, one may reasonably expect that those countries will be implementing the Basel III leverage ratio in a timely fashion. Also, I would note in passing that the U.S. leverage ratio requirement for foreign firms will be phased in more slowly than originally proposed, so as to align it more closely with the effective date of the Basel III leverage ratio requirement. A second complaint is that there is something unfair about the United States requiring an FBO to meet the international leverage ratio in its U.S. operations, because its operations may be heavily weighted toward broker-dealer activities, which generally have higher leverage, whereas the leverage ratio for U.S. firms is based on their global operations. Again, one suspects that the foreign operations of U.S. firms could be subject to a similar ratio requirement abroad as countries implement their Basel III commitments. However, quite apart from what may happen in the future, there are two U.S.-based firms--Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley--whose global business mix resembles that of the U.S. subsidiaries of FBOs that are predominantly engaged in broker-dealer activities in the United States. In fact, under the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio the Board proposed during the summer, these and other U.S. G-SIBs would be subject to a higher Basel III leverage ratio requirement (5 percent) than would apply to FBO IHCs (3 percent). The applicable liquidity requirements, while somewhat differently defined, are roughly comparable to those already applicable to FBOs in the United Kingdom. The similar positions of our two nations as host countries for foreign bank operations heavily involved in trading and significantly reliant on potentially runnable short-term wholesale funding explain this rough parallelism. The most notable departure of the new U.S. FBO standards from existing EU and U.K. practice lies in the IHC requirement for foreign banks with large domestic operations. Given the structure of U.S. financial regulation that is a legacy of Glass-Steagall, as well as the efforts by a small number of very large foreign banks to evade the intent of Congress that capital standards apply to their U.S. operations, we needed to create this structural requirement. It is unclear how much difference this makes for the capital requirements of FBOs in the United States as opposed, say, to those of U.S. operations in the EU. That would depend on the existence and size of financial affiliates owned by the U.S. firm that are not subject to Basel standards directly. In any case, it seems sound prudential practice--and consistent with the various Basel Committee principles to which I earlier referred--that large domestic operations of foreign banks meet capital standards on the basis of all exposures in the host jurisdiction and, indeed, that they manage their risks in that country across all their affiliates. "Balkanization" and Home-Host Responsibilities To return to the issue of Balkanization, three things should now be apparent. First, in its new capital regulations applicable to FBOs, the United States is more a follower of the pattern set by the EU than it is an initiator of new kinds of requirements. Of course, a few foreign banks would prefer the old system under which they held relatively little capital in their very extensive U.S. operations. But that was neither safe for the financial system nor particularly fair to their competitors--U.S. and foreign--that hold significant amounts of capital here. Indeed, a firm that is genuinely well capitalized, including holding the G-SIB surcharge at its global consolidated level, should require only moderate adjustment efforts during the transition period established in the FBO rule. Second, there is considerable scope for a foreign bank to integrate its U.S. operations with its global activities within the rule the Federal Reserve adopted last month. For example, while foreign firms with more than $10 billion in non-branch assets have some additional reporting requirements, only when U.S. non-branch assets rise above $50 billion do the quantitative Basel capital requirements become applicable to the U.S. subsidiaries. Moreover, no capital requirements apply to branches so long as their parent is subject to home-country consolidated capital rules consistent with Basel standards. The U.S. operations of FBO branches and subsidiaries will not be subject to "due from" restrictions. They remain free to lend money to their worldwide affiliates; they must simply do so with a more stable funding base. Finally, I note that many FBOs, like many U.S.-based banks, have made considerable progress in reducing dependence on short-term wholesale funding and in building capital. To some extent, the new requirements are intended to preserve this progress. Third, the capital and liquidity requirements that do apply are wholly consistent with the responsibility of host-country supervisors to assure financial stability in their own markets. Collectively, foreign banks with a large presence in the United States conduct activities of a scope, and at a scale, that could lead to problems for the U.S. financial system should they come under stress. Realistically, exposures and vulnerabilities in a large host-country market are much more difficult for home-country supervisors to assess. Indeed, U.S. regulators count on the expertise and proximity of U.K. regulators in overseeing the London operations of large U.S. financial institutions to enhance the effective consolidated supervision and regulation for which we are responsible. On the issue of home-host-country coordination in regulating large, globally active banking organizations, I would make three additional points. First, our FBO capital requirements, like those of the EU for foreign commercial and investment banks, are based on the capital rules agreed to in the Basel Committee. 15 Thus, there is an overall compatibility between national and international rules with respect to applicable definitions, standards, and required ratios. Second, home countries must implement and enforce faithfully at a consolidated level these same capital rules. More broadly, home-country supervisory expectations for strong consolidated capital levels, liquidity positions, and risk-management practices are likely to facilitate compliance with domestic requirements for large FBOs of the sort applicable in the United States and the EU. It is also important that home countries assure the credibility of resolution mechanisms for their large banking organizations. This task entails the implementation of the Financial Stability Board's principles for effective resolution regimes, including establishing a resolution authority with adequate legal powers to manage the process in an orderly fashion without injection of public capital. 16 It also includes requiring each such institution to have total loss absorption capacity sufficient to recapitalize the firm even if its substantial equity buffer is lost in an extreme tail event. Home and host countries should work together toward international standards that will ensure that an appropriate amount of this capacity would be available to host authorities faced with the potential insolvency of large FBOs in their jurisdiction or with the consequences for their market of the failure of parent banks. In this regard, I think that capital requirements for FBOs of the sort now required by the EU and the United States are very likely to reduce the considerable strains that have traditionally accompanied financial distress at global banking firms. In most cases, including both internationally and within the EU itself in recent years, stress has resulted in the demand by host authorities for ex post ring fencing of capital, liquidity, or both, often in the absence of any ex ante requirements. The existence of FBO capital and liquidity standards, particularly if supplemented with the total loss absorbency measures to which I just referred, should mitigate the need for such demands, which of course come at the worst possible time for the firm trying to meet them. Third, we--by which I mean both home and major host banking regulators--need to find better ways of fostering genuine regulatory and supervisory cooperation. Particularly at the most senior levels of the agencies that actually supervise globally active banks, our interactions with our counterparts from other countries have become almost exclusively focused on developing international standards or reviewing compliance with existing ones. These discussions are usually conducted with numerous colleagues who are not themselves responsible for banking regulation in their own jurisdictions. As important as these efforts have been, and continue to be, following the crisis, there is a risk that by not having opportunities for senior officials of the various national agencies that have direct supervisory responsibility for banking organizations to meet and discuss shared challenges, we give short shrift to the collective interest of bank regulators in effective supervision of all globally active firms. Proposals to include prudential requirements or, more precisely, to include limitations on prudential requirements in trade agreements would lead us farther away from the aforementioned goal of emphasizing shared financial stability interests, in favor of an approach to prudential matters informed principally by considerations of commercial advantage. Conclusion The job of regulating and supervising large, globally active banking organizations is a tough one. Issues of moral hazard, negative externalities, and asymmetric information are, if not pervasive, then at least significant and recurring. The job is made only harder by the fact that these firms cross borders in ways their regulators do not. But we cannot ignore this fact and pretend that we have global oversight. International standards for prudential regulation are not the same as global regulations, and consolidated supervision is not the same as comprehensive supervision. The jurisdictions represented on the Basel Committee not only have the right to regulate their financial markets--including large FBOs participating in those markets--they have a responsibility to their home jurisdictions, and to the rest of the world, to do so. The most important contribution the United States can make to global financial stability is to ensure the stability of our own financial system. There must be some assurance beyond mere words from parent banks or home-country supervisors that a large FBO will remain strong or supported in periods of stress. After all, as we saw in the crisis, while a parent bank or home-country authorities may have offered those words with total good faith in calm times, they may be unable to carry through on them in more financially turbulent periods. None of this means that we need be at odds with one another. On the contrary, these very circumstances call not only for more tangible safeguards in host countries, but also for more genuine cooperation among supervisory authorities. Indeed, as I hope will continue to be the case with the international agenda on resolution, total loss absorbency, and related matters, we should aspire to converge around the kinds of protections that we can expect at both consolidated and local levels. 1. I would add, in passing, the observation that I am not at all sure it would be desirable to have a single global bank regulator even if it were remotely within the realm of political possibility. Return to text 2. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1983), " Principles for the Supervision of Banks' Foreign Establishments (PDF) " (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, May). Return to text 3. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1992), " Minimum Standards for Supervision of International Banking Groups and Their Cross-Border Establishments (PDF) " (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, July). Return to text 4. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2012), " Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (PDF) " (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, September), p. 38. Return to text 5. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2006), " International Convergence of Capital Measures and Capital Standards (PDF) " (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, June), p. 7. Return to text 6. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2012), " A Framework for Dealing with Domestic Systemically Important Banks (PDF) " (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, October). Return to text 7. As of September 30, 2013, there were 24 such foreign banks, compared with 24 U.S. firms. Source: For U.S. bank holding companies: FR Y-9C; for foreign banks: FR Y-9C, FFIEC 002, FR 2886b, FFIEC 031/041, FR Y-7N/NS, X-17A-5 Part II, and X-17A-5 Part IIA, and X-17A-5 Part II CSE. Return to text 8. Source: FR Y-9C, FFIEC 002, FR 2886b, FFIEC 031/041, FR Y-7N/NS, X-17A-5 Part II, and X-17A-5 Part IIA, and X-17A-5 Part II CSE. Return to text 9. Source: FFIEC 002, various years. Return to text 10. Ben S. Bernanke, Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin (2011), " International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003-2007 ," International Finance Discussion Papers Number 1014 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February). Return to text 11. The European CRD IV package, which implemented the global Basel III capital standards into EU law, entered into force on July 17, 2013. See http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/bank/regcapital/legislation_in_force_en.htm . Return to text 12. Staff estimates, using data from the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England. The U.K. data include only U.K. resident banking entities of each banking group. The U.S. data include all entities of each banking group. Both U.K. and U.S. assets include intragroup claims on related affiliates. Worldwide assets are calculated using the accounting standards of home country jurisdictions. The list of G-SIBs is available at www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_131111.pdf . Return to text 13. Actually, FBOs need not meet advanced approach risk-based capital requirements in the United States, unless they specifically opt in to that treatment. See www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20140218a.htm . Return to text 14. An FBO with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more but with combined U.S. assets of less than $50 billion must report the results of an internal liquidity stress test (either on a consolidated basis or for its combined U.S. operations) to the Board on an annual basis. Return to text 15. As a technical matter, the relevant FBOs are subject to the traditional 4 percent U.S. leverage ratio, but it is very likely that this requirement will be less binding than the 3 percent international leverage ratio because of the inclusion in the denominator of the latter of off-balance-sheet activities and exposures. Return to text 16. Financial Stability Board (2011), " Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions " (Basel: Financial Stability Board, November 4). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: March 27, 2014 Back to Top

Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the 23rd Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference: Stabilizing Financial Systems for Growth and Full Employment, Washington, D.C. Share In the more than five years that I have been a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, it has been hard not to concentrate on near-term economic prospects. The severe decline in the economy precipitated by the financial crisis and the magnitude of job and production loss in the Great Recession that followed have made a focus on recovery both understandable and imperative. But as I have prepared for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings every six to seven weeks by examining incoming data and the analyses of our own staff and of outside economists, I have been struck by the evidence of longer-term challenges to the American economy that poke through shorter-term discussions. There is considerable ongoing debate about whether the financial crisis and recession amplified changes already afoot in the economy, accelerated them, or simply revealed them more clearly. Whatever one's view on that question, the confluence of some apparently secular trends raises important questions about our nation's future growth potential and our ability to provide opportunity for all of our people. Indeed, these changes reflect serious challenges not only to the functioning of the American economy over the coming decades, but also to some of the ideals that undergird the nation's democratic heritage. This evening I will address in some detail four particularly important developments: Productivity growth has slowed. As a result, the overall economic pie is expanding more slowly than before. Some indicators further suggest that workers have been claiming a smaller share of the overall economic pie during the past decade. Inequality has continued to increase, meaning that a larger portion of overall economic resources is commanded by a smaller segment of the population. Economic mobility across generations is not particularly high in the United States, and it has not been increasing over time. After detailing these trends, I will turn briefly to both the role and the limits of monetary policy in countering them. 1 Structural Challenges for the American Economy Lagging productivity growth Over the long term, the pace at which our standards of living increase depends on the growth of labor productivity--that is, the increase in the amount of economic value that a worker can generate during each hour on the job. Unfortunately, the data on productivity growth in recent years have been disappointing. Although output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose about 2-3/4 percent per year from the end of World War II through 1971, productivity has risen just 1-1/2 percent per year since then, excluding a brief burst of rapid growth that occurred roughly between 1996 and 2004. Just as it took economists a long time to identify the sources of the surge in productivity that began nearly two decades ago, they are only now beginning to grapple with the more recent slowdown. Some have argued that the burst of productivity growth that began in the mid-1990s was the anomaly, and that the more pedestrian pace of growth over the past decade represents a return to the norm. 2 In this view, the long period of rapid productivity growth that ended in the 1970s grew out of the technological innovations of the first and second Industrial Revolutions. But now, despite continued technological advances, a return to that pace of performance is thought unlikely. In particular, these authors argue that the information technology revolution of the past several decades--including the diffusion of computers, the development of the Internet, and improvements in telecommunications--is unlikely to generate the productivity gains prompted by earlier innovations such as electrification and mass production. This somewhat pessimistic perspective is far from being conventional wisdom. While productivity has increased less rapidly in recent years than during the first three-fourths of the 20th century, per capita income (a statistic available over a longer time span) is still rising more quickly than it was even during the second Industrial Revolution. Indeed, some have argued that the problem with new technology is not with productivity growth but with our ability to capture the productivity in our statistics. Moreover, many economists and technophiles remain optimistic that we have yet to fully realize the potential of the information revolution, and that technological change will continue to bring inventions and productivity enhancements that we cannot imagine today. 3 This view holds that there is no reason productivity could not continue to rise in line with its long-term historical average. 4 It must be noted that, even among the productivity optimists, there are differences over how the expected progress will affect job creation and income distribution. In particular, some in this camp believe that we are likely to see a continuation of the pattern by which recent productivity growth seems to have mostly benefited relatively skilled workers. It may also have favored returns to capital investment, as opposed to labor, in greater proportion than past productivity gains. While there is some reason for optimism about the prospects for technological progress, there are grounds for concern over the decline in the dynamism of the U.S. labor market, an attribute that has contributed to productivity growth in the past and has traditionally distinguished the United States from many other advanced economies. Historically, the U.S. labor market has been characterized by substantial geographic mobility. Our high rates of geographic mobility are one facet of the overall dynamism of our labor market, which is also manifest in the continual churning of jobs through hirings and separations, as well as firm expansions and contractions--a process that the economist Joseph Schumpeter called "creative destruction." 5 To give a sense of the magnitude of this process, while net job gains and losses are typically measured in the hundreds of thousands each calendar quarter, gross job creation and destruction commonly run at a pace of roughly 7 million jobs each quarter. Creative destruction has been shown to improve productivity as jobs that have low productivity are replaced with jobs that yield greater productivity. 6 However, a variety of data indicate that this feature of labor market dynamism has diminished. Since the 1980s, internal migration in the United States over both long and short distances has declined. To give an example, the rate of cross-state migration was less than half as large in 2011 as its average over the period from 1948 to 1971. 7 And, while we still see the level of employment rising and falling over the business cycle, the gross flows of people between jobs and of jobs across firms that underlie the observed aggregate changes have fallen over the past 15 years. At this point, we do not have a full understanding of the factors contributing to the decline in labor market dynamism. As a number of economists who have studied the issue have pointed out, some of the explanations may be benign or even positive. 8 For instance, the aging of the population accounts for some of the decline in migration and job churning, as older individuals are less likely to move and change jobs; such demographic factors probably do not represent an adverse reduction in dynamism. Moreover, some of the decline in turnover could be the result of individuals and firms finding productive job matches more quickly than before. For many employers and workers, the Internet has reduced the cost of posting job openings and the cost of searching for jobs. This more efficient process could result in better matches between firms and workers and thus fewer separations. Similarly, a reduction in firm uncertainty about the costs and benefits of investing could reduce firm-level churning in jobs. In both cases, workers and firms are able to achieve a good outcome with less turnover and presumably no loss of productivity. While it seems possible that improved information could be a force behind the reduction in geographic mobility and labor turnover, there are less benign possibilities as well. For instance, an increase in the costs to firms of hiring and firing individuals or an increase in the costs to individuals of changing jobs could lead to fewer productivity-enhancing job changes. Alternatively, the reduction in churning could itself be a function of slower productivity growth, as slower productivity growth implies lower benefits to forming new matches. One recent trend that is particularly disturbing is stagnation in the formation of new firms. Statistics from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) show that the number of establishments in operation for less than one year rose between the mid-1990s, when the data start, and the early 2000s. But, smoothing through the ups and downs of the business cycle, new firm formation has been roughly flat since then. Moreover, the number of individuals working at such firms stands almost 2 million below its peak in 1999. Given the role of innovation by entrepreneurs and the well-documented importance of successful young firms in creating jobs, these trends are disheartening. The lagging share of national income accruing to workers A second adverse development in recent years has been the apparent reduction in the share of overall national income that accrues to workers. Here I will be brief and suggestive because the scholarship is far from settled. But the basic trends in the data are troubling. Labor's share of total income generated in the nonfarm business sector has been on a downtrend since the 1980s and has fallen sharply since the turn of the millennium. It stood at 56 percent at the end of 2013, the lowest level since the BLS began collecting data on the measure in 1948. To be sure, various conceptual and measurement challenges make it difficult to compute labor's share of income with any degree of precision. However, taken at face value, these data have significant implications for the distribution of income in our society, given how skewed the holdings of capital are. Economists have focused less attention on the factors underlying the apparent decline in labor's share of income than they have on the rise in income inequality in general, but among the candidates are technological change, which has allowed for the substitution of capital for labor in the handling of routine tasks, an increase in firm bargaining power, and perhaps a decline in competition in product markets. The increase in inequality Of the trends I have identified, the one that has received the largest amount of press attention recently is the rise in income inequality. While income inequality has been increasing since the 1970s, over the past two decades the process has been characterized by what some have called polarization, with those at the top of the distribution accumulating a significantly larger share of income, those at the bottom of the distribution experiencing modest relative gains, and those in the middle of the income distribution falling further behind in relative terms. Gauging by one fairly comprehensive measure of income used by the Congressional Budget Office, the share of income garnered by those in the top 1 percent of the distribution more than doubled between 1979 and 2007 to about 17 percent, while the share accruing to those in the 1st through 80th percentiles fell 9 percentage points. 9 And while it is true that those at the upper end of the income distribution were disproportionately affected during the financial crisis, with the result that inequality actually fell a bit in the wake of the recession, high earners also appear to be benefiting disproportionately from the recovery. Thus, the crisis does not seem really to have changed the trajectory of inequality. As interesting as these statistics on inequality are, they obscure a key part of the story--one that has been an important part of our identity as Americans: whether a family has the ability, through hard work, to attain a better standard of living. And on that point, we find that households in the middle and lower parts of the earnings distribution have experienced, at best, only modest improvements in inflation-adjusted income. 10 Between 1979 and 2007, households in the middle quintile of the income distribution--a functional definition of the middle class--saw their real labor income (adjusted for household size) rise only about 3 percent. Meanwhile, households in the bottom one-fifth of the distribution did a bit better, experiencing about a 24 percent rise, although this figure reflects an improvement of just 1 percent per year, and that from a very low base. In contrast, income rose more than 70 percent among households in the top one-fifth of the earnings distribution. The polarization of the labor income distribution has been mirrored in the types of jobs we are creating. Since the 1990s, job gains have been concentrated at the upper and lower ends of the earnings distribution. There have been healthy gains in employment in highly paid occupations, such as computer and information systems managers, and a rise in low-paid jobs, such as home health-care workers, but growth has been much slower in occupations with earnings in the middle of the distribution, such as machinists. This trend accelerated during the Great Recession and the ensuing recovery. For example, food services, retail, and employment services, all low-wage industries, accounted for nearly 45 percent of net employment growth from the start of the recovery through early 2012, while employment in a number of industries that offer good jobs for mid-wage workers--including construction, manufacturing, and finance, insurance, and real estate--did not grow in those years or grew too slowly to make up for their job losses during the recession. 11 There is no single explanation for the rise in inequality and the decline in the share of jobs that provide a middle-class standard of living. Economists generally agree that technological change and globalization have played a role. 12 Both of these forces have reduced the demand for workers whose jobs had involved routine work that can easily be mechanized or offshored while, at the same time, increasing the productivity of higher-skilled workers. However, it is less clear whether technology and globalization are sufficient explanations for the increased share of income going to those at the very top of the income distribution. It may be that by increasing the effective size of the markets for their skills, technological change and globalization can also explain some of the large increase in earnings of top athletes, musicians, and even chief executive officers. In the popular press, the phenomenon of the very few reaping enormous windfalls has become known as the winner-take-all economy. However, other researchers have noted that a large share of the top earners is found in industries such as finance and law, suggesting that deregulation, corporate governance, and tax policy may have also played a role in the trend toward rising inequality. Economic mobility has not increased to mitigate higher inequality Despite the fact that rising inequality has compounded the stakes associated with one's position in the income distribution, mobility up and down the economic ladder from one generation to the next in the United States has been stagnant. Work by Raj Chetty and his coauthors using income tax data has shown that a child who was born in the early 1990s had about the same chance of moving up in the income distribution as a child born in the 1970s. 13 Combining these results with previous research suggests that mobility has not increased in the postwar era. And, despite the long-held view of the United States as the land of opportunity, we actually fall short of other advanced economies in terms of intergenerational mobility. In the United Kingdom, for example, about 30 percent of sons with low-income parents end up being low-income themselves, while in the United States the comparable figure is over 40 percent. 14 The Role of Monetary Policy As must be apparent, the challenges I have discussed are not susceptible to easy or rapid solution. It is equally apparent that monetary policy cannot be the only, or even the principal, tool in addressing these challenges. But that is not to say it is irrelevant. There is not as sharp a demarcation between cyclical and structural problems as is sometimes suggested. Monetary policies directed toward achieving the statutory dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability can help reduce underemployment associated with low aggregate demand. And, to the degree that monetary policy can prevent cyclical phenomena such as high unemployment and low investment from becoming entrenched, it might be able to improve somewhat the potential growth rate of the economy over the medium term. 15 More generally, reducing labor market slack can help lay the foundation for a more sustained, self-reinforcing cycle of stronger aggregate demand, increased production, renewed investment, and productivity gains. Similarly, a stronger labor market can provide a modest countervailing factor to income inequality trends by leading to higher wages at the bottom rungs of the wage scale. The very accommodative monetary policy of the past five years has contributed significantly to the extended, moderate recoveries of gross domestic product (GDP) and employment. To this point, however, there has not been a corresponding upturn in wages. To be sure, there have been notable wage increases in specific areas of the country enjoying economic growth much higher than the national average. And, as is nearly always the case, labor shortages in discrete skilled job categories may be placing some upward pressures on wages for those jobs (though, judging by such aggregate data as we have, not by as much as one might have thought based on the widespread anecdotal reports of skilled labor shortages). But one sees only the earliest signs of a much-needed, broader wage recovery. Compensation increases have been running at the historically low level of just over 2 percent annual rates since the onset of the Great Recession, with concomitantly lower real wage gains. The reasons for the lag in wage gains in the context of continuing moderate growth are not totally clear. Nominal wage rigidity on the downside may have played a role to the extent that employers were reluctant to cut nominal wages even in the period from late 2008 to early 2009, when they were eliminating jobs in staggering numbers. The secular labor market factors mentioned earlier are also likely relevant. There is, of course, also a debate around the question of how much of current unemployment--particularly long-term unemployment--is structural and thus how much slack still exists in labor markets. Last week Chair Yellen explained why substantial slack very likely remains. I would add to her explanation only the observation that, in the face of some uncertainty as to how best to measure slack, we are well advised to proceed pragmatically. We should remain attentive to evidence that labor markets have actually tightened to the point that there is demonstrable inflationary pressure that would place at risk maintenance of the FOMC's stated inflation target (which, of course, we are currently not meeting on the downside). But we should not rush to act preemptively in anticipation of such pressures based on arguments about the potential increase in structural unemployment in recent years. In this regard, the issue of how much structural damage has been suffered by the labor market is of less immediate concern today in shaping monetary policy than it might have been had we experienced a period of rapid growth during the recovery. Remember that, just a few years ago, many forecasters--in and out of the Federal Reserve--were projecting growth rates at an annualized rate of 4 percent or greater for at least a year. That expectation raised the question of whether a reasonably rapid tightening in monetary policy might at some point be needed. But now, in part because we did not have such a spike in the early stages of recovery and instead have had modest growth in place for several years, it seems less likely that we will experience a growth spurt in the next couple of years that would engender concerns about rapid wage pressures and changes in inflation expectations. The Importance of a National Investment Agenda In short, by promoting maximum employment in a stable inflation environment around the FOMC target rate, monetary policy can help set the stage for a vibrant and dynamic economy. But there are limits to what monetary policy can do in counteracting the longer-term trends I have discussed. In economic research and in policy debates, we need more focus on these issues and more attention to concrete proposals to address them. I would suggest that one element, though by no means the only one, in such a program is a well-formulated government investment agenda. A pro-investment policy agenda by the government could help address some of our nation's long-term challenges by promoting investment in human capital, particularly for those who have seen their share of the economic pie shrink, and by encouraging research and development and other capital investments that increase the productive capacity of the nation. There is already a well-known list of investments that have been shown to be successful. For instance, early childhood education can increase the educational attainment of children from low-income families as well as improve other outcomes. 16 In addition, recent innovations in job training programs, which more tightly link the training to the needs of employers in sectors of the economy with a demand for workers, have been shown to increase both the employment and wages of participants. 17 Investment in basic research by the federal government is another area in which greater investments could yield significant returns and in which a public policy role is warranted because of externalities. Econometric studies suggest that the rates of return to this type of investment can be very high. 18 And a range of policy commentators agree that there is a continuing role for government investment in infrastructure, including various forms of transportation, as a way to enhance productivity. Not too long ago, the American Society of Civil Engineers gave the United States a rating of D on its roads and bridges. Improving that system, both by doing necessary maintenance to maintain safety and functionality and by reducing congestion could yield substantial benefits. 19 This agenda might sound ambitious. In fact, spending in these areas is currently not a very large proportion of federal outlays. For example, the entire federal budget for nondefense research programs--including expenditures on health research, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the National Science Foundation--is only 2 percent of federal spending (or less than 0.4 percent of GDP), well below the share in the 1960s, when we last made a significant effort to advance our capacities in math and science during the era of space exploration. Moreover, spending in these areas has been the target of much of the budget restraint in recent years. Even in the area of physical infrastructure, we have fallen behind past efforts. After a surge associated with fiscal stimulus during the recent recession, public spending on infrastructure has tumbled, resulting in the slowest growth (1 percent) in the state and local capital stock since WWII. I certainly am not intending here to join the broader debate on fiscal policy, either short or longer term. But I do note that fiscal policymakers could promote the longer-term prospects of the nation by increased spending in areas that are likely to yield increases in living standards. The amount of increased investment spending that could reasonably be absorbed would be quite modest in comparison with the very large amounts associated with major fiscal issues such as health-care expenses. And even a strong investment agenda would not be a complete response to the economic challenges I have discussed. But, like monetary policy, it could play a useful role. Conclusion The longer-term challenges to the American economy that I have identified this evening are real. But I certainly do not regard a continuation of these trends as inevitable. On the contrary, the American economy is still possessed of great advantages and potential that, while always and necessarily evolving, have served us well over the years. 20 My principal aims this evening have been, first, to echo those who have been drawing attention to these challenges in recent years and, second, to encourage more discussion and debate of the specific policies that can best help us meet these challenges. As should be apparent in my remarks on monetary policy and an investment agenda, I believe that there are policies already developed and available to us that can contribute to this effort. My hope is that such policies will be pursued and that others, perhaps yet to be developed, will follow. 1. Stephanie Aaronson of the Board's staff contributed substantially to these remarks. Return to text 2. See, for example, Tyler Cowen (2011), The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better (New York: Dutton); Robert J. Gordon (2010), " Revisiting U.S. Productivity Growth over the Past Century with a View of the Future ," NBER Working Paper Series 15834 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March); and Robert J. Gordon (2012), " Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds ," NBER Working Paper Series 18315 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August). Return to text 3. See, for example, Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2011), Race Against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy (Lexington, Mass.: Digital Frontier Press); Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (New York: W.W. Norton & Company); and Martin Neil Baily, James Manyika, and Shalabh Gupta (2013), " U.S. Productivity Growth: An Optimistic Perspective ," International Productivity Monitor, no. 25 (Spring), pp. 3-12. See also Ben Bernanke (2013), " Economic Prospects for the Long Run ," speech delivered at Bard College at Simon's Rock, Great Barrington, Mass., May 18. Return to text 4. See, for example, David M. Byrne, Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel (2013), " Is the Information Technology Revolution Over? " International Productivity Monitor , no. 25 (Spring), pp. 20-36. Return to text 5. Joseph A. Schumpeter (1942), Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy (New York: Harper & Brothers). Return to text 6. See, for example, Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2001), "Aggregate Productivity Growth: Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence," in Edward Dean, Michael Harper, and Charles Hulten, eds., New Developments in Productivity Analysis (Chicago: University of Chicago Press); and Lucia Foster, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan (2006), " Market Selection, Reallocation, and Restructuring in the U.S. Retail Trade Sector in the 1990s ," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 88 (November), pp. 748-58. Return to text 7. For more information on the rate of cross-state migration, see Raven Molloy, Christopher L. Smith, and Abigail Wozniak (2013), " Declining Migration within the U.S.: The Role of the Labor Market ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-27 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September). Return to text 8. For additional details on the decline in labor market dynamism, see Henry R. Hyatt and James R. Spletzer (2013), " The Recent Decline in Employment Dynamics (PDF) ," Center for Economic Studies Working Paper Series 13-03 (Washington: U.S. Census Bureau, March). Return to text 9. This measure of income accounts for total compensation, including health benefits, and capital income, government transfers, and taxes while also adjusting for household size. See Congressional Budget Office (2011), Trends in the Distribution of Household Income between 1979 and 2007 (Washington: CBO, October). Return to text 10. This measure of income covers total compensation, including benefits, and adjusts for household size. See Congressional Budget Office, Trends in the Distribution of Household Income, in note 9. Return to text 11. For more information on this trend, see National Employment Law Project (2012), " The Low-Wage Recovery and Growing Inequality (PDF) ," data brief (New York: NELP, August). Return to text 12. The literature on the reasons for the rise in inequality is extensive, but one recent work that tries to address the issue is David H. Autor, David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013), " Untangling Trade and Technology: Evidence from Local Labor Markets ," NBER Working Paper Series 18938 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April). Return to text 13. For a discussion of mobility in income distribution, see Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez, and Nicholas Turner (2014), " Is the United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility ," NBER Working Paper Series 19844 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January). Return to text 14. For more information on intergenerational mobility, see Markus Jäntti, Bernt Bratsberg, Knut Røed, Oddbjørn Raaum, Robin Naylor, Eva Österbacka, Anders Björklund, and Tor Eriksson (2006), " American Exceptionalism in a New Light: A Comparison of Intergenerational Earnings Mobility in the Nordic Countries, the United Kingdom, and the United States (PDF) ," IZA Discussion Paper Series 1938 (Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor, January). Return to text 15. For details on the potential growth rate of the economy, see Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2013), " Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-77 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). Return to text 16. For more information on the effect of early childhood education, see James J. Heckman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Peter A. Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz (2010), " The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program ," Journal of Public Economics , vol. 94 (February), pp. 114-28; James Heckman, Rob Grunewald, and Arthur Reynolds (2006), "The Dollars and Cents of Investing Early: Cost-Benefit Analysis in Early Care and Education," Zero to Three , vol. 26 (July), pp. 10-17; and Elizabeth U. Cascio and Diane Schanzenbach (forthcoming), "The Impacts of Expanding Access to High-Quality Preschool Education," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Return to text 17. For a discussion of such rates of return, see, for example, Sheila Maguire, Joshua Freely, Carol Clymer, Maureen Conway, and Deena Schwartz (2010), Tuning in to Local Labor Markets: Findings from the Sectoral Employment Impact Study (Philadelphia: Public/Private Ventures ). Return to text 18. See Zvi Griliches (1992), " The Search for R&D Spillovers ," Scandinavian Journal of Economics , vol. 94 (Supplement), pp. S29-S47; and Charles I. Jones (2002), "Sources of U.S. Economic Growth in a World of Ideas," American Economic Review , vol. 92 (March), pp. 220-39. Return to text 19. For more details on the U.S. infrastructure, see American Society of Civil Engineers (2013), 2013 Report Card for America's Infrastructure (PDF) (Reston, Va.: ASCE); and Her Majesty's Treasury (2006), The Eddington Transport Study--The Case for Action: Sir Rod Eddington's Advice to Government (PDF) (London: Her Majesty's Stationery Office). Return to text 20. These advantages--such as the country's substantial natural resources, a stable but adaptive legal framework for economic activity, a dynamic labor market, and a fostering of entrepreneurship--have contributed to productivity growth that is estimated to have averaged about 2-1/4 percent over the past 140 years. See David M. Bryne, Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel (2013), " Is the Information Technology Revolution Over? " International Productivity Monitor , No. 25 (Spring), pp. 20-36. Return to text Last Update: April 09, 2014 Back to Top

Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Bank Structure Conference, Chicago, Illinois Share Among the questions posed by the organizers of this 50th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition is how the "regulatory-supervisory framework has fundamentally changed." I think one answer is that the aims and scope of prudential regulation have been fundamentally redefined since the financial crisis. Most significantly, a concern with financial stability and an increased emphasis on macroprudential regulation have informed major changes in both banking law and supervision. This salutary shift in perspective has important implications for prudential regulation. One is that prudential regulation must deal with threats to financial stability whether or not those threats emanate from traditional banking organizations. Hence the need to broaden the perimeter of prudential regulation, both to certain nonbank financial institutions and to certain activities by all financial actors. A second implication--to which I will devote most of my remarks this morning--is that the aims of prudential regulation for traditional banking organizations should vary according to the size, scope, and range of activities of the organizations. By specifying these aims with more precision, we can shape both a more effective regulatory system and a more efficient one. That is, once we have specified the regulatory aims for a particular type of financial institution, we can more effectively rationalize and, as appropriate, differentiate the rules and requirements to be applied to each kind of institution. The Legacy of a Unitary Approach to Bank Regulation When I was teaching banking law prior to my appointment to the Board of Governors, I noticed an interesting disconnect in the best casebooks in the field. An introductory chapter on the history and purposes of bank regulation revealed a complicated set of issues concerning changes in the structure and activities of banks, which, among other things, suggested that the rationales for regulating banks might vary depending on the size, business model, and affiliations of a bank. Yet the remaining chapters of the casebooks treated bank regulation as a more or less unitary endeavor--with prudential rules applicable in about the same way to the activities and affiliations of all banking organizations, and only to banking organizations. To be sure, topics such as bank affiliations with nonbank financial institutions were, for practical reasons, more focused on larger banks. And there were a few measures directed at the more complicated balance sheets of larger banks, such as the Basel II internal ratings-based (IRB) approach to regulatory capital, although there was no evidence the underlying purpose of capital regulation differed. But in all the chapters elaborating applicable doctrine and rules, there was little hint that the purposes and principles of bank regulation might vary across the bank population. And, to the extent that nonbank financial institutions such as broker-dealers, investment companies, or insurance companies were covered, the pedagogical point seemed to be that the aims of regulating these kinds of firms were dominantly investor and customer protection--not prudential considerations such as limiting moral hazard, much less fostering financial stability. The reason for this disconnect was, to a great extent, that pre-crisis statutes and regulations reflected what I have termed a unitary approach to banking regulation. The core of banking regulation could be explained with a relatively simple narrative, by which deposit insurance and access to the discount window had been granted to depository institutions in order to forestall runs and panics. The resulting moral hazard and the use of insured deposits as a funding source for these institutions justified everything from capital requirements to limitations on banks getting into nonbanking businesses. Even when traditional banks were permitted to affiliate with other kinds of financial firms, laws such as the Bank Holding Company Act 1 and section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act 2 were oriented mostly toward protecting the insured depository institution and the federal deposit insurance fund (DIF) from possible depredation by those nonbank businesses. The activities of broker-dealers, for example, were relevant to prudential regulation only insofar as they affected an affiliated depository institution. Of course, banking law had not only tried to protect the DIF from the risky activities of banks and their affiliates. It had also, albeit far less explicitly, tried to protect banks from nonbank competition and, to some degree, from each other. 3 Just as banks were supposed to stick to their knitting--the business of banking--so everyone else was supposed to stay out of that business. But as we all know, the distinction between demand for commercial bank loans and for investment bank underwriting of public debt issuance was never absolute, and in the 1970s it began to erode more rapidly with the growth of capital markets and financial innovations such as money market funds. The financial crisis has confirmed that the pre-crisis regulatory structure reflected a view of the financial system that was at once too broad and too narrow. It was too broad in that prudential rules generally applied to all banks and bank holding companies through a microprudential approach focused on the soundness of each individual bank. The rules were implemented somewhat differently, based on the size and relative complexity of banking organizations, and separate supervisory portfolios were created. But the principles informing regulation were basically the same whether the institution was a community bank or a holding company with a $1 trillion balance sheet whose failure might shake the entire financial system. The prudential regulatory structure was too narrow in that it did not extend to firms and activities outside of banking organizations, even those that could pose a threat to financial stability, because the soundness of the federal deposit insurance system was not implicated. Thus Lehman Brothers, whose failure did seriously shake the financial system, was not subject to even the microprudential standards applicable to bank holding companies. The run on the repo market involved a wide range of market actors of different sizes, operating under different regulatory constraints. Redefining Prudential Regulation It is important to recognize that the statutory and administrative changes in regulation following the financial crisis were not only about strengthening existing regulation following 30 years of largely deregulatory measures that had preceded the crisis. The turmoil that attended the collapse of several large nonbank financial institutions, and the extraordinary government measures necessary to contain that turmoil, had quickly changed into a consensus--previously the minority view--that prudential regulation should be broadened to better safeguard the financial system as a whole. This perspective was embraced by Congress in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank), which directed federal banking and market regulators to add to their existing mandates the responsibility for protecting financial stability. Dodd-Frank provided numerous new authorities for executing this new mission. One regulatory innovation in Dodd-Frank that is particularly salient for present purposes was the creation of different categories of banking organizations--largely, but not exclusively, on the basis of total assets--to which different regulatory requirements are to apply. Most prominently, section 165 requires that "in order to prevent or mitigate risks to the financial stability of the United States," the Federal Reserve Board is to establish for all bank holding companies with at least $50 billion in assets prudential standards that "are more stringent" than generally applicable standards and that "increase in stringency" based on a variety of factors related to the systemic importance of these institutions. 4 These standards must cover capital, liquidity, risk management, resolution planning, and concentration limits; the Federal Reserve may add other standards as it finds appropriate. 5 Section 165 also establishes requirements for the establishment of a risk committee and for stress testing, but these are applicable in at least some respects to all bank holding companies with at least $10 billion in assets. In implementing the section 165 requirement of increasing stringency for enhanced prudential standards applicable to banking organizations of increasing systemic importance, the Federal Reserve has essentially created several categories within the universe of banking organizations with $50 billion or more in assets. All firms in this universe will be subject to the basic enhanced standards, including supervisory stress tests, capital plan submissions, resolution plan requirements, single counterparty credit limits, and a modified form of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) requirement that was part of Basel III. Firms with at least $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign assets are also subject to the advanced approach risk-based capital requirements of Basel II, the Basel III supplementary leverage ratio, the full LCR requirement, and the countercyclical capital buffer provision of Basel III. 6 The eight U.S. firms designated as global systemically important banks will be additionally subject to risk-based capital surcharges, the enhanced Basel III supplementary leverage ratio, tighter single counterparty credit limits, and a long-term debt requirement designed to support the effectiveness of orderly resolution processes. In addition, the supervision of these firms is overseen by the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC), an inter-disciplinary group created by the Federal Reserve Board in 2010. 7 Thus, there are regulatory categories for banks with $10 billion or more in assets, with $50 billion in assets, with either $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in foreign assets, and with a combination of large asset holdings and other characteristics that have resulted in their being designated of global systemic importance. In fact, Dodd-Frank creates another category of banks in making its provision on incentive compensation applicable to banking organizations with at least $1 billion in assets. Clearly, the unitary approach of the pre-crisis period has been abandoned. This is an important move in the right direction. But in terms of differentiating regulatory aims, Dodd-Frank really identifies only one additional objective--that of preventing or mitigating risks to U.S. financial stability. By developing this objective a bit more, and by introducing other salient considerations, we may be able to specify the varying aims of regulation for different kinds of banks in a manner that helps us rationalize applicable regulatory structures. Specifying Regulatory Aims Let me begin with what I regard as relatively straightforward cases in specifying regulatory aims--those of the very largest banking organizations and of small ones. The largest, of course, have commanded enormous attention, with too-big-to-fail concerns often dominating the public debate on regulatory reform in the aftermath of the financial crisis. There is now a consensus among banking authorities, both U.S. and foreign, that the failure of financial institutions of sufficient combined size, interconnectedness, and leverage could threaten the entire financial system, and, therefore, must be subject to a stricter regulatory regime. The special regulatory aims for such institutions should reflect this systemic focus. The very large negative externalities associated with such failures could be realized through a classic domino effect or through contagion effects. As the financial crisis showed, losses in a tail event are likely to be correlated for large firms deeply engaged in trading, structured products, and other capital market instruments, and relying on similar sources of short-term funding. Thus, the regulatory framework should aim to reduce the chances of distress or failure at such firms to a greater extent than traditional, microprudential regulation would. Moreover, it should explicitly take into account the correlations and inter-dependencies in asset holdings and funding. Finally, the regulatory system should aim to offset the perception of too-big-to-fail status, which carries with it the possibility of funding advantages in normal times, and protection of creditors and perhaps even shareholders in highly stressed times. The systemic perspective and consequent aim of protecting financial stability argue for the stronger and broader regulatory measures that have been undertaken in recent years. At the other end of the spectrum are community banks, conventionally defined as those with less than $10 billion in assets. The roughly 5,700 banks in this group constitute 98 percent of insured commercial banks in the United States, but hold just under 20 percent of the aggregate assets of all commercial banks. Indeed, 90 percent of community banks are what supervisors classify as "small" community banks--those with less than $1 billion in assets. While these banks will suffer the fallout from systemic problems, they are unlikely to cause such problems. The regulatory aim, therefore, is about as close as can be to the traditional microprudential bank regulatory aims of protecting the federal DIF and limiting the use of insured deposits by restricting the scope of bank activities. It is true that the relative lack of geographic and portfolio diversification in many community banks can make them vulnerable to localized economic problems. But that is just the kind of problem that traditional microprudential regulation has been concerned with addressing. What, then, of the 80 or so U.S. banks that have assets of $10 billion or more, but are not among the eight large, complex institutions that have been designated of global systemic importance? Obviously they vary enormously in size, from just over $10 billion in assets all the way up to very large regional banks with hundreds of billions in assets. They bridge the $50 billion threshold for enhanced prudential standards established by Dodd-Frank. Yet, whatever their size, most banking organizations in this group are overwhelmingly recognizable as traditional commercial banks (though a few do have significant capital market or other activities). It is with this similarity in mind that some executives of some pretty sizable banks have described their institutions to me as essentially a community bank, but with a bigger balance sheet. But there are at least two reasons why the aims for prudential regulation of such institutions might reach beyond conventional microprudential purposes. First, some at the higher end of this range may have a large enough systemic footprint that their stress or failure could have material effects on the rest of the financial system, though less than the LISCC firms. Second, more than one-third of U.S. commercial banking assets are held by these 80 banks. If a number of these banks simultaneously came under pressure or failed, a harmful contraction of credit availability in significant regions or sectors of the economy could ensue, even if there were little chance of a financial crisis. Thus, particularly to the degree that there are correlations in the risks associated with loans held across such institutions, there should be a macroprudential objective in the regulation of at least some of these firms. Of course, I would not lump all 80 of these institutions into the same category for purposes of specifying the aims of regulation. In particular, only a small fraction of these firms have a significant enough systemic footprint that their stress or failure would impose sizable negative externalities on the rest of the financial system. And the lines delineating the possible categories are not as easy to draw as for community banks and LISCC firms. Nonetheless, I will suggest in a few moments some possible classifications for this group of banks, along with examples of the varying regulations that might apply. Rationalizing the Regulatory Framework The preceding observations have portrayed the prudential regulatory framework as one that should be constructed with different aims in mind. With respect to all depository institutions, this framework maintains the traditional aim of protecting the DIF and limiting the use of insured deposits to engage in nonbank activities. With respect to banks of a certain size--even those predominantly involved in conventional lending activities--a macroprudential aim should be added. Finally, with respect to banking organizations of such size and complexity that serious stress or failure could pose risks to the entire financial system, a financial stability aim should be the basis for additional forms of regulation. As suggested in section 165 of Dodd-Frank, the stringency of these additional regulations should increase in proportion to the systemic importance of the banking organizations. Let me now give a few examples of how specifying these aims can help us think through ways in which the current overlays of regulatory and supervisory requirements might be rationalized. In part, such a rationalization is motivated by the familiar goal of limiting regulatory costs that are not necessary to achieve a given set of regulatory aims, thereby lowering the cost of the underlying economic activity. But it is also motivated by the advantage to be gained if supervisory resources can be deployed where their payoff in achieving well-specified regulatory aims will be highest. Community banks. I will begin again with community banks. Community bankers often argue that they are subject to a range of rules and requirements that are not really necessary given the relevant regulatory aim which, as previously suggested, is quite straightforward. That regulatory aim needs to be implemented with an eye to the context in which community banks operate. One obvious point of context is that any regulatory requirement is likely to be disproportionately costly for community banks, since the fixed costs associated with compliance must be spread over a smaller base of assets. A second important point of context is the business model of community banks. As is well-known, over the past few decades they have substantially reduced their presence in lines of business such as consumer lending in the face of competition from larger banks benefiting from economies of scale. Today, as a group, their most important forms of lending are to small- and medium-sized businesses. Smaller community banks--those with less than $1 billion in assets--account for nearly a quarter of commercial and industrial lending, and nearly 40 percent of commercial real estate lending, to small- and medium-sized businesses, despite their having less than 10 percent of total commercial banking assets. This state of affairs is not surprising when one considers that credit extension to smaller firms is an area in which the relationship lending model of community banks retains a comparative advantage. It means that community banks are of special significance to local economies. It also means that, particularly in rural areas, the disappearance of community banks could augur a permanent falloff in this kind of credit, at least a portion of which may not be maintained in the more standardized approach to lending characteristic of larger banks. Banking regulators have taken a number of steps to try to avoid unnecessary regulatory costs for community banks, such as fashioning simpler compliance requirements and identifying which provisions of new regulations are of relevance to smaller banks. But a number of new statutory provisions apply explicitly to some smaller banks or, by failing to exclude any banks from coverage, apply to all banks. This means that smaller banks do need to expend at least some compliance effort. And, even where regulatory frameworks try to place a lesser burden on smaller banks, there may be some risk of "supervisory trickle down," whereby supervisors informally, and perhaps not wholly intentionally, create compliance expectations for smaller banks that resemble expectations created for larger institutions. It would be worthwhile to have a policy discussion of statutes that might be amended explicitly to exclude community banks (which, again, are generally defined as those with less than $10 billion in assets) from their coverage. In my view, two candidates would be the Volcker rule and the incentive compensation requirements in section 956 of Dodd-Frank. The concerns addressed by these statutory provisions are substantially greater at larger institutions and, even where a practice at a smaller bank might raise concerns, the supervisory process remains available to address what would likely be unusual circumstances. Indeed, relieving both banks and supervisors of the need to focus on formal compliance with a range of regulations less relevant to community bank practice would free them to focus on the actual problems that may exist at smaller banks. Middle-range banks. As I have already suggested, financial stability and macroprudential aims do not apply equally to all 80 of the banks in this wide category of firms holding over $10 billion in assets, other than the LISCC banking organizations. While it is reasonable to adopt a macroprudential aim for all firms in this category, few of these banks have the kind of systemic footprint that would warrant extensive special regulation for financial stability purposes. In establishing requirements for firm (though not supervisory) stress testing and risk-management committees for all bank holding companies in this group, but mandating that only bank holding companies of $50 billion or more be subject to enhanced prudential standards, Congress has reflected a similar judgment. The key question is whether $50 billion is the right line to have drawn. Experience to date suggests to me, at least, that the line might better be drawn at a higher asset level--$100 billion, perhaps. Requirements such as resolution planning and the quite elaborate requirements of our supervisory stress testing process do not seem to me to be necessary for banks between $50 billion and $100 billion in assets. If the line were redrawn at a higher figure, we might explore simpler methods for promoting macroprudential aims with respect to banks above $10 billion in assets but below the new threshold. Were such a change to be adopted, bank holding companies with less than $100 billion in assets would not be subject to any of the enhanced prudential requirements of section 165 of Dodd-Frank; bank holding companies with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion would be subject to supervisory stress testing and a basic set of the section 165 requirements; and holding companies with $250 billion or more in assets would be subject to the supplementary leverage ratio, the full LCR, and the countercyclical capital buffer provision. Of course, this is not the only way to draw the lines, and there could be reasons for applying additional requirements to specific banks, even if they fall below the presumptive asset threshold. But I use this example to illustrate how the specification of aims and the progressive stringency of section 165 could be usefully combined. Largest institutions. Specifying prudential regulatory aims in the context of community and middle-range banks suggests a rationalization that could possibly eliminate certain requirements as they apply to some of these banks. In the case of the LISCC institutions, however, I believe there are additional requirements needed to implement prudential aims associated with financial stability. These include capital surcharges and minimum amounts of "gone concern" loss absorbing capacity, among others. Most important is continued work on the vulnerabilities posed by short-term wholesale funding and, more generally, by large trading books, including maturity matched books of securities financing transactions. The regulatory response to these vulnerabilities will likely require some combination of measures directed at capital, liquidity requirements, and resolution procedures. There is also a need for a complementary set of measures such as minimum margining requirements applicable to all securities financing transactions, whether or not they involve systemically important firms. But there are some opportunities for rationalization even with respect to regulation of the larger institutions. While necessary new rules will now be applied to these institutions, vestiges of the pre-crisis regulatory approach that did not rest on well-specified regulatory aims are still in place and might sensibly be modified or removed. Most prominent in this regard is the Basel II IRB approach for risk-weighted capital requirements. The IRB approach, which generally applies in the United States to all bank holding companies with $250 billion or more in assets, was developed a decade ago in an effort to align risk weightings more closely to the increasingly sophisticated quantitative risk-assessment techniques in the financial industry. At the time of its development, the IRB approach seemed intended to result in a modest decline in risk-weighted capital requirements, a goal that the financial crisis revealed to be badly misguided. But even with the higher capital ratios required by Basel III, the IRB approach is problematic. The combined complexity and opacity of risk weights generated by each banking organization for purposes of its regulatory capital requirement create manifold risks of gaming, mistake, and monitoring difficulty. The IRB approach contributes little to market understanding of large banks' balance sheets, and thus fails to strengthen market discipline. And the relatively short, backward-looking basis for generating risk weights makes the resulting capital standards likely to be excessively pro-cyclical and insufficiently sensitive to tail risk. That is, the IRB approach--for all its complexity and expense--does not do a very good job of advancing the financial stability and macroprudential aims of prudential regulation. Yet a capital measure that incorporates these aims is precisely what is needed to complement the traditional microprudential elements of our capital standards. The supervisory stress tests developed by the Federal Reserve over the past five years provide a much better risk-sensitive basis for setting minimum capital requirements. They do not rely on firms' own loss estimates. They are based on adverse scenarios that would affect the entire economy and take correlated asset holdings into account. As we gain experience, we have been enhancing the macroprudential features of the annual stress test exercise. And, of course, the disclosure of the results helps inform counterparties and investors, thereby increasing market discipline. They are undoubtedly a substantial amount of work for both the banks and supervisors but, unlike the IRB approach, the benefits seem worth the work. 8 For all these reasons, I believe we should consider discarding the IRB approach to risk-weighted capital requirements. With the Collins Amendment 9 providing a standardized, statutory floor for risk-based capital; the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio providing a stronger back-up capital measure; and the stress tests providing a better risk-sensitive measure that incorporates a macroprudential dimension, the IRB approach has little useful role to play. We would continue to expect that firms practice sound quantitative risk management using internal models and other techniques. Indeed, the qualitative assessment included in our annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) exercise is designed to ensure that the firms have this capacity. But, in light of all that has happened in the last decade, I see little reason to maintain the requirements of the IRB approach for our largest banks. Of course, the IRB approach was agreed internationally as part of the Basel II framework concluded in 2004. It would be best if all the Basel Committee countries moved together to adopt standardized risk-weighted and supervisory stress testing requirements for all internationally active banks. This would be a somewhat complicated shift for a number of reasons, including the likely appropriateness of applying different adverse scenarios for different parts of the world and the challenges in conducting a peer review at the Basel Committee of supervisory stress tests by member countries. Yet, as documented by the Basel Committee's work on divergence in risk weightings by banks applying IRB methods, Basel II created its own problems of consistency and transparency. There is no reason to believe that the task of creating an oversight and review framework for supervisory stress testing would be any more difficult. Conclusion In practical terms, the unitary approach to banking regulation has been supplanted by various statutory, regulatory, and supervisory responses to the financial crisis. In particular, the aim of protecting financial stability has figured prominently in those responses, though a broader macroprudential aim can be detected as well. I have tried today to suggest that an explicit effort to specify relevant aims as they pertain to different kinds of banking organizations can provide a basis for rationalizing applicable regulatory frameworks--sometimes by paring back or foregoing regulation for certain kinds of firms, and sometimes by adding a regulatory measure where the relevant aim has not been adequately promoted by existing measures. By design and necessity, I have offered only a handful of illustrations as to how this perspective might lead to certain regulatory changes. I look forward to debate on the merits of these, and other, possible implications of a more precise specification of prudential regulatory aims. I also look forward to seeing new editions of banking law casebooks that differentiate regulatory measures with an eye to these multiple aims and their differential application to various banking organizations. 1. Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, 12 U.S.C. §§1841-1850. Return to text 2. 12 U.S.C. §371c. Section 23A limits transactions between insured depository institutions and their corporate affiliates. Return to text 3. For example, restrictions on branching across state lines and, in some cases, within states limited competition significantly until they were loosened through statutory changes, such as the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking & Branching Efficiency Act, P.L. 103-328 (1994). Return to text 4. Section 165 of Dodd-Frank also requires that these special prudential standards apply to any nonbank financial company designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. Return to text 5. Dodd-Frank also uses the $50 billion threshold in other parts of the law, such as to define the universe of firms that must pay the Federal Reserve for the cost of examination and supervision, and that are subject to ex post assessments in the event that taxpayers were to bear any loss as a result of the resolution of a firm under Title II of the law. Return to text 6. The $250 billion/$10 billion threshold does not appear in Dodd-Frank. It was a pre-existing regulatory category created to identify the firms subject to the so-called advanced approaches risk-based capital requirements of Basel II. Return to text 7. For more on LISCC, including which firms are part of the LISCC portfolio, see www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm . Return to text 8. Under the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review program, bank holding companies participating in the supervisory stress tests must demonstrate their capacity for sound quantitative risk assessment and management, but not for purposes of setting regulatory capital requirements. Return to text 9. Section 171 of Dodd-Frank, popularly known as the Collins Amendment, requires that the federal banking agencies establish minimum consolidated capital requirements for all banking organizations that are not less than "generally applicable" risk-based capital requirements. Return to text Last Update: May 08, 2014 Back to Top
