May 8, 2012 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Swiss National Bank-International Monetary Fund Conference, Zurich, Switzerland As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today. As I see it, the complex interconnections that exist between the real and financial sectors of the economy, both within and between countries, have important implications for both macroeconomic and regulatory policy. In particular, cross-border coordination in both realms is warranted. Often, macroeconomic and regulatory policies are too narrow in their focus. At times, policies are designed with the goal of being “best” at the national level. Yet the resulting mix of national policies is distinctly inferior to what a well-coordinated global regime could have produced. Today I will discuss two important challenges that go along with living in an interconnected world. The first is how to define what aspects of macroeconomic policy or regulation require greater international coordination and harmonization. Some issues can be handled effectively at a national level, but the crisis has demonstrated clearly that many can not. The second challenge is how to make international coordination workable so that progress can be made in a timely manner while still preserving sufficient autonomy for countries to fashion policies to suit their particular idiosyncratic structures. As always, my remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. We live in a globalized economy in which the flows of products, capital, and ideas across borders have led to significant economic gains for literally hundreds of millions of people around the world. Thus, there is a strong public interest in ensuring that this global economic integration is supported by a coherent set of coordinated national macroeconomic policies and a harmonized international regulatory regime. This applies to the policy actions we undertake to reduce economic imbalances as well as to the regulations we develop to address the vulnerabilities in our financial system that were exposed by the crisis. The better we are able to develop cooperative global solutions to these types of issues, the more successful we will be in creating a sounder and more sustainable global economy and financial system. It is clear that there were important imbalances in both economic and financial activity in the years preceding the financial crisis. For example, in the U.S., too much of economic activity was based on an unsustainable housing boom. The turmoil in financial markets that was unleashed when the boom collapsed subsequently forced the U.S. and other countries to undergo significant adjustments. These adjustments were often sudden. They transmitted large shocks across the global economy. These shocks, in turn, necessitated other adjustments in trade, investment, and in financial markets elsewhere. More generally, we know that the global economy operates under an important constraint—the sum of trade balances around the world, properly measured, must add up to zero. When one country follows policies that are designed to increase exports, there must be an offsetting adjustment elsewhere—either higher imports or fewer exports by another country. Similarly, there is the same adding up constraint in terms of the financial flows that accompany trade and investment on the capital account—current account balances around the world—again properly measured—must add up to zero. What this means in practical terms is that the outcomes for economic activity and capital flows for any individual country depend not only on the public policy and private decisions made within that country, but also on policies and mix of activities pursued in other countries. For example, for Germany to have a large trade surplus with the rest of Europe, other European countries must run trade deficits. And if Germany runs such surpluses it must accumulate large financial claims on the other countries. Or, if the U.S. has an unsustainably high level of consumption, the adjustment to a lower, more sustainable level must be offset by greater investment and exports if the U.S. economy is to be able to operate close to full employment. The fact that it takes (at least) two to tango to make these types of adjustments is just another way of saying that our economies are interconnected. In order for the U.S. to reduce its dependence on consumption and to increase its exports, there need to be offsetting adjustments in other countries, such as China. Thus, the key issue to consider in crafting internationally coordinated macroeconomic policy is not whether these adjustments will ultimately take place. They will take place because they have to take place. Instead, the issue for policymakers is whether the policies we put in place will allow adjustments to occur in a way that is consistent with a stable global economy, high levels of employment, and low inflation. At times, the situation is akin to the Prisoner’s Dilemma—a non-cooperative approach will lead to inferior results for both players compared to a cooperative approach in which each side foregoes the chance for highest potential payoff in exchange for the payoff that maximizes returns jointly. But effective cooperation that leads to higher joint returns is difficult in this game because of the complexity of the inter-linkages and the political and institutional constraints that constrain the scope for action at the national level. In macroeconomic terms, the prospects for achieving a more cooperative solution can be enhanced by policy transparency so that the policy goals and reaction function of each authority can be well understood by others. This again applies both within and across countries. For example, the Federal Reserve is making efforts to provide greater clarity about its inflation objective in the context of the dual mandate. In doing so, the Fed is also continuing to underscore that actions such as our purchase of U.S. government securities are driven exclusively by our monetary policy goals, and that these policy actions will not continue beyond the moment they become inconsistent with our dual mandate objectives. In general, policymakers should strive to ensure that we have both fiscal and monetary policy frameworks that are transparent and viewed as credible and durable. Interconnectedness means that events—be it the tragedy of a Japanese earthquake and tsunami, a revolution in Libya, or a financial crisis sparked by a housing boom and bust in the United States—can be transmitted to domestic economies located far away from the initial source of shock, often at market-speed measured in milliseconds. This interconnectedness underscores our common interest in cooperating not just to facilitate needed economic adjustments, but also to address fragilities in our interconnected global financial system. I think coordination on regulatory matters differs from on macroeconomic issues in two important respects. First, the benefits to cooperation and coordination on certain aspects of regulation seem easier to identify up front. Second, while policy coordination on regulatory issues is also very challenging, it may not be quite as difficult as in the macroeconomic realm. The stakeholders are not typically as numerous or diffuse, the problems are generally easier to identify, the gains from a cooperative solution are more obvious, and the cooperative solutions themselves may be easier to implement. On the regulatory side, I’ll start with a few broad observations. First, it is essential that regulations be harmonized internationally to a much greater degree than in the past. This will ensure there is a common minimum level of standards, which in turn will help discourage regulatory arbitrage and a “race to the bottom”. Second, it is critical that the harmonized regulations produce something that is coherent and effective on an international level, and that the different regimes in specific jurisdictions add up to a workable whole. Third, regulatory harmonization and cooperation, by necessity requires trust and a willingness to share relevant information across jurisdictions. A corollary to this is that national regulators need to be willing to constrain their unilateral actions somewhat in order to facilitate engagement and cooperative solutions on a global basis. In this respect, I think there are two areas where considerable progress has been made since the crisis—the capital regulation of globally active banking organizations and the establishment of global standards for financial market infrastructures. The first initiative is designed to ensure that globally active firms have sufficient capital to keep their risk of failure very low. The second initiative is designed to strengthen the financial market infrastructure so that if a large globally systemic firm were to fail, this event would not threaten to bring down the entire financial system. But even in these areas there still is much to do. With respect to Basel III, it is important that the regime be implemented on a consistent basis around the world. In particular, the definitions of capital must not be watered down and risk-weighted asset calculations must be done in a consistent manner around the world. An identical portfolio of assets should generate a comparable amount of risk-weighted assets regardless of the country in which the bank’s home office is domiciled. With respect to standards for financial market infrastructures, the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures, which were published last month, are an important step forward. These principles establish the minimum standard for important FMIs around the world. But the establishment of these standards is just the first step. National authorities now need to ensure that their domestic regulatory regimes embody these principles, and these national regimes have to be credibly assessed for ongoing conformance to the new standards. Global standards for financial market infrastructures are necessary if we are to build a safe global system of central counterparty clearinghouse (CCPs) infrastructures though which to clear standardized over-the-counter derivatives trades around the world. For national regulators to be comfortable with such an arrangement there has to be an appropriate level of information exchange and cooperative oversight, and the Principles explicitly mandate this. Although cross-border information exchange and cooperative oversight are certainly not new—the coordination of currency settlement around the world through CLS is one important example—the model has to be further developed and adopted more broadly across a wider range of important global financial market infrastructures. How we proceed from here will be critical to our success in building a global financial system that is both stable and efficient. By facilitating the greatest netting down of risk, global CCPs through which all standardized OTC derivatives trades would be cleared, hold out the potential for the greatest amount of risk reduction and, thus, improvement in financial stability. But, for that outcome to occur, there needs to be a global oversight framework that ensures that the CCPs are held to global standards—not just in theory, but also in practice. There are other areas where we face significant challenges in effective global information exchange and regulatory cooperation. We have much more to do to develop resolution regimes for globally systemic financial institutions, including establishing the rules of the game for the exchange of supervisory data for such firms, in clearly identifying ex ante the responsibilities of home and host countries in terms of potential liquidity support, and in overseeing the orderly wind-downs of such firms when they encounter difficulties. The exchange of supervisory information is important both for understanding the consolidated condition of a bank that operates in a host country, and for gaining insights into broader financial stability issues. For example, giving supervisors in host countries improved access to consolidated balance sheet information for foreign firms operating in their jurisdiction would allow for a more accurate assessment of a firm’s liquidity position and funding plans. Another area where there needs to be greater international cooperation is in defining the roles of home and host countries especially during times of stress. What is the responsibility, for example, of the host country to provide lender-of–last- resort liquidity to foreign firms operating in their jurisdiction? At what stage, if any, does that responsibility shift to home country? Should these responsibilities change depending on the degree of information exchange or the degree or duration of stress? On the resolution front, we know that the benefits of a harmonized global regime would be substantial. By providing greater transparency to investors and depositors about the rules of the game in the event of distress, such a regime would likely reduce the likelihood of runs and financial panics while also allowing financial intermediation to occur on a global basis. However, it is proving challenging for some jurisdictions to provide clarity around how an orderly resolution would be implemented in practice. At the same time, this lack of clarity within jurisdictions is contributing to and exacerbated by the lack of a harmonized approach across different legal and regulatory regimes. Many questions must be answered: How would different creditor and counterparty claims be treated? Who would provide the bridge financing to facilitate the orderly liquidation? Would the home country regime ensure equal treatment of all banks’ claims around the world, regardless of jurisdiction or legal entity? Would there be clarity about this, ex ante? If an effective global resolution regime with clearly defined ex ante characteristics were to turn out to be a bridge too far, national authorities may have to fall back on a subsidiarization model, in which global firms would have to establish subsidiaries on a country-by-country basis each with their own capital and liquidity buffers. Such a regime would require greater capital and liquidity as the banks would lose the significant risk diversification benefits gained from operating in many different countries. Such a regime would also presumably make it more difficult for these firms to provide financial services seamlessly to multinational corporations, global asset managers, and others that operate on an international basis. Even in this scenario, however, it would be important to ensure that national resolution regimes could interact with each other in a coherent manner. To sum up, my view is that we live in a globalized world both with respect to the macro-economy and the financial system. But too often we set macroeconomic policy and regulatory policy at a national level, and miss important opportunities to coordinate and make the global economic and financial system stronger overall. We need to understand where greater global perspective is required and we need to apply that perspective consistently across jurisdictions in a timely manner. If we don’t do this, we won’t achieve all the benefits that are possible from global specialization and we will continue to run significant risks with respect to financial stability. Thank you for your kind attention. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 24, 2012 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations, New York City As prepared for delivery It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today. My remarks will focus on how I think about monetary policy in today’s challenging economic environment. As part of this, I will discuss how simple policy rules might appropriately be used as a guide to decisionmaking. I do this not because policy rules play a dominant role in my own thinking, but because the use of these tools is widespread, with many framing their arguments this way. To start with the punch line, although I believe simple policy rules can provide useful input into the policymaking process, it would be unwise to rely on them mechanically. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. Policy must strive to promote the dual mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability given to the Federal Reserve by Congress. I believe that this should be done in a transparent and systematic manner because this will help us to achieve our objectives. In particular, a well-articulated framework for policy that explains our goals and how we use our tools to promote these goals helps market participants, businesses, and workers to anticipate how the Federal Reserve will respond under different circumstances and plan accordingly. 1 This helps to anchor private sector expectations in ways that make it easier to achieve the dual mandate objectives. In contrast, if we acted in an unpredictable way, policy would be ineffective at anchoring expectations and this shortcoming would disrupt the transmission of the monetary policy impulse to the real economy. Over the years, this logic has led the Federal Reserve to become increasingly transparent and systematic in its decisionmaking. 2 In January, the Federal Open Market Committee took another important step in this direction, endorsing a public statement of longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy. This document articulated a 2 percent inflation o bjective and committed the FOMC to a “balanced approach” with respect to promoting the dual mandate objectives. For me, the key issue is how to interpret these principles and put them into practice. I interpret the strategy document as expressing a relatively straightforward proposition: The Fed should seek the policy setting that generates the best achievable path back to full employment and price stability following shocks that push us away from either of our objectives. I regard the policymaking process as a systematic effort to investigate what policy setting would deliver the best achievable set of economic outcomes, 3 taking into consideration all available information, including risks not fully summarized in the base case point forecasts. Our approach is not greatly different from those of central banks that operate inflation targeting regimes, but in our case we explicitly seek to promote both aspects of our dual mandate. 4 The basic question is how the FOMC should implement monetary policy to best push the economy back to its dual objectives. Prescriptions from simple policy rules such as Taylor Rules, named after Stanford economist John Taylor, have a legitimate role to play in this evaluation as do more complex simulations such as optimal control rules. In a Taylor Rule, the nominal federal funds rate depends on the equilibrium or neutral real short-term rate of interest, the deviation of the level of economic activity from estimates of the level of activity that would be consistent with long-run price stability, and the deviation of inflation from the central bank’s target. 5 The Taylor Rule formulation has a number of characteristics that make it a useful input into the policy-setting process. First, it very explicitly focuses on the two parameters—the long-term inflation objective and the level of potential output consistent with that objective—that map directly to the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate objectives. Second, standard Taylor Rules are self-equilibrating. They respond to economic shocks and forecast errors in a way that pushes the economy back toward the central bank’s objectives. Third, academic research shows that Taylor-type rules typically perform quite well across a wide range of economic models. This is important because we want rules that are robust; that is, not overly sensitive to model-specific assumptions about how the economy performs or how households and businesses alter their expectations and behavior in response to changes in monetary policy. Fourth, with respect to the United States, the most popular versions of the Taylor Rule approximate how policy has evolved since the late 1980s—a period in which the Federal Reserve has been successful in keeping inflation in check (Figure 1) . This suggests that policymakers, faced with the economic conditions of that period, weighted deviations from their goals in a manner similar to the weights used in these versions of the Taylor Rule. Despite these attractive features, I do not believe that simple policy rules can take the place of in-depth analysis of economic conditions, evaluation of alternative policy plans, and ultimately policy judgment. While simple policy rules provide useful information to policymakers, their very virtue—simplicity—means they cannot capture all information that is relevant for policymaking. For example, such rules cannot easily incorporate asymmetric risks or financial stability issues. Moreover, the usefulness of simple policy rules depends critically on the stability of the relationship between monetary policy and economic outcomes. If the relationship between monetary policy and the real economy were stable over time, following a relatively simple and unchanging policy rule would likely generate acceptable results. However, if the linkage between monetary policy and the real economy is more variable, as I believe it is, then an approach that is more pragmatic and updates the policy setting in a clear and systematic manner based upon what the FOMC learns over time will be more effective. In particular, a simple policy rule can generate poor macroeconomic outcomes when either the structure of the economy or the transmission mechanism of monetary policy changes in a significant way (whether the change is temporary or permanent). If private sector economic agents—workers, businesses, investors— thought we would implement a particular policy rule regardless of changes of these kinds, policy would not be effective at stabilizing private sector expectations in ways that promote the dual mandate objectives. This is particularly relevant in the unusual environment that we find ourselves in—the aftermath of a housing bust and a financial crisis. In the current context, there is an additional complication that is extremely important. Simple policy rules implicitly assume that monetary policy is unconstrained and that the Fed can always achieve the federal funds rate policy setting the rule proposes—even if it is negative. By extension, they also assume that it is as easy to ease policy as it is to tighten policy if certain risks materialize. In practice this is not the case. Because our traditional tool, the federal funds rate, is already at its effective zero lower bound, we may want to react differently to a given economic outlook and set of risks than we would if policy were unconstrained. We are certainly not completely constrained: we have additional tools such as the balance sheet and forward policy guidance that we can use to provide additional monetary policy stimulus. But these tools have costs as well as benefits. Moreover, we can only imperfectly translate the impact of these policy instruments into interest rate equivalents for the purposes of evaluation using simple rules. So for many reasons, I focus my attention primarily on how we are progressing and expect to progress relative to our dual mandate objectives. In this context, simple policy rules are an input, but my judgment also is informed by the economic environment and what we learn about the responsiveness of the economy to monetary policy. Nevertheless, it is possible to translate my assessments into a language that would be more familiar to those who think in terms of a Taylor-type rule. Recall that in a Taylor Rule framework, five major parameters can be adjusted: The inflation objective and the estimated output gap. Different weights can be placed on deviations of output relative to its potential and inflation relative to the Fed’s objective. The estimate for the neutral real short-term rate of interest. Thus, while the Taylor Rule generally is viewed as a fixed formula, its underlying framework is sufficiently flexible that such a rule could be modified to reflect certain types of new information. What values should we use? In the United States, the inflation objective is well specified—a 2 percent annual rate for the personal consumption expenditures deflator. 6 The FOMC has formally committed itself to this objective. In contrast, there is disagreement among FOMC participants about how far the U.S. economy is operating from potential. Our staff forecast at the New York Federal Reserve estimates that the long-term unemployment rate is about 5 percent. The central tendency in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections is a bit higher at 5.2 percent to 6.0 percent, but the degree of dispersion is not particularly wide. More difficult is the judgment about what weights to put on deviations of output from potential versus deviations in expected inflation from the Fed’s inflation target. This will differ among policymakers based on their views about the costs of deviations from the dual objectives and the structure of the economy. This debate can be summed up by looking at the two most well-known versions of the Taylor Rule—the original version put forward by Mr. Taylor, which is commonly referred to as Taylor 1993, and a later version updated by other economists that Mr. Taylor has discussed but does not endorse, which is referred to as Taylor 1999. 7 Taylor 1999 puts more weight on deviations of output from potential than Taylor 1993. Thus, Taylor 1999 would lead to a later liftoff of the federal funds rate as the economy returns to full employment. Which set of weights is better is a matter of judgment. John Taylor prefers Taylor 1993. My own thinking, when translated into Taylor Rule terms, favors the weights in the Taylor 1999 formulation. I believe that Taylor 1999 is likely to perform better in achieving the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate objectives. Compared with Taylor 1993 it can achieve significantly greater stability in employment without sacrificing the medium-term inflation objective or significantly increasing the variability of inflation outcomes. Finally, the remaining parameter in the Taylor Rule is the neutral, real short-term interest rate. This is the interest rate adjusted for inflation that neither stimulates nor slows the economy. It is typically set at 2 percent. Although there is no reason why the neutral real rate cannot change over time, the 2 percent rate is typically plugged in without further attention. Whether this is appropriate is a critical question in today’s economic environment that I will return to a bit later. Let me now discuss the economic outlook, and examine some of the implications for monetary policy. In doing so I will look at results obtained by applying some variants of the Taylor Rule, and explain some of my concerns about using simple policy rules in a mechanical way for setting monetary policy. As I see it, the U.S. economy is continuing to slowly recover from the after-effects of the housing boom and bust and the financial crisis. But the recovery has been disappointing. Indeed, when we look back at economic forecasts made over the past three or four years it is notable that growth has systematically fallen short of both the Federal Reserve and private-sector forecasts. Despite what has been an unusually accommodative monetary policy by historical standards, the economy has grown at only a 2.1 percent pace over the last four quarters and the Blue Chip consensus forecast only anticipates a modest acceleration to a 2.4 percent rate over the next four quarters (Figure 2) . The headwinds retarding recovery are well known. Consumers have been deleveraging in response to the large losses in wealth generated in large part by the collapse in home prices. Housing activity remains depressed for many reasons. These include the large shadow inventory making its way through the foreclosure pipeline, tight underwriting standards for new mortgage origination, and the sharp slowdown in household formation. Although the corporate sector as a whole is now reasonably healthy, there still is a significant constraint on the availability of credit to small business. Fiscal policy has become restrictive as state and local governments have cut expenditures in response to revenue shortfalls; and the uncertainty about how Congress and the Administration will address the 2013 federal “fiscal cliff” is likely to inhibit hiring and investment by business. Global economic growth has slowed as European activity has stagnated and this is capping the demand for U.S. exports. On the brighter side, some of these headwinds appear to be subsiding. Employment growth has picked up somewhat (Figure 3) , which should eventually lead to faster household formation and more demand for housing. U.S. banks are healthier so that credit conditions, while still tight, are gradually easing. And, households appear quite far along in the deleveraging process by a number of important measures. For example, the ratio of household debt service relative to income is back to levels last seen in early 1990s (Figure 4) . For these reasons, I expect that growth will gradually strengthen over the next few years. Nevertheless, significant downside risks remain, especially those related to the challenges in Europe and how the potential “fiscal cliff” in the United States will be resolved after the fall elections. Even if these risks do not materialize, I anticipate only slow progress toward full employment. On the inflation side, in recent years our forecasts have been noticeably more accurate than on the growth side, and we have succeeded in delivering inflation very close to our 2 percent price stability objective. Through March, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures deflator, overall consumer prices have risen 2.1 percent over the past 12 months, and prices excluding food and energy have risen 2.0 percent (Figure 5) . But price trends have been a bit stickier than one might have anticipated given the large amount of slack in the economy. To some degree, this likely reflects the anchoring exerted by stable inflation expectations. But some of the price pressures can be attributed to other, more temporary, factors: Higher oil and gasoline prices and their pass-through into the costs of other goods and services. Upward pressure on imputed homeowners rents due to increased demand for rental housing. Higher import prices for goods, such as apparel. This reflects many factors including commodity prices pressures and higher wage inflation in countries such as China. Some of these upward pressures on inflation appear to be fading. Oil and gasoline prices have fallen in recent months. Apparel price inflation should gradually ease, given the sharp drop seen in cotton prices. Owners’ equivalent rent should also eventually stabilize as multi-family construction picks up and programs that shift real estate owned by banks to investors so they can be rented gear up. More generally, there are several reasons to think that inflation will remain moderate and close to our objective. First, and most obviously, the economy continues to operate with significant slack. Second, measures of underlying inflation show little upward pressure. In fact, one—the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Underlying Inflation Gauge—is turning down. This measure uses a very wide set of variables to forecast the underlying inflation trend (Figure 6) . Third, it is hard to be very concerned about inflation risks when the growth rate of nominal labor compensation is so low and stable. It is noteworthy to me that the employment cost index has risen only 2.1 percent over the past four quarters and has shown no acceleration (Figure 7) . Fourth, inflation expectations remain well-anchored (Figure 8) . This is critically important because inflation expectations are an important driver of actual inflation outcomes. Taking into account the current stance of monetary policy, I anticipate that inflation will decline to slightly below our 2 percent long-run objective over the next few years. So what does this all imply for monetary policy? I currently anticipate that the Federal Reserve’s federal funds rate target will remain exceptionally low—that is at the current level—at least through late 2014. This policy setting is more accommodative than the setting prescribed by the Taylor 1999 rule discussed earlier. 8 Using the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s current staff forecast, the Taylor 1999 rule—unadjusted for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet actions —implies liftoff in 2014. 9 But this is incomplete because it does not incorporate any adjustment for the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet actions. I estimate that the current balance sheet provides the equivalent of roughly 150 to 200 additional basis points of federal funds rate easing. 10 But as time passes, we will come closer to the date when the balance sheet will begin to be normalized. This implies that the amount of stimulus from the balance sheet will gradually lessen over time. Putting these adjustments into the Taylor 1999 formulation would pull the liftoff date to 2013 (Figure 9) . So, why do I believe the policy that promotes the best achievable path back to our dual mandate objectives should be more accommodative than that implied by Taylor 1999—adjusted or unadjusted? Taylor 1999, like other simple rules, does not take into account two key considerations: The likelihood that the relationship between monetary policy and the economy has changed significantly following the financial crisis. The need to apply a risk-management framework to policymaking at the zero bound. I don’t believe that the standard Taylor 1999 formulation is a good guide for policy right now because the neutral real rate assumption embedded in this rule of 2 percent simply doesn’t look plausible. This is important because the degree of stimulus depends not on the current policy setting but on the difference between the current level and the neutral level. For example, a short-term rate that appears highly stimulative under standard assumptions may in fact be much less so under alternative estimates of the neutral real rate. If the neutral real rate has fallen, as I believe it has, then the entire trajectory of short-term rates implied by Taylor 1999 shifts down and this pushes back the liftoff date implied by Taylor 1999 significantly. So how strong is the evidence that the neutral real rate has fallen significantly at least in the short term? First, and most importantly, if the neutral real rate were really 2 percent, then the U.S. economy should be growing faster 11 as monetary policy would be extraordinarily stimulative right now. But, if that is the case, then why do we see such a lackluster economic performance? Thomas Laubach and John Williams have devised a means of estimating how the equilibrium real interest rate varies over time based on how the economy has actually performed. The estimate generated by their model for the first quarter of 2012 is 0.3 percent. 12 Second, we can identify good reasons why the neutral real rate is depressed currently. The channels through which monetary policy stimulates the economy are weaker than normal right now. 13 Monetary policy works through its effect on financial conditions that influence economic activity. Thus, the linkage between the policy setting and the economy can be affected by changes in the relationships between policy and financial conditions or between financial conditions and the economy. Let’s consider the linkage between the policy setting and financial conditions first. In my view, the major components of financial conditions include: 1) the value of the equity market; 2) the level of real interest rates across the yield curve; 3) the level of credit spreads; 4) the availability of credit; and 5) the exchange value of the dollar. There are certainly others, but these are probably the most important ones. If we look at these financial indicators as a set, financial conditions do not appear to be unusually tight or easy in aggregate: For the equity market, the evidence is mixed (Figure 10) . On one hand, the equity risk premium actually appears to be quite elevated relative to historical levels and price/earnings ratios based on current year expected earnings are not unusually high. On the other hand, based on valuation measures using trailing 10-year earnings, the U.S. stock market valuation may be more stretched. For interest rates, conditions are accommodative. Real rates are unusually low (Figure 11) . For credit spreads, the level is well within normal ranges—neither as narrow as in 2005 or 2006 nor as wide as during 2008 and 2009 (Figure 12) . Although credit availability is improving, the sharp tightening that occurred in 2008 and 2009 has not fully reversed (Figure 13) . Credit availability remains unusually tight for certain sectors such as housing and small business. The exchange value of the dollar remains in the middle of a long-run channel showing a gentle decline (Figure 14) . Similarly, there is evidence that the linkage between financial conditions and economic activity is attenuated as well. The most obvious example of this is the housing sector. But the subdued overall rate of credit expansion for both households and the business sector is also noteworthy. This has occurred despite a monetary policy that would be judged on its face as one of the most stimulative in history. Finally, market expectations suggest that the equilibrium real rate of interest will remain depressed. To me, it is particularly noteworthy that the real forward interest rate expected 5 to 10 years in the future is currently only 0.3 percent. It has been moving lower recently and is far lower than at any time in recent memory (Figure 15) . While this pattern likely reflects in part a very low term premium, it may also be driven by an assessment that the equilibrium real rate has fallen and will remain unusually low for years. This evidence implies that current circumstances warrant the use of a significantly lower neutral real short-term rate in the Taylor Rule formulations. As economic conditions normalize, supported by accommodative monetary policy, the neutral interest rate presumably would gradually rise back toward its long run level over time. For example, adjusting Taylor 1999 for a zero percent neutral real rate that gradually normalizes over time would push liftoff beyond 2014 (Figure 16) . Risk management considerations also suggest that a more stimulative monetary policy than prescribed by Taylor 1999 is appropriate. In particular, simple policy rules implicitly treat the welfare losses generated by deviations from the central forecast path symmetrically. But I don’t believe that the potential losses are currently symmetric. In my view, the distribution of potential outcomes is currently skewed to the downside, reflecting risks posed by developments in Europe and the impending U.S. fiscal cliff. Moreover, the costs associated with such downside outcomes are likely to be considerably higher than the costs of realizing upside surprises. For example, consider two alternative scenarios: an economy that grows very quickly, but starting with some genuine spare capacity, versus an economy operating way below potential that stagnates, pushing the United States into a liquidity trap. In the first case, we have good tools with which to respond. As the economy moved closer to full employment, we could raise short-term interest rates and subsequently sell assets from our portfolio. By doing this, we would tighten financial conditions, slow the economy and ensure it remained on a path consistent with our dual mandate objectives. The losses to society from this scenario should not be very large, provided we act in a manner that keeps medium-term inflation expectations in check. But the losses to society may be very high in the second case. That is because—as Japan has discovered over the past two decades—once in a liquidity trap it is not easy to return to full employment and price stability. Pinned at the lower bound, we don’t have as good a set of tools as we would ordinarily have to push the economy back toward our dual mandate objectives. As a result of this asymmetry, we should give somewhat more weight to avoiding the liquidity trap outcome. Embedded within the traditional Taylor Rule formulations is the implicit return path back to full employment and price stability that the FOMC achieved in the past when faced with shocks that pushed economic activity below its potential level. 14 In the current economic cycle, I think it is apparent that the path back to the Fed’s dual mandate objectives has been much slower than the one that the FOMC found acceptable in the past. Growth has consistently been disappointing relative to both our own and consensus forecasts. Recent performance and forecasts relative to the dual mandate objectives suggest that standard rules calibrated in earlier times understate the degree of accommodation required to achieve the desired return path to the dual mandate objectives. We should focus on how fast we are moving toward our employment and inflation objectives, and be wary of the risks that we see around that path. If progress toward the mandate objectives is slower than desired, then this is telling us that monetary policy needs to be kept at a more accommodative setting for a longer time period than a standard rule would suggest. As downside risks continue to be present, the case for accommodation is even stronger. Given our forecast of stable prices and a still slow path back to full employment, there is an argument for easing further. But, unfortunately, our tools have costs associated with them as well as benefits. Thus, we must weigh these costs against the benefits of further action. As long as the U.S. economy continues to grow sufficiently fast to cut into the nation’s unused economic resources at a meaningful pace, I think the benefits from further action are unlikely to exceed the costs. But if the economy were to slow so that we were no longer making material progress toward full employment, the downside risks to growth were to increase sharply, or if deflation risks were to climb materially, then the benefits of further accommodation would increase in my estimation and this could tilt the balance toward additional easing. Under such circumstances, further balance sheet action might be called for. We could choose between further extension of the duration of the Federal Reserve’s existing Treasury portfolio and another large-scale asset purchase program of Treasuries or agency mortgage-backed securities. Conversely, I would be willing to consider tightening policy at a somewhat earlier stage if growth strengthened sufficiently to materially improve the medium-term outlook and substantially reduce tail risks, or if there was evidence of a genuine threat to medium-term inflation, including a rise in inflation expectations. In such a case, I would anticipate that the first step would be to bring in the late 2014 date of the policy guidance. This would effectively tighten financial conditions not only by changing the expected path of short-term interest rates, but also by bringing forward the expected start of balance sheet normalization. To sum up, I see substantial advantages in behaving in as systematic fashion as possible in setting monetary policy. But that should be done in a way that fully accounts for any constraints on policy imposed by the economic environment, the presence of asymmetric risks, and allows us to learn as we go. The fact is that the economy is recovering after an unusually deep recession and a severe financial crisis. We don’t have much experience with this type of episode and how the economy is likely to perform. What we need to focus on is not what interest rate a given rule generates, but what policy setting can be expected to deliver the appropriate return path to the dual mandate objectives—the type of return path that standard Taylor Rule formulations achieved in different economic circumstances in the past. Thank you very much for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. _____________________________________________________ 1 But, of course, predictability is not an end in itself. A policy could be completely predictable, but also incompatible with the central bank’s goals. 2 The policy response to the extreme shock of the financial crisis was predictably vigorous, even if its detail was hard to specify in advance, and the knowledge that the Federal Reserve would act “as needed” to promote the dual mandate anchored inflation expectations and helped to avoid a deflation outcome. 3 In formal terms, this approach would be described as a target-rule or forecast-targeting rule. 4 In practice, so-called inflation-targeting central banks also tend to take into account employment and other aspects of the real economy; hence, their approach is often referred to as “flexible inflation targeting.” 5 More formally, a Taylor Rule can be represented as: FFR = r* + π + a(π-π*) + b[100(Y-Y*)/Y*] where: FFR = federal funds rate r* = neutral real federal funds rate π = rate of inflation π* = target inflation rate Y = output Y* = output at full employment a = weight put on inflation gap b = weight put on output gap 6 Over the past 25 years, CPI inflation has averaged about 30 basis points to 50 basis points above PCE inflation. 7 For Taylor 1993, the output gap and inflation gap parameters are both 0.5. For the Taylor 1999 version, which updates the original formulation to take into account data over a longer period of time, the output gap parameter is 1.0: Taylor 1993 FFR=2% + π + 0.5(π-2%) + 0.5[100(Y-Y*)/Y*] Taylor 1999 FFR=2% + π +0.5(π-2%) + 1.0[100(Y-Y*)/Y*] 8 In contrast, optimal control simulations using FRBUS put the federal funds rate liftoff in 2015; see Vice Chair Yellen’s speech of April 12 (http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20120411a.htm). 9 For more details on this forecast, go to: http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2012/05/just-released-the-new-york-fed-staff-forecast-may-2012.html. 10 This estimate should be considered very imprecise. To generate this estimate we first need to estimate how much long-term rates have been pushed down because of the Federal Reserve balance sheet programs. Although there is considerable uncertainty, New York Fed staff has estimated that the Fed’s programs have pushed down the term premium by about 50 basis points. The question then becomes how much would the federal funds rate have to fall to generate the same result? That depends on how changes in the federal funds rate pass through to longer-term interest rates. If reductions in the federal funds rate were viewed as permanent, then the pass-through would presumably be 1 to 1. However, if the federal funds rate reductions were viewed as fully transitory, then there would be virtually no pass-through. Econometric estimates indicate a value of about 4 to 1, a four basis points reduction in the federal funds rate would lead to a one basis point reduction in long-term rates. However, this degree of pass-through seems too low in the current environment in which the reductions in the federal funds rate have been in place for some time and are expected to continue for several more years. If one assumes a parameter value of 3 to 4 and uses 50 basis points as the estimate of the balance sheet impact on longer-term rates, then this implies that these actions have been equivalent to a 150 to 200 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate currently. As the onset of balance sheet normalization comes closer over time, the effect of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet actions on the term premium will gradually diminish. This means that the size of the federal funds rate adjustment should also diminish over time. 11 Or, if we were wrong about spare capacity, inflation should be higher. 12 See Thomas Laubach and John Williams, “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” Review of Economics and Statistics , November 2003, pp.1063-1070. The link to the updated estimates is: http://www.frbsf.org/economics/economists/jwilliams/Laubach_Williams_updated_estimates.xls. 13 Impairment to the transmission mechanism implies that the neutral rate that neither stimulates nor slows the economy will be lower than it would otherwise be. 14 Obviously, there is a cost to those who are unemployed longer than necessary with no offsetting gain in terms of greater price stability. But there also is another potential long-run cost. Those who have been unemployed for a long period of time may lose their job skills and become less employable in the future. This can push up the non-inflationary rate of unemployment (NAIRU). Not only is this bad for those who are unemployed due to the loss of their job skills, it is bad for the nation as a whole because the rise in the NAIRU lowers the effective productive capacity of the economy and, with it, the capacity of the country to service its debts. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 30, 2012 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing, New York City As prepared for delivery Good afternoon and welcome once again to the New York Fed’s Quarterly Regional Economic Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to talk with the journalists covering our region—and through you, to the people in our District. This morning I will focus on regional economic conditions, with particular attention to job polarization, which I would define as the expansion of the number of jobs at the upper and lower ends of the wage and skill distribution and a shrinking of job opportunities for those in the middle. We will see how these trends are playing out in our region. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. National Economic Conditions The U.S. economy is continuing to slowly recover from the after-effects of the housing boom and bust and the financial crisis. But the recovery has been disappointing. Indeed, when we look back at economic forecasts made over the past three or four years it is notable that growth has systematically fallen short of both the Federal Reserve and private-sector forecasts. Despite what has been an unusually accommodative monetary policy by historical standards, the economy has grown at only a 2.1 percent pace over the last four quarters and the Blue Chip consensus forecast only anticipates a modest acceleration to a 2.4 percent rate over the next four quarters. The headwinds retarding recovery are well known. Consumers have been deleveraging in response to the large losses in wealth generated in large part by the collapse in home prices. Housing activity remains depressed for many reasons. These include the large shadow inventory making its way through the foreclosure pipeline, tight underwriting standards for new mortgage origination, and the sharp slowdown in household formation. Although the corporate sector as a whole is now reasonably healthy, there still is a significant constraint on the availability of credit to small business. Fiscal policy has become restrictive as state and local governments have cut expenditures in response to revenue shortfalls; and the uncertainty about how Congress and the Administration will address the 2013 federal “fiscal cliff” is likely to inhibit hiring and investment by business. Global economic growth has slowed as European activity has stagnated and this is capping the demand for U.S. exports. On the brighter side, some of these headwinds appear to be subsiding. Employment growth has picked up somewhat, which should eventually lead to faster household formation and more demand for housing. U.S. banks are healthier so that credit conditions, while still tight, are gradually easing. And, households appear quite far along in the deleveraging process by a number of important measures. For example, the ratio of household debt service relative to income is back to levels last seen in the early 1990s. For these reasons, I expect that growth will gradually strengthen over the next few years. Nevertheless, significant downside risks remain, especially those related to the challenges in Europe and how the potential “fiscal cliff” in the United States will be resolved after the fall elections. Even if these risks do not materialize, I anticipate only slow progress toward full employment. On the inflation side, in recent years our forecasts have been noticeably more accurate than on the growth side, and we have succeeded in delivering inflation very close to our 2 percent price stability objective. Through March, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures deflator, overall consumer prices have risen 2.1 percent over the past 12 months, and prices excluding food and energy have risen 2.0 percent. But price trends have been a bit stickier than one might have anticipated given the large amount of slack in the economy. To some degree, this likely reflects the anchoring exerted by stable inflation expectations. But some of the price pressures can be attributed to other, more temporary, factors: • Higher oil and gasoline prices and their pass-through into the costs of other goods and services. • Upward pressure on imputed homeowners rents due to increased demand for rental housing. • Higher import prices for goods, such as apparel. This reflects many factors including commodity prices pressures and higher wage inflation in countries such as China. Some of these upward pressures on inflation appear to be fading. Oil and gasoline prices have fallen in recent months. Apparel price inflation should gradually ease, given the sharp drop seen in cotton prices. Owners’ equivalent rent should also eventually stabilize as multi-family construction picks up and programs that shift real estate owned by banks to investors so they can be rented gear up. More generally, there are several reasons to think that inflation will remain moderate and close to our objective. First, and most obviously, the economy continues to operate with significant slack. Second, measures of underlying inflation show little upward pressure. In fact, one—the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Underlying Inflation Gauge—is turning down. This measure uses a very wide set of variables to forecast the underlying inflation trend. Third, it is hard to be very concerned about inflation risks when the growth rate of nominal labor compensation is so low and stable. It is noteworthy to me that the employment cost index has risen only 2.1 percent over the past four quarters and has shown no acceleration. Fourth, inflation expectations remain well-anchored. This is critically important because inflation expectations are an important driver of actual inflation outcomes. Taking into account the current stance of monetary policy, I anticipate that inflation will decline to slightly below our 2 percent long-run objective over the next few years. So what does this all imply for monetary policy? I currently anticipate that the Federal Reserve’s federal funds rate target will remain exceptionally low—that is at the current level—at least through late 2014. Given our forecast of stable prices and a still slow path back to full employment, there is an argument for easing further. But, unfortunately, our tools have costs associated with them as well as benefits. Thus, we must weigh these costs against the benefits of further action. As long as the U.S. economy continues to grow sufficiently fast to cut into the nation’s unused economic resources at a meaningful pace, I think the benefits from further action are unlikely to exceed the costs. But if the economy were to slow so that we were no longer making material progress toward full employment, the downside risks to growth were to increase sharply, or if deflation risks were to climb materially, then the benefits of further accommodation would increase in my estimation and this could tilt the balance toward additional easing. Under such circumstances, further balance sheet action might be called for. We could choose between further extension of the duration of the Federal Reserve’s existing Treasury portfolio and another large-scale asset purchase program of Treasuries or agency mortgage-backed securities. Conversely, I would be willing to consider tightening policy at a somewhat earlier stage if growth strengthened sufficiently to materially improve the medium-term outlook and substantially reduce tail risks, or if there was evidence of a genuine threat to medium-term inflation, including a rise in inflation expectations. In such a case, I would anticipate that the first step would be to bring in the late 2014 date of the policy guidance. This would effectively tighten financial conditions not only by changing the expected path of short-term interest rates, but also by bringing forward the expected start of balance sheet normalization. Regional Economic Conditions Let me turn now to the regional economy, the focus of our presentations today. Since our last briefing, the recovery in the region has picked up some steam. As attendees at previous regional press briefings may recall, the New York Fed produces economic activity indexes to help monitor the performance of the regional economy. Based on these measures, activity in New York State and New York City has expanded at a healthy clip, while New Jersey’s growth continues at a more moderate pace. In Puerto Rico, the activity index produced by the Government Development Bank for Puerto Rico shows that the Island’s downturn appears to have ended, but the pick up that we noted at our last briefing has not persisted and the level of activity there has stalled. Looking at payroll employment, however, the pattern of recovery is a bit more positive, though mixed across the region. New York State and New York City saw faster job growth than the nation since our last briefing. Job creation in the city has been particularly robust and employment in the city is now above its pre-recession peak. In New Jersey, however, employment stands only slightly above where it was at our last briefing and still is well below its previous peak. In Puerto Rico, employment continues to fluctuate near its lows, with no sign of a pickup. Job Polarization Our special topic today is the issue of job polarization. As I have visited different parts of the district—most recently trips to Long Island, Syracuse and Buffalo—employers have told me that they are beginning to add jobs, particularly in high-tech fields. These jobs can best be characterized as high skilled and technologically advanced. I have heard similar stories from our small business advisory council, our upstate advisory council and even our community banks. These anecdotes are reflected in our research on labor market dynamics. Over the past three decades, job opportunities have become increasingly concentrated in high wage/high skill occupations and low wage/low skill occupations, while job opportunities for those in the middle have been shrinking. At the same time, there has been a growing gap in wages between jobs that pay the most and those that pay the least. Taken together, this phenomenon is often referred to as job polarization. The root causes of job polarization appear to be technology and globalization, which have displaced many jobs, particularly those involving routine tasks. This loss of jobs has been especially pronounced for what we often think of as traditional middle-skilled workers. Its impact is perhaps most evident in the manufacturing sector, where so many jobs have been lost in recent decades. Given the strong history of manufacturing in our region, job polarization has been an important feature in our local economy. No doubt, the widening wage gap and loss of job opportunities for middle-skilled workers has contributed to a rise in economic inequality and created challenges for many workers and their families. More than ever before, jobs are requiring a greater degree of knowledge and skill. In order to adapt to these changes, it is increasingly important for workers to acquire and upgrade their skills, whether through formal education or other forms of training. In addition, it is important for employers to communicate their needs to educational institutions so that they can offer the coursework and programs so that people can develop the right skills to fill the available jobs. For these reasons, we think it is particularly important to highlight these trends in today’s briefing. Conclusion In summary, recent data are consistent with the expectation of moderate growth in 2012 and stronger, but still not robust, growth in 2013. I also expect both headline and core inflation rates should moderate over the next few months. In our region, the recovery of activity and employment has continued, though the data indicate relatively stronger performance in New York State and New York City than in New Jersey, while Puerto Rico has yet to show any meaningful improvement. Our special topic shows a trend toward job polarization both in the nation and the region, which focuses our attention on the ever-growing importance for workers to acquire skills and upgrade their skills on an ongoing basis. I will now ask Jim Orr to present the update of economic conditions in our region. Quick Links Regional Economic Press Briefing on Job Polarization and Rising Inequality in the Region By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
