1 Early Childhood Education in the Context of Lifetime Human Capital Investment Jeffrey M. Lacker President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Early Childhood Education Executive Briefing Richmond, Va. October 19, 2015 This speech was delivered by John Weinberg, special advisor to President Lacker. Good afternoon, and thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today on what is arguably one of the most critical economic policy topics of all: the skills of our workforce. To set the stage, let me begin by explaining why a Reserve Bank president might be interested in this topic. Part of our job at a regional Federal Reserve Bank is to understand how economic growth is unfolding in our region and in our national economy more broadly. We hear regularly from our constituents and partners throughout our District, which runs from Maryland down through South Carolina and includes almost all of West Virginia, that the long-run vitality of a community depends crucially on the skills of its people. Economists, and increasingly others, refer to such skills as human capital. It has become apparent that human capital investment is a critical determinant of an economy’s longer-run potential. As policymakers, we need to know whether investments in skills through education and work experience are making the most of the raw abilities that each new cohort of Americans brings with them. We at the Richmond Fed have found it useful to look at questions regarding early childhood education through the broader lens of human capital investment. Before I discuss these ideas in more detail, I must note that the views I express are my own and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.1 Human Capital Investments The human capital approach treats skills as one of many kinds of investments available to individuals: It views skill acquisition as influenced by the associated payoffs or “returns.” It allows for these payoffs to be monetary or nonmonetary (such as the pleasure we experience from learning or having an intellectually challenging job, for example). Furthermore, it suggests that human capital investments ought to be “front loaded,” that is, occur primarily earlier rather than later in life. Investing early in human capital makes sense for three reasons. First, it provides a longer time horizon over which to reap the rewards and recoup the cost of the investment. Second, investing late is costlier in terms of the forgone opportunities from spending time learning rather than earning, because earnings inevitably rise with age and experience. Third, there is compelling evidence that “skills beget skills”: Early investments in human capital make later investments more productive.2 This complementarity between early and later investments in human capital suggests that we ought to think about early childhood education within the broader context of human capital investments that take place later in life. Formal education is key among these, and substantial public funding is aimed at providing the means and environs for people to acquire it. These include the universal availability of a free public K-12 education and a highly subsidized public college system thereafter. Let me give you a sense of substantial scale of public support for education in the United States. Taken together, the expenditures of public elementary schools, secondary schools and degree-granting postsecondary institutions amount to 5.8 percent of GDP.3 The level of spending is similar in most developed nations, though the precise mix varies. Public elementary and secondary schools account for two-thirds of these expenditures.4 This makes public school essentially free for all. Moreover, the 2 attendees of public K-12 schools, far from being disproportionately underprivileged, constitute a very broad cross-section of American households. I will return to this point. Human Capital Outcomes To what extent has the widespread public provision of education given rise to cohorts ready for higher education and the workplace? A brief glance at some summary measures suggests that we could do better. Nationwide, about 20 percent of high school students fail to graduate within four years, with the number being as high as 40 percent in some large urban school districts. At public, four-year, degree-granting institutions, over 40 percent of enrollees fail to graduate within six years.5 At the same time, our country appears to be experiencing what economists refer to as “skill-biased technical change” — the growing use of advanced technologies that increase the demand for skilled workers. Yet our investments in human capital have not kept pace with this demand. After rising rapidly for much of the 20th century, the average number of years Americans spend in school has leveled off and, since the 1970s, has remained stubbornly stable at roughly 14 years.6 The share of high school graduates who immediately enroll in four-year college has remained constant around 42 percent since 2000.7 But over the same period, college appears to have become an increasingly attractive proposition. The wages of college graduates (though not the wages of those with some years of college but no degree) have increased steadily relative to the wages of those with just a high school education. The fact that so many do not enroll despite a widening college wage premium has profound implications. For one, it raises the possibility that those who do not currently enroll assess their odds of collegiate success as low enough to outweigh the high returns associated with completing a degree. In other words, our K-12 education system is failing to respond to the increasing demand for college-ready graduates. Indeed, K-12 systems seem to have acknowledged this, and college readiness is becoming an area of focus at high schools nationwide.8 Interestingly, the emphasis placed by high schools on college readiness may have the unintended consequence of discouraging students who view themselves as unlikely to attend college. If students believe the only reason to succeed in high school is to attend college, they, or their families, might not see much value in doing what is required to graduate from high school. This can contribute to poor performance and high dropout rates in high school9 and to the increasingly frequent reports we hear from employers that have trouble finding adequately prepared workers for jobs that do not require a college degree. What does all this mean for early childhood efforts? If students and their parents are aware of the limited ability of their K-12 system to prepare them for college, or to provide them with useful skills when college is not their best option, they may be less likely to make the effort needed to leverage the benefits of early childhood education. One possible result is that the value of early childhood education may be diluted or lost. The last point drives home a theme I want to highlight: The ability of our K-12 educational system to help people realize their potential will affect what results we can expect from earlier investments. This view represents the flip side of the familiar idea that early human capital investment improves the efficacy of later educational investments. It also suggests that early childhood investments made in conjunction with well-functioning systems in K-12 and beyond may be capable of yielding even greater payoffs than what research has uncovered so far.10 3 Challenges Facing Early Childhood Education Another important theme that emerges from the human capital literature is that human capital is multidimensional: Any attribute or skill that rewards the individual contributes. Cognitive skills – that is, the mental abilities that relate to learning, problem-solving and so on -- are an important part of an individual’s human capital. Cognitive skills have been shown to be associated with positive outcomes in adulthood. But noncognitive skills, such as initiative and motivation, are also critical. Indeed, Nobel Laureate James Heckman and other scholars have argued that it is through the channel of noncognitive skills that early childhood interventions lead to better outcomes in adulthood.11 Such skills make it possible for us to acquire more complex cognitive skills, and they also are critical for success in the labor market. Noncognitive skills, by their very nature, are harder to measure but, make no mistake, they are clearly relevant. For example, we routinely hear from employers and workforce development professionals around our District that a lack of “soft skills” is a major obstacle to hiring and employment. It is also true, however, that the positive effects of early childhood interventions, especially on cognitive outcomes, may fade out over time. This appears to be true for both “model” programs, which are typically small, intensive, high-quality interventions, as well as for large-scale public programs such as Head Start.12 An early study compared outcomes for children who participated in Head Start with those of their siblings who did not.13 The use of siblings allowed the researchers to study differences in outcomes that were not attributable to family circumstances. The study found that while both white and African- American students experienced gains in test scores initially, the gains for the latter group, but not the former, diminished after they left the program. Subsequent research has confirmed these “fade-out” effects.14 This suggests that human capital, like its physical counterpart, may “depreciate” in the absence of ongoing high-quality investment. The challenge of fade-out may be related to the link between parental circumstances and K-12 school quality in the United States. The K-12 system here is heavily dependent on local economic conditions for funding: Property taxes, on average, raise about 36 percent of all revenue needed to run public K-12 schooling.15 Not surprisingly, school districts with higher median incomes raise more revenue locally and, despite attempts by state and federal funding to offset this, tend to spend more on instruction per student. By contrast, in most other developed nations, this link is less strong and local property taxes less important. The Norwegian model of financing, for example, almost completely decouples parental circumstances from the revenue collected within a school district.16 This is an important point to bear in mind: Early childhood efforts in the United States must fight the headwind created by the prevailing model of school funding, something that they may not face elsewhere. Indeed, the correlation between school funding and parental income might help explain why the gains from early childhood education appear less persistent for some student populations. Another challenge is being able to provide quality early childhood education on a large scale. The most successful programs tend to be those that are intensive and use highly trained personnel to target relatively small groups of students. On the other hand, research on the effectiveness of large-scale programs suggests that the gains from these programs tend to be smaller and less persistent. A recent study of Tennessee’s Voluntary Prekindergarten program has been widely cited for its negative findings: By second grade, students who participated in the program actually performed worse than those who did not. 17 The lessons of this study are still being investigated but we do know that, within other large scale programs such as Head Start, more intensive interventions such as full-day service and frequent home visits are associated with better outcomes.18 This level of intensity would be costly to sustain in large- scale programs, and so it follows that there must be a trade-off between the quality of the intervention and the number of children that it reaches. 4 Encouraging a Lifetime of Human Capital Investment If funding for early childhood education is going to be constrained, as seems likely to be the case over the medium term, then I believe a case can be made for targeting resources to those for whom outcomes would change the most. There is widespread agreement in the academic literature that disadvantaged students (for example, those coming from families with low incomes or parental education) experience the greatest improvement in outcomes from early childhood interventions. Research has also found that such targeted spending is likely to have a larger effect on reducing the persistence of inequality across generations than broad-based spending.19 It’s a good thing that some easily observable characteristics can tell us whose outcomes are likely to be benefited most by early childhood efforts, because it opens a path to setting eligibility requirements and judiciously targeting resources. Such targeting has in fact been a feature of some early childhood investments. For example, the Minnesota Early Learning Scholarships Program gives pre-school-aged children from low-income families access to early childhood education by paying scholarships directly to the program of their choice. From 2016 onward, the programs will be required to maintain a minimum rating to be eligible for funds.20 I also want to stress a more general principle that we need to keep in mind when thinking about the allocation of public funding, which is the importance of equalizing marginal societal benefits: The next dollar spent ought to yield society the same bang for its buck no matter how it is ultimately allocated. In essence, this principle provides a guide to balancing competing resource demands. I and many others have long argued that a more balanced portfolio of educational spending would devote more resources to early childhood education. The reason is that under current arrangements, the marginal return to investments in early childhood appear to be large relative to other educational expenditures. Finally, at the beginning of my remarks I discussed the idea that human capital investments at various stages of life are complementary. This idea also has important implications for what an appropriately balanced portfolio of education spending looks like. The evidence suggests that investments in early childhood can increase the effectiveness of human capital investments made later in life. Conversely, investments in K-12 education will also increase the long-term payoff to early childhood investments. In conclusion, I should note that while what we have learned so far clearly underscores the power of early childhood education, even more remains to be learned about the interplay of forces that determine its ultimate efficacy. I’ll leave you with the idea that we can only unlock the full transformative potential of early childhood education in the context of effective human capital investment in K-12 and beyond. Thank you for your attention. 1 I am grateful to Kartik Athreya, Nika Lazaryan, Urvi Neelakantan and Jessie Romero for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 See, for example, Flavio Cunha and James Heckman, "The Technology of Skill Formation," American Economic Review, May 2007, vol. 97, no. 2, pp. 31-47. 3 National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics, 2014, Tables 106.10 and 106.20. https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2014menu_tables.asp. 4 National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics, 2014, Tables 106.10 and 106.20. https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2014menu_tables.asp. 5 Ibid, Graduation Rates, https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=40. 6 Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, The Race Between Education and Technology, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2008. 7 Ibid, Immediate Transition to College, https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=51. 5 8 See Julie Berry Cullen, Steven D. Levitt, Erin Robertson, and Sally Sadoff, "What Can Be Done to Improve Struggling High Schools?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2013, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 133- 152. 9 For further discussion, see https://www.richmondfed.org/~/media/richmondfedorg/publications/research/econ_focus/2014/q3/pdf/feature1.pdf . 10 Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, The Race Between Education and Technology, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2009. 11 James Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev, Understanding the Mechanisms Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes, American Economic Review, October 2013, vol. 103, no. 6, pp. 2052-2086, 2013. 12 Janet Currie, "Early Childhood Education Programs." Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2001, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 213-238. 13 Janet Currie and Duncan Thomas, "Does Head Start Make a Difference?" American Economic Review, June 1995, vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 341-64. 14 See, for example, David Deming, "Early Childhood Intervention and Life-cycle Skill Development: Evidence from Head Start." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, July 2009, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 111-134. 15 National Center for Education Statistics, Digest of Education Statistics, 2014, Table 235.10. https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/2014menu_tables.asp. 16 Christopher M. Herrington, “Public Education Financing, Earnings Inequality, and Intergenerational Mobility,” Review of Economic Dynamics, October 2015, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 822-42, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.red.2015.07.006. 17Mark W. Lipsey, Dale C. Farran, and Kerry G. Hofer, "A Randomized Control Trial of a Statewide Voluntary Prekindergarten Program on Children's Skills and Behaviors through Third Grade," Peabody Research Institute, September 2015. 18 See Christopher Walters, “Inputs in the Production of Early Childhood Human Capital: Evidence from Head Start,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, October 2015, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 76-102, and references thereof. 19William Blankenau and Xiaoyan Youderian. "Early Childhood Education Expenditures and the Intergenerational Persistence of Income," Review of Economic Dynamics, 2015, vol. 18 no. 2, pp. 334-349. 20 http://www.education.state.mn.us/MDE/StuSuc/EarlyLearn/EarlyLearnScholarProg/index.html .

1 What Monetary Policy Can and Can’t Do Jeffrey M. Lacker President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Cato Institute Monetary Conference Washington, D.C. November 12, 2015 Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this discussion on monetary policy and what it can and can’t do. In thinking about this topic, it occurred to me that one side of the question – what it can’t do – generates a very long list. So for today’s discussion I intend to focus on the positive and discuss the one thing that I think we should be pretty certain monetary policy can indeed do, and that is to determine the long-run path of the price level. Recent experience has caused some to question whether monetary policy’s ability to achieve even this modest goal has diminished or been lost in the years since the Great Recession. I will argue that a central bank’s ability to influence inflation and how it does so is essentially unchanged. I also believe that monetary policy’s ability to affect inflation is essentially independent of its effects on real economic activity, which I view as limited and temporary. My view of what monetary policy can do is based on the (perhaps old-fashioned) idea that money creation is at the heart of price level determination. As I’m sure you know, it is standard practice for Federal Reserve officials in settings like this to begin with a disclaimer, namely, that the views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or any other members of the Federal Open Market Committee. A Basic Framework I take as my starting point that monetary policy is uniquely capable of affecting the price level over the longer term. Indeed, in the benchmark classical (or neoclassical) economic model without some form of friction – in which money is neutral – the price level is all that monetary policy will affect. The price level, after all, is simply the rate of exchange between money and goods. So the quantity of money must be related to how much of the latter each unit can buy. How to match the quantity of money in a theoretical model to a particular empirical measure of money is not always straightforward. But the ability of monetary policy to affect the price level, or the rate of inflation, over time is a natural starting point and one that is embedded in the FOMC’s statement concerning its long-term goals. 1 In contrast, monetary policy’s ability to affect real economic activity – when monetary policy is being reasonably well-executed – can be quite limited and is almost always short-lived.2 Real activity is driven predominantly by factors beyond the control of monetary policy – productivity and population growth, for example. In the standard models used in policy analysis, monetary policy’s real effects generally derive from frictions that impede the rapid adjustment of the overall level of the price. Such frictions are, almost always, short-run phenomena that generate transitory deviations in real activity, and their empirical significance is a matter of ongoing research and debate. It is true that egregious monetary policy errors can seriously damage the economy – for instance, by adding extraneous volatility and reducing the informativeness of relative price signals. But in typical circumstances, monetary policy that successfully stabilizes inflation and inflation expectations will have only modest, temporary effects on real activity. The mechanism through which monetary policy has its ultimate effect on the price level is through the process of money creation – that is, the process by which central bank actions affect the distinct forms of 2 money, such as bank deposits, that people use in transactions for goods and services. It is more common these days to think of monetary policy as setting an interest rate target, rather than a money supply, in part because money demand seems to fluctuate significantly.3 Nonetheless, prior to 2008 the Fed achieved its target for the federal funds rate – the price of overnight loan of reserves – by manipulating the supply of bank reserves. Reductions in the Fed’s interest rate target necessitated increases in the supply of bank reserves. The resulting money creation – by the central bank and the private banking system – in turn drives price level determination. If frictions in goods or financial markets impede price adjustment, then monetary policy may temporarily affect real economic activity along with the price level. In particular, a low interest rate policy will tend to stimulate real activity for a time. These effects can give rise to an empirical correlation between the observed behavior of inflation and real economic activity. Such correlations are often referred to as the Phillips curve relationship – resource utilization or real activity positively correlated with inflation. It is important to note, however, that the standard framework for understanding monetary policy transmission is inconsistent with a popular interpretation of the Phillips curve, which is that a low interest rate raises inflation because the stimulation of real activity puts upward pressure on (real) resource costs. For example, one sometimes hears that high rates of resource utilization lead to rising inflation. Or that an empirical breakdown in the Phillips curve relationship makes it harder for the Fed to bring inflation back toward our 2 percent objective. This reasoning is fundamentally flawed. Monetary policy does not affect inflation through its effect on real activity. Monetary policy affects inflation and real activity simultaneously. If the relevant frictions are minimal, so that monetary policy has little effect on real activity, inflation is still driven directly by monetary policy. So a weak Phillips curve relationship does not imply that monetary policy has any less influence over inflation. Recent Experience Reconciling the behavior of monetary measures with the behavior of inflation has been more difficult since the crisis. The dramatic increase in the Fed’s monetary liabilities after 2008 – from just under $1 trillion to over $4 trillion now – has led to dire warnings from some critics that surging inflation was imminent. That hasn’t happened. Inflation has not only failed to rise, but has been persistently low relative to the FOMC’s stated goal of 2 percent. The last reading of 2 percent or greater for the 12-month change in the personal consumption price index was in April 2012, and since 2013, the core index has fluctuated between 1.2 and 1.6 percent. In fact, some argue that the zero lower bound on interest rates has been interfering with the Fed’s ability to keep inflation from falling. This is based on the idea, widely attributed to Swedish economist Knut Wicksell, that keeping inflation close to our objective requires that the real short-term interest rate should track the economy’s underlying “natural” real rate of interest.4 Because the Fed’s nominal interest rate target has been constrained by zero, policy might be disinflationary if the natural real rate has fallen significantly. This hypothesis is more difficult to assess, because the natural real interest rate is not directly observable, and so independent measurements naturally depend on auxiliary assumptions and theories. At this point, there is a fair amount of uncertainty around common estimates, but most estimates of the natural rate of interest in the U.S. have clustered at or just above zero, well above the actual real funds rate, which has been running below negative 1.5 So at this point, a Wicksellian perspective does not suggest that the zero lower bound is impeding the Fed’s ability to attain its 2 percent inflation objective. In fact, this perspective bolsters the case for raising the federal funds rate target now. 3 Moreover, the actual behavior of inflation in recent years does not warrant such pessimism. Statistically speaking, inflation appears to have some slow-moving components, which allow it to stray sometimes for extended periods from its longer-run trend. In other words, inflation does not seem to behave as if each year’s result is a roll of the dice, unconnected from last year’s experience. Given the historical behavior of inflation in recent decades – a period of time when the Fed is widely considered to have achieved stability of inflation and inflation expectations – an extended, one-sided deviation like the one we are currently experiencing turns out to be not unlikely.6 So I don’t think the recent behavior of inflation implies a more permanent departure from our target. The persistent part of inflation has been modeled by some as a random walk component, which would seem to imply a process that is not well-anchored in the long run by the central bank’s objective. That is, it would seem to imply that inflation can drift permanently away from the central bank’s objective. But this specification is hard to distinguish statistically from one in which inflation does move, perhaps slowly, toward a better anchored long-run expectation.7 While a description like this pins down the longer-run behavior of inflation, it leaves inflation at higher frequencies to move around, perhaps in response to a variety of relative price shocks. With this statistical behavior, monetary policy’s ability to control inflation rests, in part, on its ability to stabilize longer-run inflation expectations. The Fed established credibility for long-term inflation, in the sense of stabilizing expectations, in the 1990s – the culmination of a process that began with the Volcker disinflation in the early 1980s. And our available measures suggest that expectations have remained well- anchored for most of the period since the recession. While it is conceivable that the central bank could anchor expectations and the long-run behavior of inflation simply by stating a goal, it is more likely that the credibility of the goal depends on the public’s belief that the central bank has and will use the tools necessary to make inflation return to its goal, should that become necessary. So we should look again to the mechanism through which central bank actions affect money creation and ultimately the price level, taking into account how the monetary policy toolkit has changed since the financial crisis. The New Monetary Policy Environment The second reason I am not pessimistic about the ability of monetary policy to ultimately control inflation has to do with the mechanics of monetary policy. Allow me to explain. In the standard model, monetary policy operations were premised on the actual arrangements in place prior to the financial crisis. The Federal Reserve controlled the quantity of its monetary liabilities, consisting of currency and bank reserves. Both were non-interest-bearing. The quantity demanded for each was a downward-sloping function of the short-term nominal interest rate. The Federal Reserve controlled the overall supply of its liabilities through open market operations in order to achieve a target level for the short-term interest rate, set by the Federal Open Market Committee. To lower rates, for example, the supply of monetary liabilities would be increased, making bank reserves less scarce. This picture changed as a result of the crisis. Reserve account balances now earn explicit interest at a rate set by the Federal Reserve, and, as I noted earlier, the supply of bank reserves has increased dramatically. So the mechanics of monetary policy are necessarily different from what they were in the decades before the Great Recession. Some economists have argued that in the current regime, bank reserves are perfect substitutes for short- term Treasury securities, and that as a result, monetary policy may be relatively impotent. 8 Open market purchases of U.S. Treasury securities are just exchanges of one liquid government liability for another. 4 Financial institutions will simply hold fewer Treasury securities and more bank reserves, leaving economic activity unaffected. This neglects a key characteristic of bank reserves, however. While Treasury securities can be held by any financial entity, bank reserves can only be held by banks.9 The banking system can shed other assets in order to accommodate larger reserve account balances, but there is an upper limit to this process. At some point, banks would have to raise more capital in order to accommodate higher reserve account balances. This would force broader changes in portfolios that would inevitably affect economic outcomes, including the price level. Richmond Fed economist Huberto Ennis has provided an explicit model that captures this logic.10 The intuition is that when the quantity of bank reserves is small enough and interest rates are above the interest rate the central bank pays on excess reserves, then price level determination works the usual way. When the quantity of bank reserves is large enough, bank balance sheets are forced to adjust, and again, the quantity of central bank liabilities directly affects the price level. In between, however, there is a broad zone in which the quantity of bank reserves can vary without affecting the price level. This basic story seems consistent with the difficulty of finding conclusive evidence of economic effects from the Fed’s large-scale asset purchases. It seems plausible that successive rounds of quantitative easing have had little or no tangible effect, apart from signaling regarding the FOMC’s outlook for future economic growth and policy settings. At the same time, this framework implies that large enough asset purchases would compel changes in bank balance sheets that would in turn affect economic outcomes. This analysis bolsters my confidence that the intuition of the standard approach remains relevant and monetary policy still has the capacity to determine inflation and the price level over time. Concluding Remark Therefore, I continue to hold the view, as expressed in the FOMC’s statement of long-term goals, that monetary policy has the unique ability to determine inflation over time. That ability is independent of whether or not there is a reliable Phillips curve correlation. Moreover, it remains true in a world with interest on reserves and large bank reserve account balances. The effect of monetary policy on real activity, on the other hand, is likely to be transitory, which suggests caution in trying to use monetary policy to have significant real effects over the medium term. Even more caution should apply, given the state of our understanding, to the notion that monetary policy should respond to signals of incipient financial instability, an idea that has received considerable attention since the crisis. Conducting monetary policy to achieve low and stable inflation over time, without doing damage to real activity, is hard enough. 1 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” Adopted January 24, 2012, amended January 27, 2015. 2 Milton Friedman, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, March 1968, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 1- 17. 3 Marvin Goodfriend, “Interest Rates and the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Spring 1991, vol. 34, pp. 7-30. 5 4 Michael Woodford, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2003; Knut Wicksell, Interest and Prices: A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of Money, 1898, English translation, London: Macmillan and Company, 1936. 5 Thomas A. Lubik and Christian Matthes, “Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief no. 15-10, October 2015; Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams, "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest," Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2003, vol. 85, no. 4, pp. 1063-1070. 6 Andreas Hornstein, Joe Johnson, and Karl Rhodes, “Inflation Targeting: Could Bad Luck Explain Persistent One- Sided Misses?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief no. 15-09, September 2015. 7 Jon Faust and Eric M. Leeper, “The Myth of Normal: The Bumpy Story of Inflation and Monetary Policy,” Paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Jackson Hole Symposium, August 2015; Jon Faust and Jonathan Wright, “Forecasting Inflation,” in Handbook of Economic Forecasting Vol. 2A, edited by Graham Elliott and Allan Timmerman. Amsterdam: North-Holland, July 2013. 8 John Cochrane, “A Few Things the Fed Has Done Right,” Wall Street Journal, August 21, 2014. 9 Basically, only depository institutions, government agencies and government sponsored enterprises can hold accounts at Federal Reserve Banks. 10 Huberto Ennis, “A Simple General Equilibrium Model of Large Excess Reserves,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper no. 14-14, July 2014.
