Shocks, Gaps, and Monetary Policy KAEA-Maekyung Forum Korea-America Economic Association Philadelphia, PA January 4, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Shocks, Gaps, and Monetary Policy KAEA-Maekyung Forum Korea-America Economic Association Philadelphia, PA January 4, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights: • President Charles Plosser notes there are several different ways to interpret the economic dynamics during the recent recession and recovery. Some view the shocks hitting the economy as transitory and potential GDP as stable. Others view the shocks as being more permanent, affecting both actual and potential output. Those perspectives would call for different policy responses. • President Plosser says this is one of the reasons why monetary policymakers should think in terms of policies that are likely to be robust across many models and perspectives. • He advocates that systematic policymaking seems to be the most promising approach, because it tends to be more transparent and minimizes the degree to which data mismeasurement and model uncertainty affect policy. I want to thank Bang Jeon, president of the Korea-America Economic Association (KAEA), who is on the faculty here at Drexel University, and Yongsung Chang, vice president of the KAEA, who is on the faculty at the University of Rochester, for inviting me to speak to this forum. The KAEA has hosted a number of prominent speakers in recent years at its annual meetings, and so it is a pleasure and an honor to speak to you this evening. Much has happened in the field of macroeconomics and monetary policy in the past seven years since I left Rochester to join the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Today I want to highlight some key features of the recent recession and the recovery and to discuss how they have influenced my views on monetary policymaking. Before I begin, though, I would like to point out that my views are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 2 The challenges presented by the recession and recovery have illustrated why policymakers must have a framework that provides a basis for their policy judgments. We say that our policymaking is data dependent, but without a lens through which we view economic data, it is impossible to interpret those data in any sort of useful way, particularly as they pertain to policy. However, policymakers also must approach their task with a great deal of humility. The lens through which we look is often foggy and lacking focus. There is still much we do not understand about recent events, and I am mindful that further research is likely to bring more clarity to the narrative and to our ability to make more informed policy decisions going forward. After all, economists are still debating the events surrounding the Great Depression three- quarters of a century after it ended. Indeed, I would argue that none of us have the economic theory exactly right. That is why I believe it is useful and important that policy discussions include a healthy debate with different perspectives clearly represented. There are many different interpretations of recent events, each with strengths and weakness and it is unlikely that economists will converge to a common or shared understanding of these events anytime soon. Unfortunately, this is not just a characteristic of the current economic environment – it is the typical state of affairs – and it is one of the reasons I believe it is important for monetary policymakers to think in terms of policies that are likely to be robust across many models and perspectives. The Traditional View of Shocks and Gaps I want to organize my comments today around “shocks” and “gaps.” I find this to be a simple but useful way to highlight some different perspectives and their implications. For example, economists have different views about the nature of the shocks that sent the economy into recession and about the dynamics of the economy in response to those shocks. Those dynamics are summarized by the economic models or frameworks economists use to interpret incoming data. As a policymaker, I think it is impossible to determine the right course of policy without an assessment of the nature of the shocks and a framework or implicit model for the economy. 3 One way to characterize some of the key differences in models is to view how the models assess departures from some concept of ideal or desirable outcomes. The concept could be a steady state, some notion of economic potential, or the economic efficient outcome. Departures of the economy from these ideal outcomes can be viewed as gaps. Of course, to the extent that the ideal outcomes are model dependent, the gaps would also depend on the model one is using. According to one perspective, which I’ll call the traditional view, shocks hitting the economy are largely transitory and dissipate rather quickly over time. Negative shocks can then give rise to something called a negative output gap – a level of output that is lower than the level consistent with the economy operating at its full potential. Such a gap then becomes an object that policy seeks to close or eliminate. In some models, this negative output gap also acts to dampen inflation. Think about the recent recession. Some economists and policymakers characterize the shock that hit financial markets as a temporary, albeit large, aggregate demand shock. This shock gave rise to a large “output gap,” sometimes referred to as slack, which, in turn, is working to keep inflation low. According to this view, the large output gap and low inflation justify keeping interest rates near zero for a long time. The belief is that low rates will help to close the output gap by increasing the growth of demand and thus output, which will reduce slack and allow inflation to move back to target. In this perspective, there are headwinds that are temporarily restraining economic growth, but these can be offset with aggressive monetary accommodation. An Alternative View of Shocks and Gaps But there is an alternative interpretation. Let’s look at a rather simple, but I think useful, figure. 1 The figure shows the level of real GDP as well as various vintages of potential GDP estimated by the U.S. Congressional Budget Office (CBO). The CBO defines potential GDP as a 1 See figure below. 4 “measure of the economy’s maximum sustainable output, in which the intensity of resource use is neither adding to nor subtracting from inflationary pressure.”2 Such a definition obviously has embedded in it some implicit assumptions about an underlying economic model, but I will return to this point shortly. I would like to draw your attention to two noteworthy features. First, during the recession, GDP fell sharply, as we all know. But since the end of the recession in June 2009, the economy has continued to grow at roughly the same pace as it grew before the recession. There has been little evidence of the rapid growth required to return the economy to the path of potential GDP as estimated by the CBO in 2007. While that may still happen, there has not been the V-shaped recovery to date anticipated by many. The shock that hit the economy appears to have had very persistent, if not permanent, effects. From a statistical perspective, the economy appears to have taken a permanent hit to the output level. The second noteworthy feature illustrated in the figure is that the CBO has revised its estimate of the path of potential GDP numerous times since the beginning of the recession. Specifically, almost every year since 2007, it has revised down potential GDP. I am showing only three vintages here as an example. If you look at the “gap,” or the difference between the actual level of GDP – measured as of February 2013 when the latest CBO estimate of potential was released – and estimated potential, it is about half the size that it would have been if the path of potential GDP had not been revised. The gap is closing not because GDP has rebounded toward the earlier estimates of potential – but because potential GDP has fallen. And this has occurred in spite of aggressive policies – especially monetary policy – that were intended to boost economic growth rates. So, what might one infer from these observations? I want to offer a perspective based on some empirical research that Charles Nelson and I published in the Journal of Monetary Economics 2 Congressional Budget Office, “A Summary of Alternative Methods for Estimating Potential GDP,” Background Paper, March 2004, p. 1. 5 over three decades ago.3 In that paper, we concluded that real output contained important stochastic trends. A stochastic trend is often characterized as a random walk. A particular feature of a random walk is that it doesn’t exhibit any mean reversion. It means that the stochastic shocks that drive such a series accumulate. Put another way, each shock is permanently embodied in the level of the series – there is little tendency to return to a previous trend line. Such shocks are the antithesis of transitory, or what some refer to as cyclical, shocks that, by definition, dissipate over time. In our analysis, Nelson and I assumed that the economy was buffeted by a mixture of permanent and transitory shocks. Such a framework is not unusual and is compatible with the type of permanent and transitory distinction stressed in Milton Friedman’s permanent income hypothesis.4 More generally, in dynamic models, forward-looking agents’ responses to permanent shocks can be quite different from their responses to transitory shocks. For example, in the permanent income framework, agents adjust consumption much more in response to changes in permanent income than to temporary changes in income. Our statistical analysis found that a large portion of the fluctuations in real GDP were the result of shocks to the stochastic trend, that is, permanent shocks. Interestingly, the recent recession saw a marked drop in consumption. Some of this decline may have been due to credit constraints that became binding on some consumers. But some of the decline likely reflected the fact that many consumers now perceived that their permanent income had fallen, so they reduced their level of consumption. Looking at the figure, we see that the behavior of the GDP suggests that in the recent recession, the U.S. economy sustained what appears to be a permanent or at least highly persistent shock to the supply side of the economy that has lowered the level of GDP – although not necessarily its growth rate. One could contemplate numerous hypotheses about the nature of such a shock. In 2009, I put forward the idea that the crisis and recession were caused by a shock that 3 Charles R. Nelson and Charles I. Plosser, “Trends and Random Walks in Macroeconomic Time Series: Some Evidence and Implications,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 10 (1982), pp. 139–162. 4 Milton Friedman, A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton: Princeton University Press (1957). 6 likely had either permanent or very long-lasting consequences for the economy. I suggested that the financial crisis may have precipitated a permanent or highly persistent decline in the output of financial intermediation. I have also considered the possibility that the collapse in house values could be viewed as a permanent loss of wealth affecting household balance sheets. Either of these disturbances would require significant real adjustments in the economy.5 If we view the shock we experienced as largely permanent in nature, in contrast to being largely transitory, then it alters the way we should think about gaps and about the policy responses, particularly appropriate monetary policy. If you accept the idea that money is neutral in the long run, then efforts to use monetary policy to offset such permanent shocks and to close what appears to be a gap will likely be ineffective and perhaps even counterproductive. The real economy must ultimately adjust to such permanent shocks. Monetary policy cannot offset the costs or the necessity of such real adjustments, and so it is unlikely to be an effective stabilization tool. Looking at the figure again, we see the repeated downward revision in the estimate of potential GDP suggests that the CBO is gradually recognizing that the fall in output was most likely a permanent or at least highly persistent shock to the supply side of the economy. In other words, the CBO’s measures of potential output now recognize that the shock that hit the economy damaged the productive potential of the economy in a persistent way, as potential GDP is now lower as far out as 2020. Therefore, the output gap is no longer what we thought it was – it has been revised down over time. One can wonder whether five years from now the CBO’s potential GDP estimates will gradually converge with the existing growth path of real GDP. At that point, the output gap will have been gradually revised away. The constant revision of estimates of potential output and thus of the output gap also underscore one of the difficulties policymakers have in trying to use gaps as a guide to 5 Charles Plosser, “A Perspective on the Outlook, Output Gaps, and Price Stability,” speech presented to Money Marketeers, New York, May 21, 2009. 7 policymaking in real time. Indeed, Athanasios Orphanides and Simon van Norden have argued that a major problem that gave rise to the great inflation of the 1970s was the mismeasurement of the perceived output gap.6 They explained how the Fed consistently relied on estimated output gaps that were subsequently revised and ended up being much smaller than initially thought. They argue that policymakers’ reliance on estimated gaps led to overly expansionary monetary policy and the resulting high rates of inflation. There is a separate and perhaps more challenging issue. While a permanent shock to the level of GDP is disturbing enough, it would be even worse if the underlying growth rate of the economy were to slow. Economists normally think that the longer-run growth rate of the economy is roughly the sum of the growth rate of the labor force and the growth rate of productivity. Here again, monetary policy would not be an effective tool to address such real economic challenges as slower labor force or productivity growth. Appropriate policies would require focusing on increasing productivity and the quality of the labor force, not on traditional countercyclical monetary policy. Alternative Concepts for the Gap To this point, I’ve talked about the traditional view and an alternative view of the nature of the shock the economy experienced and how these views change the nature of the gap and the appropriate monetary policy response. But as I mentioned at the outset, there are different ways to approach the standard to which economic performance is measured. In particular, we need to remember that economic theory does not give us a unique way to define gaps. Different models can offer different conceptual approaches to the gap. For example, as I mentioned earlier, implicit in the CBO’s approach to constructing potential GDP is a model of the economy and the concept of a noninflationary maximum level of output. One feature of the CBO’s construct of potential, and many others’, is that potential output moves very slowly and very smoothly. This means that potential GDP does not – indeed, 6 Athanasios Orphanides and Simon van Norden, “The Reliability of Inflation Based on Output Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 37 (2005), pp. 583–601. 8 cannot – respond much to current shocks to the economy regardless of their magnitude or source, especially in real time. This is in contrast to research Nelson and I conducted that revealed that a significant proportion of the variability in GDP was due to permanent or very long-lasting shocks. While our statistical approach was not based on an economic model, there is good reason to believe that shocks that give rise to permanent changes in GDP should be viewed differently from those that give rise to purely transitory movements, especially in terms of their policy prescriptions. Measures that arbitrarily, or by assumption, assign the bulk of fluctuation in GDP to purely temporary factors may provide poor policy guidance when shocks are more permanent in nature. A different conceptual approach to defining a gap is implied by a class of economic models in wide use today – the new Keynesian dynamic stochastic general equilibrium, or DSGE, models. DSGE models explicitly posit that firms have some pricing power; that is, there is imperfect competition so that a firm can choose to sell more of its output by lowering its price or to sell less of its output by raising its price, and the firm will set its price at a markup over marginal cost to maximize its profits. DSGE models also assume that firms are able to only adjust prices infrequently. This form of sticky prices, together with imperfect competition, allow monetary policy to have real effects in the short run, while remaining neutral for the real side of the economy in the long run. The sticky prices generate distortions that mean allocations and output can be inefficient in the face of shocks. In these models, the efficient level of output is the level of output that would prevail in the absence of the sticky prices and other market imperfections that allow deviations from perfect competition. In this framework, the relevant output gap to be addressed is the difference between the efficient level and that level generated by the distortion introduced by the sticky prices and market imperfections. The behavior of the efficient level of output is unlikely to be a smooth or a slowly evolving series like the CBO concept. In fact, it could be quite volatile and may bear little or no resemblance to the traditional concept of potential used by the CBO and others. Efficient output would be altered by changes in technology that affect productivity or changes in agents’ preferences. The role of monetary policy in these models is to react to economic 9 conditions in a way that minimizes the potential for distortions arising from the price stickiness or other market imperfections. The general policy prescription is to minimize the gap between output and the efficient level of output. In the absence of unexpected events that lead firms to change their desired markups over marginal cost, or other real rigidities like real wage rigidities, this would be equivalent to stabilizing inflation.7 A great deal of work is being done on this class of models. For example, many researchers are attempting to build richer models that have a more elaborate financial sector in light of the recent financial crisis, and they are incorporating frictions of various kinds. Regardless of how these models are enhanced, their concept of the gap will continue to be a deviation of output from the efficient level that would prevail in the absence of nominal rigidities and market imperfections. Therefore, the gap in these models will remain conceptually different from a gap based on potential output. And there is no reason to believe that the policy prescriptions based on these gaps will be the same. Indeed, the nature of the shock will be an important determinant in whether the efficient output level changes and whether monetary policy should react or not. Conclusion Policymakers need a framework with which to evaluate incoming data in order to set appropriate monetary policy. But the recession and recovery have underscored that we must remain humble about our degree of understanding of the economy and that we must entertain various perspectives in setting policy. As I’ve discussed, there are several different ways to interpret the economic dynamics we have seen in recent years, and those perspectives would call for different policy responses. Some view the shocks hitting the economy as transitory and potential GDP as stable. Others view the shocks as being more permanent, affecting both actual and potential output. 7 See Jordi Gali and Olivier Blanchard, “Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39 (2007), pp. 35–65 and Aubhik Khan, Robert G. King, and Alexander L. Wolman, “Optimal Monetary Policy,” Review of Economic Studies, 70 (2003), pp. 825–860. 10 In addition, there are alternative concepts of the output gap itself, some of which focus on the efficient level of output instead of potential output. Each of these perspectives has some merit as well as drawbacks, and it will be some time (if ever) when we will know which perspective is the correct one in explaining our recent economic experience. This state of affairs has led me to be skeptical of relying on gaps in general as well as optimal control exercises that are derived from specific models. Instead, I have long advocated that we should think in terms of robust policies that yield good economic outcomes across a variety of models and frameworks.8 In my view, a robust, systematic approach to policy, which is transparent and minimizes the degree to which data mismeasurement and model uncertainty affect policy is the most promising approach to the uncertainties facing policymakers in real time. 8 Charles Plosser, “Output Gaps and Robust Policy Rules,” speech presented to the 2010 European Banking and Financial Forum, Czech National Bank, Prague, the Czech Republic, March 23, 2010. 11

Perspectives on the Economy and Monetary Policy The 13th Annual Economic Outlook The School of Business at La Salle University Union League of Philadelphia Business Network Philadelphia, PA January 14, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Perspectives on the Economy and Monetary Policy The 13th Annual Economic Outlook The School of Business at La Salle University Union League of Philadelphia Business Network January 14, 2014 Philadelphia, PA Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser provides his economic outlook for 2014 and reports that the FOMC’s decision to reduce the pace of asset purchases was a step in the right direction. • Based on the economic progress that has been made and his economic outlook, President Plosser believes it is appropriate to end asset purchases and anticipates that purchases will end later this year. • President Plosser expects growth of about 3 percent in 2014. He expects the unemployment rate to continue its steady decline and to reach about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. Inflation expectations will be relatively stable, and inflation will move up toward the FOMC target of 2 percent over the next year. • President Plosser notes that the Fed still faces considerable challenges as it seeks to normalize policy. He believes that policy should return to a framework in which a market rate is our primary policy tool, and accordingly, the size of the balance sheet is reduced and restored to an all-Treasuries portfolio. Introduction I want to thank La Salle University and the Union League for inviting me to speak at this annual economic event. The new year always seems like a good time to reflect on the past and refresh our outlook for the future, and I will try to do a bit of both today. 2 This is a particularly noteworthy time in the history of the Federal Reserve. On December 23, 1913, President Woodrow Wilson signed into law the act that created the Federal Reserve System. Thus, the Fed’s official 100th anniversary occurred just three weeks ago. So, I thought I would begin by sharing a brief history of our nation’s central bank with you before discussing my views on economic conditions and monetary policy. Before I begin, though, I should note that my views are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). A Historical Look at a Decentralized Fed What better place to share a little history of our central bank than here in Philadelphia and in this historic venue of the Union League. Just a few blocks from where the Philadelphia Fed stands on Independence Mall, you will find vestiges of two earlier attempts to create a central bank for the United States, dating back to the time Philadelphia was the nation’s major financial and political center. The first institution was the brainchild of our first Treasury secretary, Alexander Hamilton. His efforts led to the creation of the First Bank of the United States, which was awarded a 20-year charter by Congress in 1791. Although the First Bank’s charter was not renewed, the War of 1812 and the ensuing inflation and economic turmoil convinced Congress to establish the Second Bank of the United States. It was also given a 20-year charter and operated from 1816 to 1836. However, its charter was not renewed — Congress could not override the veto of President Andrew Jackson, who led the opposition to the central bank. Public distrust of centralized power was an important factor in the demise of both banks. Both became entangled in politics, and both failed to gain the public’s confidence and establish the 3 independence necessary to serve our vast and diverse country of bakers and bankers, farmers and financiers, and manufacturers and merchants. It took Congress nearly 80 years to try again to establish a central bank. This time Congress and President Wilson agreed upon a uniquely American governance structure — a decentralized, central bank. To balance political, economic, and geographic interests, Congress created the Federal Reserve System made up of regional Reserve Banks with oversight provided by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. This structure helped to overcome political and public opposition stemming from fears that a central bank would be dominated either by political interests in Washington or by financial interests on Wall Street. The Federal Reserve Act formed a Reserve Bank Organization Committee to divide the country into no fewer than eight and no more than 12 Federal Reserve Districts. Almost immediately after the law was enacted, the committee started receiving letters and telegrams from local business owners, bankers, farmers, and others, who were all making a case for where they wanted a Reserve Bank to be located. The committee held meetings in 18 cities before submitting a report to Congress in April 1914, naming the final 12 cities and districts. The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia was designated as the regional Reserve Bank for the Third District, an area that includes Delaware, the eastern two-thirds of Pennsylvania, and the southern half of New Jersey. These Reserve Banks distribute currency, act as a bankers’ bank, and generally perform the functions of a central bank, which includes serving as the bank for the U.S. Treasury. The 12 regional Reserve Banks are deeply rooted in our nation’s communities, which ensure that the Federal Reserve stays in touch with Main Street. The Reserve Banks all have boards of directors, many also have Branch boards, and all have advisory councils 4 and other mechanisms to keep abreast of conditions in their regional economies. This rich array of information and the diverse views from around the country contribute to a mosaic of the economy that is essential as we formulate national monetary policy. Of course, most people associate the Fed with the determination of monetary policy. Within the Federal Reserve, the body that makes monetary policy decisions is the Federal Open Market Committee, or the FOMC. Here again, Congress has designed the system with a number of checks and balances. Since 1935, the composition of the FOMC has included the seven Governors in Washington, the president of the New York Fed, and the presidents of four other Reserve Banks who serve one-year terms as members on a rotating basis. One important role of the independent regional Reserve Banks is to ensure that diverse views are represented. The Reserve Banks each have economic research departments to guarantee that a wide variety of perspectives are brought to the table. In this way, the institution avoids groupthink. By being open and transparent about these various perspectives, the decentralized model for the Federal Reserve helps strengthen public confidence and preserve its independence. Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee’s assessment of the economy and policy options. The FOMC has eight regularly scheduled meetings a year to set monetary policy. It discusses economic conditions and, in normal times, adjusts short-term interest rates to achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us in the Federal Reserve Act. Congress established the current set of monetary policy goals in 1978. The amended Federal Reserve Act specifies that the FOMC “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term 5 interest rates generally result when prices are stable and the economy is operating at full employment, many have interpreted these instructions as being a dual mandate to manage fluctuations in employment in the short run while preserving price stability in the long run. Economic Conditions In order to determine the appropriate monetary policy to promote these goals, the FOMC must monitor economic developments. So, let me turn to an assessment of our economy. As we enter 2014, I think the bottom line is that the economy is on firmer footing than it has been for the past several years. Real output grew at a 4.1 percent annual pace in the third quarter of last year, the strongest gain in nearly two years and a marked acceleration from the first half of 2013. Some of this growth came in the form of inventory investment, which is volatile and is less likely to have contributed as much to growth in the fourth quarter. Still, personal consumption and fixed investment provided positive contributions, and economic prospects at the end of last year and the beginning of this year are positive. Personal consumption, which accounts more than two-thirds of GDP, advanced at an annual rate of 2 percent in the third quarter. Some observers have lamented at the lack of stronger growth in consumption. But I would note that consumption growth has not fluctuated that much over the course of the recovery. I am encouraged by the U.S. consumers’ persistence in the face of many challenges, including a payroll tax hike last January, a government shutdown, significant uncertainties about future tax policy, and the implications of health-care reform. Consistent job growth has added to wage and salary growth, which has supported spending. The December employment report released last Friday, which showed payroll gains of 74,000 jobs, came in below many analysts’ expectations. Yet, I caution you not to read too much into one month’s number. December’s number was likely affected by 6 the unseasonably cold and snowy weather, although it is not yet clear by how much. The number is also subject to revision, and such revisions can be significant. Because of the month-to-month volatility and data revisions, I prefer not to read too much into the most recent number but, instead, look at averages over several months, and here the news remains positive. Firms added an average of 182,000 jobs per month last year, comparable to the pace in 2012. This consistent pace of job growth was enough to drop the unemployment rate to 6.7 percent in December. This means that the unemployment rate fell 1.2 percentage points last year, and, importantly, it is at a lower level than the FOMC anticipated it would be at this point when we started the current asset purchase program in September 2012. That is, the labor market has performed noticeably better than expected, according to the unemployment rate measure. Some people, however, feel that the decline in the unemployment rate overstates the degree of progress being made in labor markets because it reflects declines in labor force participation as well as increases in employment. There is even concern that the unemployment rate will move back up significantly when discouraged workers reenter the labor force. Based on research by my staff, I am less concerned about this possibility.1 First, it is important to realize that labor force participation rates have been declining since 2000. The declines are driven mostly by demographic changes, including the aging of the baby boomers. This trend is ongoing and was expected to accelerate. Second, detailed analysis of the Current Population Survey’s micro data indicates that much of the decline in participation since the start of the recovery can be accounted for 1 Shigeru Fujita, “On the Causes of Declines in the Labor Force Participation Rate,” Research Rap Special Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, November 19, 2013. 7 by increased retirements and disability. Some of these increases might have been driven by the state of the economy as some baby boomers perhaps moved their retirement decision forward after losing a job. Nevertheless, few of these former individuals are likely to reenter the labor force. In addition, there has been an increase in the number of people out of the workforce who are going to school, which means there is less concern about skill depreciation for these people. So while I do expect some discouraged workers to reenter the labor force as the expansion picks up and while they search for a job there could be upward pressure on the unemployment rate, I would not overinterpret the decline in participation as a lack of progress made in labor market conditions or as a problem that must be corrected. There are fundamental changes in the structure of the labor market that are likely real and sustained. The progress in the labor market has led to growth in household income. In addition to income growth, household balance sheets have strengthened as well. Overall household wealth, in nominal terms, advanced 11 percent year over year through the third quarter. The improving housing market has been an important contributor to that growth, with owners’ equity in real estate surging 29 percent in 2013 over 2012. House prices are rising; the number of homeowners with underwater mortgages and the number of mortgage delinquencies are down. I expect these improvements will help to support consumer spending going forward. Business balance sheets are also healthy. Industrial production was very encouraging in November, when it advanced 1.1 percent on gains in all major categories. That growth was the most rapid in 12 months and brought the overall index higher than its prerecession peak for the first time. The Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey of regional manufacturing, which is a reliable indicator of national manufacturing trends, has also been in positive territory for seven months, and our firms expect continued expansion in manufacturing activity over the next six months. This gives me some hope that business fixed investment, which has been generally lackluster during the course of the recovery, will pick up somewhat this year. 8 Inflation has been running below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent. The year-over- year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation, is the Fed’s preferred measure. It has drifted downward over the past year to about 0.9 percent in November. Core PCE, a measure that removes food and energy prices that tend to be volatile, was a bit higher at 1.1 percent. I believe we must defend our 2- percent inflation target from below and above. However, I believe inflation is likely to firm up as some of the factors that have held it down, such as the cut in payments to Medicare providers and generally weak medical costs, are likely to abate over time. I am encouraged that inflation expectations remain near their longer-term averages and consistent with our 2-percent target. So, I anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, that inflation will move back toward our target over time. Indeed, given the large amount of monetary accommodation we have added and continue to add to the economy, I think that there is some upside risk to inflation in the longer term. I anticipate overall economic growth of around 3 percent this year, a pace that is slightly above trend. This is far from the robust growth that many would like to see; nevertheless, it does represent steady progress and an improving economy. My forecast is largely in line with those of my colleagues on the FOMC, whose most recent projections had a central tendency of growth of 2.2 to 2.3 percent for 2013, and accelerating to 2.8 to 3.2 percent in 2014. I believe this growth will continue to lead to declines in the unemployment rate over the next year and should result in an unemployment rate of about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. This makes me somewhat more optimistic than most of my FOMC colleagues, who reported a central tendency of 6.3 to 6.6 percent by the end of 2014. Monetary Policy So, let me turn to some observations about monetary policy. Over the past five years, the Federal Reserve has taken extraordinary actions to support the economic recovery. The Fed has lowered its policy rate — the federal funds rate — to essentially zero, 9 where it has been for more than five years. Since the policy rate cannot go any lower, the Fed has attempted to provide additional accommodation through large-scale asset purchases, or quantitative easing. We are now in our third round of these purchases, or QE3. These purchases have greatly expanded the size and lengthened the maturity of the assets on the Fed’s balance sheet. The Fed is also using forward guidance as a policy tool, which is intended to inform the public about the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. In its December statement, the FOMC indicated that it intends to leave the policy rate near zero well past the time that the unemployment rate falls below 6.5 percent, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the FOMC’s 2-percent target. On asset purchases, the FOMC has indicated that it will continue the purchases until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in the context of price stability. The Fed has structured its latest round of asset purchases as a flow-based program, with the idea that policymakers could fine-tune the rate of purchases in response to the economy. The FOMC decided in December to reduce the purchases from $85 billion to $75 billion per month. Thus, we are still adding monetary accommodation but at a slightly slower pace. Asset purchases are not on a preset course and will continue to be contingent on the FOMC’s economic outlook. However, the FOMC did indicate in December that if economic conditions evolve as expected, with improved labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its goal, then the FOMC will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in measured steps at future meetings. Chairman Ben Bernanke indicated in his December press conference that if we are making progress in terms of inflation and continued job gains, then the program would be concluded late in 2014. The December employment report has not changed my belief that the economy has already met the criteria of substantial improvement in labor market conditions. So my preference would be that we conclude the purchases sooner than this, but I am glad that we have taken the first step on the path to ending the program. 10 Eventually, monetary policy will be normalized, but the way in which that is done will depend on what operating framework we plan to use in the normalized environment. I believe that the exit strategy principles laid out by the FOMC in June 2011 still apply. More specifically, we need to return to an operating framework in which a market interest rate is our policy instrument. We also should shrink the size of our balance sheet, which is now about $4 trillion, and return to an all-Treasuries portfolio as part of the normalization process. This sounds easy in principle, but I believe the size and composition of our balance sheet will make it challenging to execute smoothly. There are now more than $2.4 trillion of excess reserves in the banking system. These reserves are not inflationary until they are converted to money and flow out into the economy. But as market rates rise in an improving economy, banks will find it advantageous to begin to increase lending or acquire assets using their reserves. The challenge for the Fed is to control the flow of reserves so that we can successfully maintain our 2-percent inflation target. This may require raising interest rates more quickly than currently anticipated. We have the tools that would enable us to raise rates if we chose to do so. However, the Fed may be subject to political pressures or pushback from various interest-sensitive sectors that could result in a more measured response than required. One of the consequences would be higher inflation. History suggests that the Fed tends to be behind the curve when it comes time to tighten monetary policy, and in the current environment, that delay could prove to be more costly than when reserves are in limited supply. Thus, it’s a matter of our will rather than our ability. Conclusion In summary, I believe that the economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. We are likely to see growth of around 3 percent in 2014. Prospects for labor markets 11 will continue to improve gradually, and I expect the unemployment rate will continue its decline to 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. I also believe that inflation expectations will be relatively stable and that inflation will move up toward our goal of 2 percent over the next year. On monetary policy, the reduction in asset purchases from $85 billion a month to $75 billion a month is a step in the right direction. I believe the economy has met the criteria of significant improvement in labor market conditions for ending the program and that further increases in the balance sheet are unlikely to provide appreciable benefits for recovery. Even after the asset purchase program has ended, monetary policy will still be highly accommodative. The work of the Fed, however, is far from over. Monetary policy still faces considerable challenges as we seek to normalize policy. The task should be to return to a framework in which a market rate is our primary policy tool, to reduce the size of our balance sheet, and to restore our portfolio to all Treasuries. The challenge will be to do so in a way that ensures that inflation remains close to our target, that the economy continues to grow, and that we avoid sowing the seeds of another financial crisis.

Monetary Policy and a Brightening Economy Presented at the 35th Annual Economic Seminar sponsored by the Simon Business School with JPMorgan Chase & Co., Rochester Business Alliance, and the CFA Society of Rochester Rochester, NY February 5, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Monetary Policy and a Brightening Economy 35th Annual Economic Outlook Seminar sponsored by the Simon Business School with JPMorgan Chase & Co., Rochester Business Alliance, and the CFA Society of Rochester Rochester, NY February 5, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser provides his economic outlook for 2014 and reports that the decision of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to reduce the pace of asset purchases was a step in the right direction. • President Plosser expects growth of about 3 percent in 2014. He also expects the unemployment rate to continue its steady decline and to reach about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. Inflation expectations will be relatively stable, and inflation will move up toward the FOMC target of 2 percent over the next year. • Based on the economic progress that has been made and his economic outlook, President Plosser believes it is appropriate to end asset purchases, and he supported the FOMC’s decision in January to continue to reduce the pace of purchases. • A case can be made for ending the current asset purchase program sooner to reflect the improvement in the economic outlook and to lessen some of the communications problems the FOMC will face with its forward guidance. Introduction This is the 35th time that I have had the pleasure of speaking at this annual event. That is quite a long time. While I am a lot older than when I first started giving these talks, I do not feel particularly wiser. So I guess I have to keep trying until I get it right. You may wonder why, after more than seven years at the Philadelphia Fed, I still look forward to returning to Rochester each winter. Well, it is certainly not the weather! Although, I’ll note that you certainly handle the snow better than we do in Philadelphia. 2 No, it’s about friends and colleagues, and a community that remains vibrant and positive. So, even in the wake of the “Polar Vortex of 2014,” I am delighted to be here and to see old friends and familiar faces. Thank you for having me back and for such a warm welcome. I have acquired a great deal of respect for weather forecasters over the years, especially in turbulent seasons, because as I have noted on many occasions, forecasting even in good times can be a humbling experience. Nonetheless, I am once again going to offer you a forecast for the economy as well as my views on monetary policy. I should note, though, that my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Let me begin by noting that this is a special time for the Federal Reserve. We are observing our 100th anniversary. The Federal Reserve Act was signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on December 23, 1913, and the 12 Federal Reserve Banks opened their doors on November 16, 1914. To balance political, economic, and geographic interests, Congress created the Federal Reserve System made up of these 12 regional Reserve Banks with oversight provided by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. This decentralized central bank was structured to overcome political and public concerns that its actions would be dominated either by political interests in Washington or by financial interests on Wall Street. The 12 Reserve Banks perform several roles. They distribute currency, act as a bankers’ bank, and generally perform the functions of a central bank, which includes serving as the bank for the U.S. Treasury. They also play a critical role in supervising many banks and bank holding companies. Moreover, the Reserve Banks ensure that the Federal Reserve stays in touch with Main Street. The Reserve Banks have boards of directors, many also have Branch boards, and all have advisory councils that provide economic insight and information. These 3 contacts allow the Reserve Banks to keep up to date and knowledgeable about economic conditions in their regions. The Reserve Banks also collect data, run surveys of economic activity, and provide economic analyses. This rich array of information and the diverse views from around the country help paint a mosaic of the economy that is essential as we formulate national monetary policy. Within the Federal Reserve, the body that makes monetary policy decisions is the Federal Open Market Committee, or the FOMC. Here again, Congress has designed the system with a number of checks and balances. Since 1935, the composition of the FOMC has included the seven Governors in Washington, the president of the New York Fed, and the presidents of four other Reserve Banks who serve one-year terms as members on a rotating basis. Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee’s assessment of the economy and policy options. The FOMC has eight regularly scheduled meetings a year to set monetary policy, and our first one in 2014 was held last week. In normal times, the Committee votes to adjust short-term interest rates to achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us in the Federal Reserve Act. Congress established the current set of monetary policy goals in 1978. The amended Federal Reserve Act specifies that the FOMC “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are stable and the economy is operating at full employment, many have interpreted these instructions as being a dual mandate to manage fluctuations in employment in the short run while preserving price stability in the long run. 4 Economic Conditions In order to determine the appropriate monetary policy to promote these goals, the FOMC must monitor and assess economic developments. So, let me turn to an assessment of our economy. As a reminder, last year at this time, I anticipated that we would see real economic growth of about 3 percent in 2013, that the unemployment rate would reach 7 percent in the fourth quarter, and that inflation would gradually rise toward the Fed’s target of 2 percent. That turned out to be a “not too shabby” forecast. Real growth for the year is currently estimated at about 2.8 percent, and the unemployment rate was 7 percent for the fourth quarter. Inflation has not risen as much as I thought it would, but it has stabilized nonetheless. So let’s look at some of the details of how the year ended and the implications for the coming year. The message is that the economy is on firmer footing than it has been for the past several years. Real output grew at a 3.2 percent annual pace in the fourth quarter of last year, following a 4.1 percent growth rate in the third quarter. That means economic growth in the second half of 2013 was double that of the first half. Consumer spending and business investment in equipment ended the year with strong increases. Inventory investment and net exports also contributed to growth, while a decline in residential investment and a sharp decrease in federal government spending subtracted from growth in the fourth quarter of the year. I expect that there will be less fiscal drag in 2014 and that housing will continue its recovery. Personal consumption, which accounts for more than two-thirds of GDP, advanced at an annual rate of 3.3 percent in the fourth quarter, the highest personal consumption growth rate since fourth quarter 2010. Rising house prices and stock prices have helped improve consumer balance sheets, and steady job growth has added to wage and salary growth, all of which have supported spending. The recent December employment 5 report showed payroll gains of 74,000 jobs, which came in below many analysts’ expectations. Yet, December’s number was likely affected by the unseasonably cold and snowy weather, although it is not yet clear by how much. The number is also subject to revision, and such revisions can be significant. Because of the month-to-month volatility and data revisions, I prefer not to read too much into the most recent number but, instead, look at averages over several months, and here the news remains positive. Firms added an average of 182,000 jobs per month last year, comparable to the pace in 2012. This consistent pace of job growth was enough to drop the unemployment rate to 6.7 percent in December. This means that the unemployment rate fell 1.2 percentage points last year. It also ended the year at a lower level than the FOMC anticipated in its Summary of Economic Projections in September 2012, when we started the current asset purchase program. That is, the labor market has performed noticeably better than expected, according to the unemployment rate measure. Should we be skeptical of the unemployment rate as an indicator of labor market conditions? Some people are because the decline in the unemployment rate reflects declines in labor force participation as well as increases in employment. There is even concern that the unemployment rate will move back up significantly when discouraged workers reenter the labor force. Based on research by my staff, I am less concerned about this possibility.1 First, it is important to realize that labor force participation rates have been declining since 2000. The declines are driven primarily by demographic changes, most notably the aging of the baby boomers. This trend is ongoing and was expected to accelerate. Second, detailed analysis of the Current Population Survey’s micro data indicates that 1 Shigeru Fujita, “On the Causes of Declines in the Labor Force Participation Rate,” Research Rap Special Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, November 19, 2013. 6 much of the decline in participation since the start of the recovery can be accounted for by increased retirements and disability. Some of these increases might have been driven by the state of the economy as some baby boomers may have moved their retirement decision forward after losing a job. Nevertheless, few of these individuals are likely to reenter the labor force. In addition, there has been an increase in the number of people out of the workforce who are going to school, which means there is less concern about skill depreciation for this group. So, I do expect some discouraged workers to reenter the labor force as the expansion picks up, and while they search for a job, there could be upward pressure on the unemployment rate. Nonetheless, I believe the overall unemployment rate remains the best summary statistic of labor market conditions. The business sector is also entering the year on a positive note. At the national level, manufacturing activity accelerated over the final three months of 2013. The Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey of regional manufacturing, which is a reliable indicator of national manufacturing trends, also showed that manufacturing activity picked up in the second half of 2013. In January, the survey’s general activity index posted its eighth consecutive positive number. Expectations for manufacturing activity six months ahead also remained positive. This gives me some hope that business fixed investment, which has been generally lackluster during the course of the recovery, will pick up somewhat this year. Indeed, we saw a nice rebound in equipment spending in the fourth quarter. Inflation has been running below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation is the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. It came in at 1.1 percent last year. It is important to defend our 2 percent inflation target from both below and above. But I believe inflation is likely to firm up. Economic growth is accelerating, and some of the factors that have held inflation down, such as the one-time cut in payments to Medicare providers, are likely to abate over time. An additional and important determinant of 7 actual inflation is consumer and business expectations of inflation. I am encouraged that inflation expectations remain near their longer-term averages and consistent with our 2 percent target. Thus, I anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, that inflation will move back toward our target over time. Indeed, given the large amount of monetary accommodation we have added and continue to add to the economy, I think there is some upside risk to inflation in the longer term. Although growth in the first quarter is likely to be somewhat slower than the rapid pace we saw in the fourth quarter of last year, overall, I anticipate economic growth of around 3 percent this year, a pace that is slightly above trend. This is far from the robust growth that many would like to see; nevertheless, it does represent steady progress and an improving economy. My forecast is largely in line with those of my colleagues on the FOMC, whose most recent projections saw growth in the 2.8 to 3.2 percent range in 2014. Growth will continue to lead to declines in the unemployment rate over the next year to about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. Like my forecast last year, this makes me somewhat more optimistic than most of my FOMC colleagues, who reported a central tendency of 6.3 to 6.6 percent by the end of 2014. Of course, with any forecast, there are risks. The current volatility in emerging market currencies could pose a risk if it were to spill over more broadly to other financial markets. But at this point, I do not consider it a significant risk to the U.S. economy. While there continues to be some downside risks, for the first time in a few years, I see a potential for some upside risks to the economic outlook. We need to consider this possibility as we calibrate monetary policy. Monetary Policy Over the past five years, the Federal Reserve has taken extraordinary policy actions to support the economic recovery. The Fed has lowered its policy rate — the federal funds rate — to essentially zero, where it has been for more than five years. Since the policy 8 rate cannot go any lower, the Fed has attempted to provide additional accommodation through large-scale asset purchases, or quantitative easing. We are now in our third round of these purchases, or, as it is commonly called, QE3. These purchases have greatly expanded the size and lengthened the maturity of the assets on the Fed’s balance sheet. The Fed is also using forward guidance as a policy tool, which is intended to inform the public about the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. In this dimension, the FOMC has indicated that it intends to leave the policy rate near zero well past the time that the unemployment rate falls below the 6.5 percent threshold. The FOMC had previously indicated this was the earliest point at which it would consider raising interest rates, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent target. On asset purchases, the FOMC has indicated that it will continue the purchases until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in the context of price stability. Yet, with the economy having improved substantially over the last year and the outlook brightening, the time has come for the FOMC to slow the pace at which it is adding monetary accommodation, which is to say, ease our foot off the accelerator. My personal view is that the process should have started sooner and proceeded more expeditiously. Nevertheless, the FOMC did decide in December to take a very modest step in this direction by reducing asset purchases from $85 billion to $75 billion per month, and last week’s decision reduced this by another $10 billion to $65 billion a month. The FOMC indicated that if incoming information broadly supports its expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, then we’ll likely reduce the pace of purchases in further measured steps at future meetings. Former Chairman Ben Bernanke indicated in his December press conference that if we are making progress in terms of inflation and continued job gains, then the program would be concluded late in 2014. 9 Notice that even though we are reducing the pace at which we are purchasing longer- term assets, we are still adding monetary policy accommodation. As I noted earlier, I believe the economy has already met the criteria of substantial improvement in labor market conditions, and the economic outlook has improved as well. So my preference would be that we conclude the purchases sooner rather than later. Indeed, before the decision to taper in December, I had proposed that we set a total amount of additional securities we planned to buy and then stop the asset purchases once that amount was reached. In my view, this would have reduced policy uncertainty, thereby benefiting the economy. 2 In December, the FOMC announced a reduction in the purchase pace, indicating that purchases were not on a preset course. The Committee continued on this path in January, and while this wasn’t my preferred path, I supported the action as a step in the right direction. I reasoned that by following through with another measured step to reduce purchases, the Committee was strengthening the signal that the process would continue and thus it was reducing policy uncertainty. While I may have preferred a more aggressive scale-back, I was pleased that the FOMC has taken the first two steps on the path toward ending the program. That said, I believe a good case can be made for speeding up the pace of our taper if the economic outlook plays out as I expect. As I noted earlier, the unemployment rate fell 1.2 percentage points last year, to 6.7 percent in December. This was a much sharper decline than anticipated when we started the purchase program in September 2012. In fact, back then, the central tendency of the Committee’s economic projections for unemployment in the fourth quarter of 2013 was 7.6 to 7.9 percent compared to the 7 percent fourth-quarter average that the economy actually achieved. If the unemployment rate continues to drop at that pace, we will soon be at the 6.5 percent threshold in our forward guidance for interest rates. 2 Charles I. Plosser, “Economic Conditions and Monetary Policy,” remarks before the Risk Management Association, Philadelphia, PA, November 18, 2013. 10 Although the FOMC has indicated that it doesn’t anticipate raising rates when the economy crosses that threshold, I do believe that we will have complicated our communications if we are still purchasing assets at that point. What is the argument for continuing to increase monetary policy accommodation when labor market conditions are improving rapidly, inflation has stabilized, and the outlook is for it to move back to goal? The longer we continue purchases in such an environment, the more likely we will fall behind the curve in reducing the extraordinary degree of monetary policy accommodation. With the economy awash in reserves, the costs of such a misfire could be considerably higher than usual, fomenting higher inflation and perhaps financial instability. My preference is to scale back our purchase program at a faster pace to reflect the strengthening economy. I would like to see purchases concluded before the unemployment rate reaches the threshold, which is likely during the first half of the year. Conclusion In summary, I believe that the economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. We are likely to see growth of around 3 percent in 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, and I expect the unemployment rate will continue its decline, reaching 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. I also believe that inflation expectations will be relatively stable and that inflation will move up toward our goal of 2 percent over the next year. On monetary policy, we must begin to back away from increasing the degree of policy accommodation in a manner commensurate with an improving economy. Reducing the pace of asset purchases to $65 billion a month is moving in the right direction, but that may prove to be insufficient if the economy continues to play out according to the FOMC forecasts. I believe the economy has met the criteria of significant improvement in labor market conditions for ending the program and that further increases in the 11 balance sheet are unlikely to provide appreciable benefits for the recovery. A case can be made for ending the current asset purchase program sooner to reflect the improvement in the economic outlook and to lessen some of the communications problems we will face with our forward guidance. Even after the asset purchase program has ended, monetary policy will still be highly accommodative. As the expansion gains traction, the challenge will be to reduce accommodation and normalize policy in a way that ensures that inflation remains close to our target, that the economy continues to grow, and that we avoid sowing the seeds of another financial crisis. This means the Fed still has considerable work ahead.

Monetary Policy and a Brightening Economy 2014 Economic Forecast Lyons Companies, the University of Delaware’s Center for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship, and Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics February 11, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Monetary Policy and a Brightening Economy 2014 Economic Forecast Lyons Companies, the University of Delaware’s Center for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship, and Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics Newark, DE February 11, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Note: President Plosser presented similar remarks at the Simon Business School in Rochester, NY, on February 5, 2014. Highlights • President Charles Plosser provides his economic outlook for 2014 and reports that the decision of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to reduce the pace of asset purchases was a step in the right direction. • President Plosser expects growth of about 3 percent in 2014. He also expects the unemployment rate to continue its steady decline and to reach about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. Inflation expectations will be relatively stable, and inflation will move up toward the FOMC target of 2 percent over the next year. • Based on the economic progress that has been made and his economic outlook, President Plosser believes it is appropriate to end asset purchases, and he supported the FOMC’s decision in January to continue to reduce the pace of purchases. • A case can be made for ending the current asset purchase program sooner to reflect the improvement in the economic outlook and to lessen some of the communications problems the FOMC will face with its forward guidance. Introduction I am delighted to return once again to the University of Delaware to speak at this annual event. This is a great event for the region and I am pleased to see it grow year after year. 2 I would like to begin my remarks this morning with a bit of history. We are observing the 100th anniversary of the Federal Reserve and that gives me the opportunity, or the excuse, to offer a perspective on this important, but sometimes misunderstood, institution. I should note that my views are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. On December 23, 1913, President Woodrow Wilson signed the act that created the Federal Reserve System, and the 12 Federal Reserve Banks opened their doors on November 16, 1914. I have often described the Federal Reserve as a uniquely American form of a central bank – a decentralized central bank. To understand why, we need to consider two earlier attempts at central banking in the United States. Just a few blocks from the Philadelphia Fed’s present building on Independence Mall, you will find the vestiges of both institutions, dating back to the early years when Philadelphia was the major financial and political center of the country. Alexander Hamilton, our first secretary of the Treasury, championed the First Bank of the United States to help our young nation manage its financial affairs. The First Bank received a 20-year charter from Congress and operated from 1791 to 1811. Although this charter was not renewed, the War of 1812 and the ensuing inflation and economic turmoil convinced Congress to establish the Second Bank of the United States, which operated from 1816 to 1836. However, Congress could not override the veto of President Andrew Jackson, and the Second Bank’s charter also lapsed. Both institutions failed to overcome the public’s mistrust of centralized power and special interests. Nearly 80 years later, Congress tried again. To balance political, economic, and geographic interests, Congress created a Federal Reserve System of 12 regional Reserve Banks with oversight provided by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. This decentralized central bank was structured to overcome concerns that its actions would be dominated either by political interests in Washington or by financial interests on Wall Street. 3 These 12 Reserve Banks perform several roles. They distribute currency, act as a bankers’ bank, and generally perform the functions of a central bank, which includes serving as the bank for the U.S. Treasury. They also play a critical role in supervising many banks and bank holding companies across the country. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors selected in a nonpartisan way to represent a cross-section of banking, commercial, and community interests. Pat Harker, president of the University of Delaware, serves on our board. These directors fulfill the traditional governance role, but they also provide valuable insights into economic and financial conditions, which contribute to our assessment of the economy. The Reserve Banks seek to stay in touch with Main Street in other ways. Some have Branch boards, and all have advisory councils. Reserve Banks also collect and analyze data and conduct surveys of economic activity. This rich array of information and the diverse views from across the country help policymakers paint a mosaic of the economy that is essential as we formulate national monetary policy. Within the Federal Reserve, the body that makes monetary policy decisions is the Federal Open Market Committee, or the FOMC. Here again, Congress has designed the system with a number of checks and balances. Since 1935, the composition of the FOMC has included the seven Governors in Washington, who are appointed by the President of the United States and confirmed by the Senate, as well as the president of the New York Fed, and four other Reserve Bank presidents who serve one-year terms as members on a rotating basis. Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee’s assessment of the economy and policy options. The FOMC has eight regularly scheduled meetings each year to set monetary policy. The first one in 2014 was held just two weeks ago. In normal times, the Committee votes to adjust short-term interest rates to achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us. 4 Congress spelled out the current set of monetary policy goals in 1978. The amended Federal Reserve Act specifies that the FOMC “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are stable and the economy is operating at full employment, many have interpreted these instructions as being a dual mandate to manage fluctuations in employment in the short run while preserving price stability in the long run. Economic Conditions In order to determine the appropriate monetary policy to promote these goals, the FOMC must monitor and assess economic developments. So, let me turn to an assessment of our economy as we enter 2014. In a nutshell, my view is that the economy is on firmer footing than it has been for the past several years. So let’s look at some of the details of how last year ended and the implications for the coming year. Real output grew at a 3.2 percent annual pace in the fourth quarter of last year, following a 4.1 percent growth rate in the third quarter. That means economic growth doubled in the second half of 2013 compared with the first half. Consumer spending and business investment in equipment ended the year with strong increases. Inventory investment and net exports also contributed to growth. On the other side of the ledger, a decline in residential investment and a sharp decrease in federal government spending subtracted from growth in the fourth quarter of the year. Going forward, I expect that there will be less fiscal drag in 2014 than we saw in 2013 and that housing will continue its recovery. Personal consumption, which accounts for more than two-thirds of GDP, advanced at an annual rate of 3.3 percent in the fourth quarter, the highest personal consumption 5 growth rate since fourth quarter 2010. Rising house prices and stock prices have helped improve consumer balance sheets, and steady job growth has added to wage and salary growth, all of which have supported spending. On the job front, the January employment report showed payroll gains of 113,000 jobs, following an increase of 75,000 jobs in December, which was below many analysts’ expectations. Yet, these numbers were affected by the unseasonably cold and snowy weather. Indeed, winter weather has continued to be unusually disruptive, and that is making it difficult to assess underlying economic trends. I suspect it may be another couple of months before we have a better read on the economy – hopefully the weather will turn better before that! We have to remember that these employment numbers are subject to revisions, and such revisions can be significant. For instance, in the latest report the November jobs number was revised up by 33,000, from 241,000 to 274,000, while the December number was also revised up by 1,000 to 75,000. Because of month-to-month volatility and data revisions, I prefer not to read too much into the most recent numbers but, instead, look at averages over several months. Here the news remains positive. Based on the latest revision, firms added an average of 194,000 jobs per month in 2013, somewhat better than the pace in 2012. This consistent pace of job growth was enough to drop the unemployment rate 1.2 percentage points last year. In January, it fell a bit further to 6.6 percent. This is noticeably lower than the FOMC anticipated in its Summary of Economic Projections in September 2012, when we started the current asset purchase program. That is, the labor market has performed better than expected, according to the unemployment rate measure. Should we be skeptical of the unemployment rate as an indicator of labor market conditions? Some people are because the decline in the unemployment rate reflects not only increases in employment but declines in labor force participation as well. 6 Declines in participation can include discouraged workers who have stopped looking for work because it is difficult to find a job. There is concern in some quarters that the unemployment rate will move back up significantly when these discouraged workers reenter the labor force. Based on research by my staff, I am less concerned about this possibility.1 First, it is important to realize that labor force participation rates can decline for reasons other than a rise in discouraged workers. Indeed, we have seen steadily declining participation rates since 2000 that reflect demographic changes, most notably the aging of the baby boomers. This trend is continuing and has long been expected to accelerate. Second, detailed analysis of the Current Population Survey’s micro data indicates that about three-quarters of the decline in participation since the start of the recession in December 2007 can be accounted for by increased retirements and movements into disability. Some of these increases might have been driven by the state of the economy. For example, some baby boomers may have moved their retirement decision forward after losing a job. Nevertheless, few of these individuals are likely to reenter the labor force. So, while I do expect some discouraged workers to reenter the labor force as the economy improves, I still believe the overall unemployment rate remains a good summary statistic of labor market conditions. The business sector is also entering the year on a positive note. At the national level, manufacturing activity accelerated over the final three months of 2013. The Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey of regional manufacturing, which is a reliable indicator of national manufacturing trends, also showed that manufacturing activity picked up in the second half of 2013. In January, the survey’s general activity index posted its eighth consecutive positive number. Expectations for manufacturing 1 Shigeru Fujita, “On the Causes of Declines in the Labor Force Participation Rate,” Research Rap Special Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, February 6, 2014. 7 activity six months ahead also remained positive. This gives me some hope that business fixed investment, which has been generally lackluster during the course of the recovery, will pick up somewhat this year. Indeed, we saw a nice rebound in equipment spending in the fourth quarter. Inflation has been running below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation is the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. It came in at 1.1 percent last year. It is important to defend our 2 percent inflation target from both below and above. But I believe inflation is likely to move up. Economic growth is firming, and some of the factors that have held inflation down, such as the one-time cut in payments to Medicare providers, are likely to abate over time. An additional and important determinant of actual inflation is consumer and business expectations of inflation. I am encouraged that inflation expectations remain near their longer-term averages and consistent with our 2 percent target. Thus, I anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, that inflation will move back toward our target over time. Indeed, given the large amount of monetary accommodation we have added and continue to add to the economy, I think there is some upside risk to inflation in the longer term. Although growth in the first quarter is likely to be somewhat slower than the rapid pace we saw in the second half of last year, overall, I anticipate economic growth of around 3 percent this year, a pace that is slightly above trend. Everyone would like to see robust growth of 5 to 6 percent, but I don’t see that happening. Nevertheless, I do see steady progress and an improving economy. This growth is sufficient to result in a continued decline in the unemployment rate, which should reach about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. Of course, with any forecast, there are risks. The current volatility in emerging market currencies could pose a risk if it were to spill over more broadly into other financial 8 markets. But at this point, I do not consider it a significant risk to the U.S. economy. While there continues to be some downside risks, for the first time in a few years, I see a potential for some upside risks to the economic outlook. We need to consider this possibility as we calibrate monetary policy. Monetary Policy The Federal Reserve has taken extraordinary policy actions to support the economic recovery. The Fed has lowered its policy rate — the federal funds rate — to essentially zero, where it has been for more than five years. Since the policy rate cannot go any lower, the Fed has attempted to provide additional accommodation through large-scale asset purchases. We are now in our third round of this quantitative easing, or, as it is commonly called, QE3. These purchases have greatly expanded the size and lengthened the maturity of the assets on the Fed’s balance sheet. The Fed is also using forward guidance as a policy tool, which is intended to inform the public about the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. In this dimension, the FOMC has indicated that it intends to leave the policy rate near zero well past the time that the unemployment rate falls below the 6.5 percent threshold. The FOMC had previously indicated this was the earliest point at which it would consider raising interest rates, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent target. On asset purchases, the FOMC has indicated that it will continue the purchases until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in the context of price stability. Yet, with the economy having improved substantially over the last year and the outlook brightening, the time has come for the FOMC to slow the pace at which it is adding monetary accommodation, which is to say, ease our foot off the accelerator.2 My 2 For more on the subject, see Charles I. Plosser, “The Outlook and the Hazards of Accelerationist Policy,” remarks before The University of Delaware Center for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship, Newark, DE, February 14, 2012. 9 personal view is that the process should have started sooner and proceeded more expeditiously. Nevertheless, the FOMC did decide in December to take a very modest step by reducing asset purchases from $85 billion to $75 billion per month, and then reduced this by another $10 billion to $65 billion a month in January. The FOMC indicated that if incoming information broadly supports the expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, then we’ll likely reduce the pace of purchases further in measured steps at future meetings. Former Chairman Ben Bernanke indicated in his December press conference that if we are making progress in terms of inflation and continued job gains, then the program would be concluded late in 2014. Notice that even though we are reducing the pace at which we are purchasing longer- term assets, we are still adding monetary policy accommodation. So, the foot is still on the accelerator. My preference would be that we conclude the purchases sooner rather than later. I believe a good case can be made for speeding up the pace of our taper if the economic outlook plays out as I expect. As I noted earlier, the unemployment rate fell 1.2 percentage points last year, and again in January to 6.6 percent. This is a much sharper decline than anticipated when we started the purchase program in September 2012. We are now only one-tenth of a point from the 6.5 percent threshold in our forward guidance for interest rates. The FOMC has indicated that it doesn’t anticipate raising rates when the economy crosses that threshold. However, I do believe that we have a communications challenge. We have not described how policy will be conducted after the unemployment rate passes 6.5 percent. Last summer, it was thought that we would stop asset purchases by the time unemployment reached 7 percent. Well, that didn’t happen. What is the argument for continuing to increase monetary policy accommodation when labor market conditions are improving more quickly than 10 anticipated and inflation has stabilized and is projected to move back to goal? The longer we continue purchases in such an environment, the more likely we will fall behind the curve in reducing the extraordinary degree of monetary policy accommodation. With the economy awash in reserves, the costs of such a misfire could be considerably higher than usual, fomenting higher inflation and perhaps financial instability. My preference was, and remains, to scale back our purchase program at a faster pace to reflect the strengthening economy. Given the falling unemployment rate, our communications should be focused on how economic conditions will determine the interest rate path. Continuing to buy assets is neither helpful nor essential. Conclusion In summary, I believe that the economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. We are likely to see growth of around 3 percent in 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, and I expect the unemployment rate will continue its decline, reaching 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. I also believe that inflation expectations will be relatively stable and that inflation will move up toward our goal of 2 percent over the next year. On monetary policy, we must back away from increasing the degree of policy accommodation in a manner commensurate with an improving economy. Reducing the pace of asset purchases to $65 billion a month is moving in the right direction, but that may prove to be insufficient if the economy continues to play out according to the FOMC forecasts. I believe the economy has met the criteria for ending the asset purchases as there has been significant improvement in labor market conditions. I also believe that further increases in the balance sheet are unlikely to provide appreciable benefits for the recovery and may have unintended consequences. A case can be made for ending the current asset purchase program sooner to reflect the improvement in the economic outlook and to lessen some of the communications problems we will face 11 with our forward guidance. Even after the asset purchase program has ended, monetary policy will still be highly accommodative. As the expansion gains traction, the challenge will be to reduce accommodation and to normalize policy in a way that ensures that inflation remains close to our target, that the economy continues to grow, and that we avoid sowing the seeds of another financial crisis. This means the Fed still has considerable work to do.

Communication Challenges 2014 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum Initiative on Global Markets The University of Chicago Booth School of Business New York, NY February 28, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Communication Challenges 2014 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum Initiative on Global Markets The University of Chicago Booth School of Business New York, NY February 28, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Plosser believes the Federal Open Market Committee has to revamp its current forward guidance regarding the future federal funds rate path because the 6.5 percent unemployment threshold has become irrelevant. • President Plosser points out that before offering new forward guidance, the FOMC ought to be clear about its purpose. Is it purely a transparency device, or is it a way to commit to a more accommodative future policy stance to add more accommodation today? • President Plosser notes that commitment is required to be successful in either approach to forward guidance. Policymakers cannot maintain discretion and simultaneously commit to forward guidance and expect that guidance to be effective. Introduction It is a pleasure to return to this event. The organizers have put together another great and timely program with distinguished participants. However, with Governor Stein and Presidents Kocherlakota, Evans, and myself all here, I am beginning to wonder if we are in Washington rather than in New York. Nevertheless, it is great to be on the program with so many of my fellow policymakers. If you listen carefully to each of us, you will understand why I start with the usual caveat that my remarks represent my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 2 Communication and transparency have been important themes in monetary policy discussions over the past decade or more. Indeed, in 2007 this Monetary Policy Forum began with Alan Blinder’s keynote address titled “Making Monetary Policy and Talking about It.” In part, this emphasis on communication and transparency reflects the steady evolution in the theory and science of monetary policy. Reflecting this emerging consensus, the Federal Reserve during the tenure of Chairman Bernanke has taken a number of actions to promote increased transparency about its actions and policies. In fact, President Evans and I served on a subcommittee led by current Chair Yellen specifically focused on improving communication. Our efforts to improve communication took on heightened importance as the FOMC responded to the financial crisis and recession. Since December 2008, the federal funds rate target has been near zero. Since the nominal funds rate cannot go below zero, we had to develop alternative policy tools in an effort to provide further accommodation to support the recovery. We also had to figure out how and what to communicate about these new tools. Thus, well- understood communication practices about traditional policy tools gave way to untested ways to describe these new tools. The task was further complicated because one of the unconventional tools was so-called forward guidance. Forward guidance seeks to inform the public about the future path of policy rather than describing a policy action taken today. Thus, effective forward guidance is all about communication and what it conveys or doesn’t convey. In my brief time today, I will focus on why I think communication is such a challenge and discuss some of the choices the Committee faces going forward. Current State of Affairs First, communication is difficult because monetary policy is more complicated than it used to be. With the traditional policy tool at the zero lower bound, the Committee has focused on two unconventional tools. The first is the purchase of long-term assets, and the second, as I mentioned, is forward guidance. The asset purchase program has had many dimensions, such as the overall volume of purchases, the pace of purchases, the kinds of assets targeted for purchase, and the criteria for starting and stopping the purchases. Policymakers have tried to 3 fine-tune the program along each dimension while assessing the trade-offs among them and the trade-offs with other policy tools, such as the traditional funds rate decision. With so many moving parts to our policy framework, it is not surprising that communication is very complicated. We are now in the third round of asset purchases, or quantitative easing. Since September 2012, the FOMC has added some $1.3 trillion in long-term Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities to its balance sheet through this program, buying at a pace of $85 billion a month in 2013. This program, known as QE3, is already twice the size of the last round of asset purchases that was initiated in November 2010, known as QE2. In December 2013, the Committee announced that it would reduce the pace of purchases from $85 billion to $75 billion per month. In January, it announced a further reduction to $65 billion. The FOMC is now on a path of measured reductions, which, if continued, will end the purchase program late this year. If the economy continues to improve, we could find ourselves still trying to increase accommodation in an environment when history suggests that policy should perhaps be moving in the opposite direction. Communication about the future path of asset purchases has, at times, been imprecise and confusing. Last June, the Committee suggested that it might begin to reduce the pace of purchases in the fall and perhaps end them when the unemployment rate reached 7 percent. However, the Committee did not even begin the tapering process until unemployment had reached 7 percent. It now seems unlikely that the program will end until the unemployment rate is below – or as indicated in the FOMC statement, perhaps “well below” – 6.5 percent. Why is the 6.5 percent unemployment rate important? Because the Committee made it important. The Committee, in essence, told the markets that the 6.5 percent unemployment rate was an important quantitative marker. In December 2012, the FOMC indicated that it intended to keep the federal funds rate target near zero at least as long as the unemployment rate was above 6.5 percent, the inflation rate between one and two years ahead was projected to be no more than 2.5 percent, and inflation expectations remained well anchored. However, 4 it is important to remember that these guideposts were thresholds, not triggers. The FOMC had not made a commitment to act once a threshold was reached, nor did it indicate how policy would evolve after a threshold was reached. It simply signaled that it would not act prior to crossing one of the thresholds. Yet, the 6.5 percent threshold will soon become irrelevant, and it probably is already. So the Committee, at a minimum, has to revamp its communications regarding the future federal funds rate path. Given that we are still easing policy by buying assets, it is pretty clear that even though the threshold will soon come and go, the Committee is unlikely to contemplate raising rates as long as it is buying assets. Put another way, the practical constraint at this point for raising the policy rate is no longer the unemployment rate but the fact that we are still buying assets. Indeed, the Committee has acknowledged that it will likely be appropriate to keep rates at their current low rates well past the time unemployment falls below 6.5 percent. Therefore, in my view, the threshold has already lost its meaning as a guidepost. It needs to be replaced with something that is more relevant and informative. This poses the challenge of how and what to communicate about policy going forward. Our actions and the data have made the current form of forward guidance outdated and mostly irrelevant. Indeed, one could reasonably wonder whether the inflation threshold has any meaning at this point. In other words, by allowing the unemployment threshold to pass without taking action, the public might conclude that the Committee could easily decide to let the inflation threshold pass without taking action as well. Competing Roles for Forward Guidance Before we offer further forward guidance, it is important to be clear about what this forward guidance is intended to accomplish. As Yogi Berra is reported to have said, “You have to be careful if you don’t know where you’re going because you might end up somewhere else.” One way to think of forward guidance is that it is just another step toward increased transparency and effective communication of monetary policy. This approach seeks to clarify how policymakers will alter policy as economic conditions change, that is, to describe a reaction 5 function. By being more transparent about how policy will evolve as a function of economic conditions, this approach can help the public form more accurate expectations about the future path of monetary policy. Economists have learned that expectations play an important role in determining economic outcomes. When businesses and households have a better understanding of how monetary policy is likely to evolve, they can make more informed spending and financial decisions. If monetary policymakers can reduce uncertainty about the course of monetary policy, the economy is likely to perform more efficiently. Of course, in order to communicate something about the reaction function, you have to have one. That means in order to be successful with this approach to forward guidance, policymakers must be able to agree on how they will systematically respond to changes in economic conditions. To be useful, however, the reaction function need not be mechanistic. Qualitative information about such a function and how it will be implemented can also be useful and meaningful. Nevertheless, some degree of commitment to abide by the specified reaction function is necessary, if the communication is to achieve the desired result of reducing policy uncertainty and providing meaningful forward guidance. The excuse that “this time is different” undermines the commitment and the credibility of the information that the communication is seeking to provide. I would add that a committed and credible approach to such a systematic approach to policy is helpful and informative regardless of whether you are at the zero lower bound or not. A somewhat different rationale or view of forward guidance is that it is a way of increasing accommodation in a period when the policy rate is at or near the zero lower bound. Some models suggest that when you are at the zero lower bound, it can be desirable, or optimal, to indicate that future policy rates will be kept “lower for longer” than might otherwise be the case. Thus, policymakers intentionally commit to deviating from what they would otherwise choose to do in normal times, such as following the Taylor rule. In these models, such a commitment would tend to raise inflation expectations and lower long-term nominal rates, thereby inducing households and businesses to spend more today. 6 This approach asks more of forward guidance than just articulating a reaction function. It takes more credibility and commitment because it requires policymakers to directly influence and manage the public’s beliefs about the future policy path in ways that are different from how they may have behaved in the past. As I have indicated in previous speeches, this approach to forward guidance can backfire if the policy is misunderstood.1 For example, if the public hears that the policy rate will be lower for longer, it may interpret this news as policymakers saying that they expect the economy to be weaker for longer. If that is the interpretation of the message, then the forward guidance will not succeed and may even weaken current spending. The FOMC has not been clear about the purpose of its forward guidance. Is it purely a transparency device, or is it a way to commit to a more accommodative future policy stance to add more accommodation today? This lack of clarity makes it difficult to communicate the stance of policy and the conditionality of policy on the state of the economy. Note that most formulations of standard, simple policy rules suggest that the federal funds rate should rise very soon – if not already. In other words, the zero lower bound no longer appears to be binding. However, the FOMC has provided forward guidance indicating that the federal funds rate will need to be low for some time to come. How do we reconcile this apparent incongruity? It could be that the FOMC is using its forward guidance as a commitment device or signal for a more accommodative policy well into the future, as in the second approach I have discussed. Or, it could be the FOMC views forward guidance as a device for increased transparency but that it doesn’t think the standard rules apply in the current environment. Then what rules do apply? If policymakers are not relying on a rule or a rule-like reaction function, policy is purely discretionary and forward guidance becomes ineffective. In either case, we have an opportunity and an obligation to provide more transparency and better communication. 1 See Charles I. Plosser, “Forward Guidance,” speech to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research’s (SIEPR) Associates Meeting, February 12, 2013, Stanford, CA 7 This leads me to suggest that there is a more fundamental tension underlying our forward guidance and communication challenges. Forward guidance in either of the two approaches that I have discussed requires a degree of commitment to conduct future policy in some particular manner. That commitment is central to the success of either approach. Yet, I would suggest that the old “rules versus discretion” debate is alive and well. This, of course, is not a new tension within the FOMC, nor is it one that is likely to go away in the near term. But the heightened weight and prominence given to forward guidance as a policy tool has certainly shined a spotlight on this longstanding debate. The desire to maintain flexibility to respond to “events on the ground” is a strong one. One can make the case that discretion is deeply ingrained in most policy institutions, particularly the Fed. Yet, the desire to maintain discretion is anathema to the commitment required for successful forward guidance. Policymakers cannot maintain discretion and simultaneously commit to forward guidance and expect that guidance to be effective. So, I conclude as I began: Forward guidance and clear communications remain important challenges for monetary policymakers.

Perspectives on the U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy The Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) Golden Series Lecture London, England March 6, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Perspectives on the U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy The Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF) Golden Series Lecture Armourers’ Hall London, England March 6, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Plosser expects growth of about 3 percent in 2014. He also expects the unemployment rate to continue its steady decline and to reach about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014. Inflation expectations will be relatively stable, and inflation will move up toward the FOMC target of 2 percent over the next year. • President Plosser believes the Federal Open Market Committee has to revamp its current forward guidance regarding the future federal funds rate path because the 6.5 percent unemployment threshold has become irrelevant. • President Plosser favors providing more information on policymakers’ reaction function, which indicates how policy will evolve as economic conditions change. • President Plosser favors a more systematic, less discretionary approach to monetary policy. He believes it is time to switch from an interventionist mode for monetary policy to one that is more systematic. Introduction I am honored to participate in the Golden Series lectures and to be here in such a historic hall. The Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum is a relatively new organization, yet it is already establishing itself as an important venue for the exchange of views and ideas among policymakers and the private sector. It is similar to the Global Interdependence Center, a think tank based in Philadelphia, which is hosting a conference at the Banque de France next week, where I will join my friend Governor Christian Noyer. I note with interest that Governor Noyer will be speaking to you in just a few weeks’ time. 2 Our venue today has an impressive history. The Worshipful Company of Armourers and Brasiers has been operating at this location since 1346. That is nearly 350 years before the Bank of England was founded in 1694. Its original building survived the Great Fire of 1666, and this current building survived the 1940 Blitz. With so much history steeped in these halls, I hesitate to mention that the Federal Reserve is marking its 100th anniversary this year. The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 created a uniquely American approach to a central bank – a decentralized central bank – with 12 independent Federal Reserve Banks around the country and a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. This unique governance structure requires that I forewarn you that the views I express are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Economic Conditions The U.S. economy is now nearly five years into a recovery that began in June 2009. The recovery has been lackluster in many ways, yet it has made considerable progress nonetheless. The unemployment rate, for example, has fallen from its peak of 10.0 percent to 6.6 percent. Employment gains have restored some 7.8 million jobs since the trough, representing about 90 percent of the jobs lost since the peak. Stock prices have recovered, housing prices are up, and earnings at many businesses are healthy. It is my general view that the U.S. economy is on firmer footing today than it has been in several years. This is a cause for some optimism for continued progress in 2014. In recent weeks, there has been a blizzard of economic reports, which have come in weaker than expected. I believe that weakness largely reflects the severe winter weather rather than a frozen recovery. So, we must be wary of attaching too much significance to the latest numbers. As a monetary policymaker, I prefer to take a longer view rather than let our decisions be whipsawed by the most recent statistics, which are often noisy and subject to revision. Because monetary policy tends to work with a lag, we must keep our attention focused on the intermediate- to longer-term underlying trends if we are to make wise decisions. 3 Based on the latest GDP numbers revised last week, the U.S. economy performed noticeably better in the second half of 2013 than in the first half. Specifically, real output grew at a 3.3 percent pace in the second half of the year compared with 1.8 percent in the first half. While this is far from the robust growth that many would like to see, it continues to represent steady progress and an improving economy. My forecast calls for about 3 percent growth in 2014. This is in line with the central tendency of 2.8 to 3.2 percent growth reported by my colleagues on the FOMC in December 2013. There has been discussion of some recent weakness in consumer spending, housing starts, and housing sales. For instance, in January, total retail sales fell by 0.4 percent; housing starts dropped sharply in January by 2 percent compared with the level of a year ago; and existing home sales dropped about 5 percent from a year ago. While some softening in home sales might be expected from the rise in mortgage rates, those rates are still very low by historical standards, and new home sales surged in January, rising to their highest level since 2008. Despite the mixed housing data, continued household formation constitutes a source of growth in housing demand. So, I expect that housing will continue its recovery in 2014, once we get past the severe weather. Consumer spending, which accounts for more than two-thirds of U.S. GDP, proved to be quite resilient in 2013, despite the rise in payroll taxes at the start of the year, a government shutdown, significant uncertainties about future tax policy, and the implications of health-care reform. Going forward, I expect that there will be less fiscal drag on the economy in 2014 than we saw in 2013. Moreover, rising home prices and stock prices have helped improve consumer balance sheets. I have frequently noted that one reason for the less-than- robust growth in consumption during this recovery has been the deleveraging efforts by consumers. With consumers carrying too much debt, spending was inevitably going to give way to more saving as consumers attempted to restore the health of their balance 4 sheets. That process has been playing out, and the drag from deleveraging is waning. In addition, steady, moderate job growth has led to modest increases in income. I foresee somewhat more robust spending by consumers in the coming year as these trends continue. Weather also affected recent manufacturing numbers in the U.S. The Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers in our region has been a reliable indicator of national manufacturing trends in the U.S. In February, the diffusion index of current activity fell into negative territory for the first time in nine months. However, most respondents attributed the weakness to the severe winter weather. Consistent with such comments, expectations for manufacturing activity six months ahead increased in February. On the job front, the January employment report posted payroll gains of 113,000 jobs, following an increase of 75,000 jobs in December, again most likely reflecting in part the effect of the unusually severe winter weather. As we look at the employment averages over several months, the news remains positive. Based on the latest revision, firms added an average of 194,000 jobs per month in 2013, which is a somewhat better pace than in 2012. This consistent pace of job growth was enough to drop the unemployment rate to 6.6 percent in January. I expect that the unemployment rate will reach about 6.2 percent by the end of 2014, and, if anything, that may prove too pessimistic. Given the recent trends, an unemployment rate below 6 percent is certainly plausible. In terms of the other part of the Fed’s mandate, inflation has been running somewhat below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation is the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. It came in at 1.1 percent last year. It is important to defend our 2 percent inflation target both from below and above. Yet, I anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, that inflation will move back toward our target 5 over time. Economic growth is firming, and some of the factors that have held inflation down, such as the one-time cut in payments to Medicare providers, are likely to abate over time. An additional and important determinant of actual inflation is consumer and business expectations of inflation. I am encouraged that inflation expectations remain near their longer-term averages and consistent with our 2 percent target. Given the large amount of monetary accommodation that we have added and continue to add to the economy, I think there is some upside risk to inflation in the longer term. Of course, with any forecast, there are risks. While there continues to be some downside risk to growth, for the first time in years, I see the potential for more upside risk to the economic outlook. We need to consider this possibility as we calibrate monetary policy. Monetary Policy So let me turn to some issues for monetary policy. The Federal Reserve has taken extraordinary policy actions to support the economic recovery. The Fed has lowered its policy rate — the federal funds rate — to essentially zero, where it has been for more than five years. Since the policy rate cannot go any lower, the Fed has attempted to provide additional accommodation through large-scale asset purchases. We are now in our third round of this quantitative easing. Since September 2012, the FOMC has added about $1.3 trillion in long-term Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities to its balance sheet through this program, buying at a pace of $85 billion a month in 2013. This program, known as QE3, is already twice the size of the last round of asset purchases initiated in November 2010, known as QE2. In December 2013, the Committee announced that it would reduce the pace of purchases from $85 billion to $75 billion per month. In January, it announced a further reduction to $65 billion. The FOMC is now on a path of measured reductions, which, if 6 continued, will end the purchase program later this year. If the economy continues to improve, we could find ourselves still trying to increase accommodation in an environment in which history suggests that policy should perhaps be moving in the opposite direction. In addition to asset purchases, the Fed is using forward guidance as a policy tool, which is intended to inform the public about the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. In this dimension, the FOMC has indicated that it intends to leave the policy rate near zero well past the time that the unemployment rate falls below the 6.5 percent threshold. The FOMC had previously indicated that this was the earliest point at which it would consider raising interest rates, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent target. Even though the FOMC has said that it doesn’t anticipate raising rates when the economy crosses that threshold, I believe that with the economy so close to the unemployment threshold, we face a communications challenge. In particular, we have not described how policy will be conducted after the unemployment rate falls below 6.5 percent. Communication Challenges But before we offer further forward guidance, it is important to be clear about what this forward guidance is supposed to accomplish. As that famous American baseball player Yogi Berra is reported to have said, “You have to be careful if you don’t know where you’re going because you might end up somewhere else.” One way to think of forward guidance is that it is just another step toward increased transparency and effective communication of monetary policy. This approach seeks to clarify how policymakers will alter policy as economic conditions change, that is, to describe a reaction function. By being more transparent about how policy will evolve as a function of economic conditions, this approach can help the public form more accurate expectations about the future path of monetary policy. 7 Economists have learned that expectations play an important role in determining economic outcomes. When businesses and households have a better understanding of how monetary policy is likely to evolve, they can make more informed spending and financial decisions. If policymakers can reduce uncertainty about the course of monetary policy, the economy is likely to perform more efficiently. Of course, in order to communicate something about the reaction function, you have to have one. That means in order to succeed with this approach to forward guidance, policymakers must be able to agree on how they will systematically respond to changes in economic conditions. To be useful, however, the reaction function need not be mechanistic. Qualitative information about such a function and how it will be implemented can also be useful and meaningful. Nevertheless, some degree of commitment to abide by the specified reaction function is necessary if the communication is to achieve the desired result of reducing policy uncertainty and providing meaningful forward guidance. A somewhat different rationale or view of forward guidance is that it is a way of increasing accommodation when the policy rate is at or near the zero lower bound. Some models suggest that when you are at the zero lower bound, it can be desirable, or optimal, to indicate that future policy rates will be kept “lower for longer” than might otherwise be the case. Thus, policymakers may want to deliberately commit to deviating from what they would otherwise choose to do under normal conditions, such as following a Taylor-like rule. In these models, such a commitment would tend to raise inflation expectations and lower long-term nominal rates, thereby inducing households and businesses to spend more today. This approach asks more of forward guidance than just articulating a reaction function. It takes more credibility and commitment because it requires policymakers to directly influence and manage the public’s beliefs about the future policy path that differs from how policymakers behaved in the past. As I have indicated in previous speeches, this 8 approach to forward guidance can backfire if the policy is misunderstood.1 For example, if the public hears that the policy rate will be lower for longer, it may interpret this news as policymakers saying that they expect the economy to be weaker for longer. If that is the interpretation of the message, then the forward guidance will not succeed and may even weaken current spending. The FOMC has not been clear about the purpose of its forward guidance. Is it purely a transparency device, or is it a way to commit to a more accommodative future policy stance to add more accommodation today? This lack of clarity makes it difficult to communicate the stance of policy and the conditionality of policy on the state of the economy. I believe there is another – perhaps more fundamental – tension underlying forward guidance and communication. Forward guidance in either of the two approaches I have discussed requires a degree of commitment to conduct future policy in some particular manner. Commitment is central to the success of either approach. Yet, I would suggest that the old “rules versus discretion” debate is alive and well. This, of course, is not a new tension within the FOMC, nor is it one that is likely to go away in the near term. But the heightened weight and prominence given to forward guidance as a policy tool has certainly shined a spotlight on this longstanding debate. The desire to maintain flexibility to respond to “events on the ground” is a strong one. One can make the case that discretion is deeply ingrained in most policy institutions, particularly the Fed. Yet, the desire to maintain discretion is anathema to the commitment required for successful forward guidance. Policymakers cannot maintain discretion and simultaneously commit to forward guidance and expect that guidance to be effective. 1 See Charles I. Plosser, “Forward Guidance,” speech to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research’s (SIEPR) Associates Meeting, February 12, 2013, Stanford, CA. 9 Conclusion In summary, I believe that the U.S. economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. We are likely to see growth of around 3 percent in 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, and I expect the unemployment rate will continue to decline, reaching 6.2 percent or lower by the end of 2014. I also believe that inflation expectations will be relatively stable and that inflation will move up toward our goal of 2 percent over the next year. On monetary policy, we must back away from increasing the degree of policy accommodation in a manner commensurate with an improving economy. Reducing the pace of asset purchases in measured steps is moving in the right direction, but the pace may leave us well behind the curve if the economy continues to play out according to the FOMC forecasts. Even after the asset purchase program has ended, monetary policy will still be highly accommodative. As the expansion gains traction, the challenge will be to reduce accommodation and to normalize policy in a way that ensures that inflation remains close to our target, that the economy continues to grow, and that we avoid sowing the seeds of another financial crisis. Let me conclude with this thought. Over the past five years, the Fed and, dare I say, many other central banks have become much more interventionist. I do not think this is a particularly healthy state of affairs for the central banks or our economies. The crisis in the U.S. has long passed. With a growing economy and the Fed’s long-term asset purchases coming to an end, now is the time to contemplate restoring some semblance of normalcy to monetary policy. In my view, the proper role for monetary policy is to work behind the scenes in limited and systematic ways to promote long-term growth and price stability. But since the onset of the financial crisis, central banks have become highly interventionist in their efforts to manipulate asset prices and financial markets in general as they attempt to 10 fine-tune economic outcomes. This approach has continued well past the end of the financial crisis. While the motivations may be noble, we have created an environment where “it is all about the Fed.” Market participants focus entirely too much on how the central bank may tweak its policy, and central bankers have become too sensitive and desirous of managing prices in the financial world. I do not see this as a healthy symbiotic relationship for the long term. If financial market participants believe that their success depends primarily on the next decisions of monetary policymakers rather than economic fundamentals, our capital markets will cease to deliver the economic benefits they are capable of providing. And if central banks do not limit their interventionist strategies and focus on returning to more normal policymaking aimed at promoting price stability and long-term growth, then they will simply encourage the financial markets to ignore fundamentals and to focus, instead, on the next actions of the central bank. I hope we can find a way to normalize the role of monetary policy to one that is less interventionist, less discretionary, and more systematic. I believe our longer-term economic health will be the beneficiary.
