Why I Dissented: Neel Kashkari September 18, 2020 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Why I Dissented: Neel Kashkari Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This essay is also available on Medium . I strongly support the new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy 1 that the Federal Open Market Committee has adopted. It incorporates the lessons we have learned from the prior recovery and gives the Committee sufficient flexibility to make up for periods of low inflation in order to achieve our dual mandate goals. However, I voted against the FOMC’s September 16, 2020, policy statement because, while I believe the statement is a positive step forward in putting those lessons into practice, I would have preferred the Committee make a stronger commitment to not raising rates until we were certain to have achieved our dual mandate objectives. The 2015 tightening cycle To explain my rationale for seeking stronger forward guidance, I first must review what I learned from the recent tightening cycle that began in 2015. That policy tightening was predicated on the Committee’s view that the labor market was reaching maximum employment and therefore inflation was around the corner. When I first became an FOMC voter, I dissented against all three of the Committee’s rate hikes in 2017 because, as I wrote then: “We are still coming up short on our inflation target, and the job market continues to strengthen, suggesting that slack remains.” 2 Recently, Governor Brainard commented: “had the changes to monetary policy goals and strategy we made in the new [monetary policy strategy] been in place several years ago, it is likely that accommodation would have been withdrawn later, and the gains [to the labor market] would have been greater.” 3 We misread the labor market and, as a result, the tightening cycle that we embarked upon was not optimal to achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices. In recent years, we have repeatedly believed we were at or beyond maximum employment only to be surprised when many more Americans reentered the labor market or chose not to leave, increasing the productive capacity of the economy without causing high inflation. To me, maximum employment is the point at which the labor market is just tight enough to deliver 2 percent inflation in equilibrium. If we were to push the labor market harder, we would end up with inflation greater than 2 percent. By this definition, even in January 2020, we had not yet reached maximum employment. Why did we consistently make this error? First, we heard repeatedly from businesses who complained that they couldn’t find workers. Some said we had a “historic worker shortage.” At the same time, wages were only rising modestly. I learned that businesses want qualified workers at wages they are used to paying. If they can’t readily find workers at historical wage levels, then they declare a worker shortage. The fact that wages weren’t climbing more quickly helped me to see through their complaints and realize that there was likely still slack in the labor market. Second, economists and policymakers often raise their estimates of the natural rate of unemployment in recessions, believing that workers’ skills diminish, their skills become obsolete in a changing economy, and as they are dislocated from the labor market, they then become hard to reengage during a recovery. For example, if some policymakers believed that 4 percent was the lowest the unemployment rate could go without triggering high inflation during an expansion, they might ratchet it up to 5 percent or 6 percent after a recession. And then when the unemployment rate fell during the recovery back to 6 percent or even 5 percent, some policymakers might believe we must be at maximum employment. In December 2015, when the Committee decided to first raise rates off the effective lower bound, the median FOMC participant thought the lowest unemployment could go without triggering inflation was 4.9 percent, while the actual unemployment rate at the time was 5.1 percent. By February 2020, the unemployment rate had fallen to 3.5 percent without inflation returning to our target. That’s 2.3 million more Americans working than we thought the economy could sustain just a few years earlier. While I accept that there may be some increase in the natural rate of unemployment in recessions, I believe that economists have overstated the extent of the increase. The result has been a ratcheting up of the natural rate of unemployment in recessions that is harmful because it leads to policy that is too tight. My takeaway from this recent experience is that it is difficult to assess in real time whether we are at maximum employment and whether inflation really is around the corner. Why do I want stronger forward guidance? The new policy statement includes this new forward guidance language: “The Committee expects it will be appropriate to maintain this target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee’s assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time.” This language is an example of outcome-based forward guidance, where the Committee indicates it expects to keep rates at the effective lower bound until certain economic conditions are met. I support the adoption of outcome-based forward guidance as an important step forward for the Committee’s approach to setting monetary policy. My preference, however, would have been for this new forward guidance to be stronger. Specifically, this new language still relies on the Committee to assess whether we are at maximum employment and whether inflation is expected to climb. As I just reviewed, those are difficult judgments to make in real time. For example, what would have happened had the FOMC adopted this forward guidance in 2012, when it first adopted its 2 percent inflation target? Inflation briefly crossed 2 percent in January 2017 before falling back down. Given that we believed at the time we were at or beyond maximum employment, this new forward guidance would likely have deferred liftoff from December 2015 to January 2017, a little more than one year later. While that would have been an improvement over what the Committee actually did, we still would have been lifting off based on a misreading of the labor market and a false signal that underlying inflation had really returned to target. Hence, we still may not have achieved our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. My proposal In June 2019, I proposed forward guidance that I continue to believe would better assist the FOMC in achieving its dual mandate goals. Specifically, I propose the following: “The Committee expects to maintain this target range until core inflation has reached 2 percent on a sustained basis.” By eliminating both the direct reference to our assessment of maximum employment and any forecast of inflation climbing, this proposed language guards against the risk of underestimating slack in the labor market. We would only lift off once we had demonstrated that we really were at maximum employment, because core inflation would have had to actually hit or exceed 2 percent on a sustained basis in order to lift off. Policymakers will have a range of opinions about what constitutes a sustained basis, but for me in this environment, it means roughly a year. Our new monetary policy strategy says that after periods of low inflation, the Committee “will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time.” Not raising rates for roughly a year after core inflation first crosses 2 percent is consistent with a strategy of aiming for a modest overshoot in order to achieve average inflation of 2 percent. What might be wrong? Under what scenario might the Committee regret adopting the forward guidance I propose? If inflationary pressures are building, we might have to raise rates to keep inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent. Once core inflation crosses 2 percent on a sustained basis, my proposal allows the Committee to do exactly that. This scenario should not be a concern. We heard in the last expansion that there might be nonlinearities in the inflation process—that once inflation started climbing, it might accelerate, requiring a very strong policy response to control it. At the time, I called such theories ghost stories, because there was no evidence they were true but they also couldn’t be ruled out. I believe that characterization is still appropriate today. The FOMC has powerful tools to combat high inflation but only limited tools to combat low inflation. Persistent low inflation is posing challenges to advanced economies around the world. If this new forward guidance helped to generate higher inflation that the FOMC then had to respond to by raising rates, I think we would consider that a high-class problem. Endnotes 1 See the statement from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2 See my dissent explanation from 2017. 3 See Brainard’s speech . More On Inflation Monetary Policy Policy More On Inflation Monetary Policy Policy Related Content A strategy to re-anchor inflation expectations Article The Flattening Yield Curve Article Why I Dissented a Third Time Article Related Content A strategy to re-anchor inflation expectations Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Capital Markets and Banking Regulation President Kashkari’s speech to the Conference of Institutional Investors September 18, 2020 | 2:00 p.m. CT Neel Kashkari President and CEO Capital Markets and Banking Regulation Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Your browser does not support the audio element. Full event video ( video ) Prepared remarks I really appreciate the opportunity to be with you today and to speak to the Council of Institutional Investors. As a reminder, my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System or of the Federal Open Market Committee. I also thank you for allowing us to record and replay my remarks, which is important for transparency. I am excited to join you today because of who CII is—long-term investors who work on behalf of millions of Americans to secure their economic futures. With $4 trillion of assets under management, you are important stakeholders in our financial system. While there are other large players in our economy and capital markets, few combine that scale with such a long-term perspective. You don’t have the luxury of looking out only one or two quarters or even one or two years; you make decisions that will affect your members many years in the future and even over decades. It is your unique combination of scale and long investment horizon that is motivating me to speak with you today. I know from my own experience in government and in the private sector that CII, and many of your members, are active leaders in driving positive changes in our economy and society. Take corporate governance as one example. You have long advocated for strong governance practices because, as you say, “CII believes effective corporate governance and disclosure serve the best long-term interests of companies, shareowners and other stakeholders. Effective corporate governance helps companies achieve strategic goals and manage risks by ensuring that shareowners can hold directors to account as their representatives.” Another example is climate change. Several leading pension plans actively promote environmental sustainability by investing in companies that are aligned with their goals and principles. It seems to me that you take on issues that (1) are in your members’ long-term interest, (2) your scale and your role in our economy position you to help drive meaningful change, and (3) are the right things to do for society as a whole. I want to speak with you today about another issue that I think meets that three-part test and on which I believe you should focus your policy agenda; that is, capital markets and banking regulation. I know this is not a new issue for you, as many of you have identified financial market stability as important to your ability to deliver for your members. However, I am going to argue today that you should elevate this issue to the forefront of your agenda because large, unacceptable risks remain, and you are uniquely situated to drive change. Your members and all Americans deserve better than the financial system we have today. Earlier in my career, I worked at the U.S. Treasury Department and oversaw the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP) in the Bush and Obama administrations. I confess that the experience of battling the global financial crisis is burned into me. In the worst moments of the crisis, we didn’t know if our financial system, our banking system, and our broader economy would pull through. Looking back, I realize that our programs—Treasury’s, the Fed’s and Congress’ fiscal programs—were effective in stabilizing the crisis, but I also know that we got lucky. We didn’t know for sure that our programs would work. We were taking our best shot. It could have been much worse. We saw that fragile capital markets and a fragile banking system can inflict enormous damage on the broader economy and on Main Street—on everyday Americans living their lives far away from Wall Street. These are your members. Think back to 2008. What was happening to your pension plans? What was happening to their funding status? For most, it was a catastrophe in the making and, even with the massive government intervention, many plans haven’t recovered. The most recent data from the Federal Reserve 1 show that before the financial crisis, state and local pensions were about 66 percent funded. That fell to 48 percent in the crisis and most recently had only recovered to around 52 percent. Beyond the pressures on pension plans, think about the hardships your members faced. Even with massive government intervention, millions of Americans lost their jobs. Many lost their homes. Many who were responsible and bought homes they could afford lost those homes after they lost their jobs. The financial crisis was deeply unfair in who paid the price for the risks that had built up in the financial sector. Following the financial crisis and Great Recession, Congress passed the Dodd-Frank Act, and new regulations were put in place to increase the resilience of the banking sector. That act and the reforms that followed were based on a fundamental design principle: Keep the basic architecture of our financial system unchanged. Just strengthen the existing structure, but don’t be so aggressive that it leads to major changes. As a result, large banks were forced to increase their capital levels modestly and fund themselves with longer-term liabilities. Stress tests were introduced. But the basic architecture and the main players didn’t change. Did the reforms work? The largest banks in America do have higher capital levels than they had before the crisis and do fund themselves with less short-term borrowing. But the 10 largest bank holding companies in America are around 45 percent larger than they were going into 2008, having grown from roughly $9 trillion to nearly $13 trillion in assets. 2 While banks often complain that regulations are hurting their competitiveness, the data show that is simply not true. When I joined the Minneapolis Fed in 2016, we embarked on a review of the issue of banks being too big to fail to assess the reforms that had been implemented and whether more were needed. Our analysis, and that of many other independent researchers and academics since, confirms that large banks in America today are still too big to fail, and their capital levels are not high enough to balance the benefits society gains from their scale with the risks they pose to the economy. 3 This analysis shows clearly that large banks should fund themselves with equity of at least 24 percent of risk-weighted assets—up from around 13 percent today. That would maximize the benefit to society and protect taxpayers because, at those levels, banks could cover their own losses. Banks make all sorts of arguments against higher capital requirements that are easily refuted. First, they say they will be at a competitive disadvantage if other countries don’t follow suit. But that has already proven to be false because U.S. banks are outcompeting European banks that have even more lax regulations. Next, they say the U.S. economy benefits from their large economies of scale and that will be lost if they are forced to issue more equity, because they might choose to break themselves up to get around the higher capital requirements. If, in fact, they have such economies of scale, then they should be able to afford higher capital levels than small banks. Perversely, large banks have, on average, much lower levels of capital than small banks even though small banks don’t pose a systemic risk to the economy. It’s the exact opposite of the way it should be. Finally, their favorite line is that lending will be curtailed if they have to fund themselves with more equity. But up until COVID-19 hit, they were buying back billions of dollars of their stock each year. In fact, combined, the eight largest global banks headquartered in the United States bought back more than $110 billion of stock in 2019 alone. 4 If capital was constraining lending, why were they buying back their stock? It is nonsense. Large banks will never address these risks on their own. Their management teams have a fiduciary duty to their shareholders, which are you and your members, to maximize shareholder value. And the shareholder value-maximizing business strategy is for banks to expose the taxpayers to as much risk as possible and then count on the government to bail them out in bad times. More specifically, they are charged to run with as little equity as possible—that is how you maximize earnings per share. Large bank CEOs would not be doing their jobs for shareholders if they didn’t fight back against regulations that could protect taxpayers and make the financial system safer. This is not hyperbole. This is the reality of our economic system and why they are willing to make silly arguments that are so easily refuted. There are some risks in society like this—we call them externalities—which the private sector simply cannot address on its own, and that is why strong government regulation is necessary to address those risks. Congress considered financial system reform when it wrote the Dodd-Frank Act, and it chose not to be aggressive in reforming our financial system. Why not? I have asked that question of numerous members of Congress on both sides of the aisle. They respond simply that financial firms have enormous influence on Capitol Hill. Strong regulation is the textbook response to externalities such as pollution or too-big-to-fail risks. However, that response fails if the regulated entities have too much political power. And, unfortunately, that appears to be the position we are in today. Before COVID-19, the good news, or so I thought, was that we had time. Prior to the Great Recession, the last time the United States had a systemic financial crisis was during the Great Depression. So I thought, if these massive shocks happen only every 80 years, then we could take our time to reform the system. And then COVID-19 hit us. Much to my surprise and horror, in March of this year, the financial system faced another systemic collapse as fear gripped markets and investors shunned most securities in favor of cash. Facing this crisis, the Federal Reserve stepped up forcefully to backstop the financial system, pumping trillions of dollars into markets and directly supporting money markets, municipal bond markets, mortgage markets, corporate bond markets, and the Treasury market. In 2020, the Fed acted much faster and more aggressively than it did in 2008. I fully support the Fed’s actions in responding to the COVID-19 crisis, but I just can’t believe that it happened again, only 12 years later. And I keep asking myself, what kind of absurd financial system do we have that requires the central bank to bail it out every decade? How can it possibly be this fragile? So far, this financial crisis has been focused on funding markets, such as commercial paper and money markets, rather than large banks. You might not realize it, but the banks got a lot of help. How have the tens of millions of Americans who lost their jobs because of COVID-19 been able to make their credit card payments, car payments, and rent and mortgage payments? Most have been able to make these payments because Congress acted so quickly and aggressively to send money to people, including the $1,200 one-time checks many Americans received and the extra $600 a week in unemployment benefits. Bank losses would have been much, much larger if the American people didn’t have this extra money to make payments on their loans. I applaud Congress’ bold actions to support people affected by the COVID-19 crisis, but we need to be clear that families weren’t the only beneficiaries. This was also a banking bailout. In my mind, the funding markets that almost collapsed in March raise important and complex policy questions. Unlike addressing the risks of too-big-to-fail banks, where the solution is clear and straightforward—force them to fund themselves with more equity—the solution to fragile funding markets is less obvious but also important. Fundamentally, I wonder why we allow firms, financial or otherwise, to fund themselves overnight? What societal value is there in such a system that proves so fragile when risks emerge? The primary value I see is that it allows firms to eke out a few extra basis points of earnings in good times and then requires the central bank to backstop it when risks emerge. This is the definition of privatized profits and socialized losses. That strikes me as an absurd system for the country. We need to carefully study what happened in these markets in 2008 and again in 2020 to develop effective solutions. In my view, we can’t keep doing what we’ve been doing. I am not suggesting that we could eliminate all financial crises if we aggressively addressed these flaws in our banking and financial system. Crises have happened throughout financial history and no doubt will continue to happen in the future. I do believe that with smart, aggressive regulation, the American economy could thrive on an efficient, competitive, and innovative financial system that was more resilient against shocks—one that required taxpayers to step in far less often and at lower cost. So why am I coming to you? Because you are uniquely positioned to drive much-needed reforms in the banking sector and the broader financial markets that have proven so fragile. First, you are large-bank shareholders. Bank management will argue they are just doing their jobs, simply trying to maximize shareholder value for you. But you are in a position to recognize that maximizing the value of one sector of your portfolio that then puts the rest of your portfolio at risk doesn’t make sense. You are in a better position than most to understand the spillovers of these financial system risks. And you can demand change as shareholders. Second, you are huge players in the capital markets, which means you are important customers of large banks. If the largest pension plans in America got together and said we aren’t going to trade with banks that do not have at least 24 percent equity, they would increase their capital levels. Banks are hard to change—but they know they have to listen to their clients, because the marketplace is competitive. And if they don’t listen to you, some of their competitors will. Don’t underestimate your potential influence as major capital markets clients of large banks to demand and drive change. Third, the bailouts worked in 2008, and they worked again, so far, in 2020. Will they work next time? Will there be political will to backstop the financial system the next time there is a massive shock, such as a real estate bust or another pandemic? I don’t know. Will there even be the political will to continue to support Americans who’ve lost their jobs because of COVID-19? I hope so. Is betting on successful future bailouts a sensible risk for your members? I would argue the answer is a resounding no. I am here today to ask you to put meaningful banking and financial system reform at the front of your agenda. I believe your members and the American people deserve a resilient financial system that doesn’t require a bailout every decade or so. Fixing this system is absolutely in your members’ long-term interest. Your scale and your role in the capital markets uniquely position you to help drive meaningful change. And it is clearly the right thing to do for society. We at the Minneapolis Fed would be pleased to work with you to share what we’ve learned, examine these recent episodes, and advance solutions that will finally address these risks. Thank you. Endnotes 1 See state pension data from the Board of Governors of the Federal reserve System. 2 Minneapolis Fed calculations based on data from the FR Y-9C (Consolidated Financial Statements for Holding Companies). 3 See The Minneapolis Plan to End Too Big to Fail (pp. 16-17) for citations to six analyses finding net benefits to higher equity levels. Former Fed Chair Janet Yellen also summarized some of this same material and noted that “this research points to benefits from capital requirements in excess of those adopted.” 4 Minneapolis Fed calculation based on data from Bloomberg Finance L.P. Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Racism and the Economy: Series kickoff event October 7, 2020 1:00 p.m. - 3:30 p.m. ET | 12:00 p.m. - 2:30 p.m. CT Virtual video event Racism and the Economy: Series kickoff event Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Your browser does not support the audio element. Watch the full event ( video ) Understanding the implications of structural racism in America’s economy and advancing actions to improve economic outcomes for all. Racism forms the foundation of inequality in our society; it limits opportunity for people of color and threatens the health of our economy. While the global pandemic has intensified racial and economic disparities, the killing of George Floyd has provoked people from all walks of life to address the systems and structures that enable and perpetuate these outcomes. Racism and the Economy series page Learn more about the series and upcoming events. The Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Minneapolis have partnered to present a series of virtual events where community, business, and academic leaders will examine the economic impact of racism and advance bold ideas and concrete actions to achieve an economy that makes opportunity available to everyone. The kickoff event on Wednesday, October 7, 2020, was the first in a series over the next several months exploring context and actions to address systemic racism in employment, housing, education, criminal justice, and other topics. Raphael Bostic , Neel Kashkari , and Eric Rosengren , the presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Minneapolis, and Boston were joined for this virtual event by nationally recognized experts: Angela Glover Blackwell , PolicyLink Ursula Burns , former Xerox Corporation Geoffrey Canada , Harlem Children’s Zone Carmen Rojas , Marguerite Casey Foundation Kai Ryssdal , Marketplace Full event transcript Article “Racism and the Economy” series launched Read the recap article from this event Event Details October 7, 2020 1:00 p.m. - 3:30 p.m. ET | 12:00 p.m. - 2:30 p.m. CT Virtual video event Event media coverage “Racism and the Economy," a series of virtual events hosted by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Minneapolis The University of Chicago Financial Education Initiative | Nov. 18, 2020 What role can the Fed play in building a more inclusive economy? Marketplace | Oct. 13, 2020 We can’t just ‘sit by, wait and hope’ for racial equity in America, say Atlanta Fed’s Bostic MarketWatch | Oct. 8, 2020 Fed officials vow to alter long-held practices to beat inequity American Banker | Oct. 7, 2020 The Federal Reserve Has A Role To Play In Reducing Racism In The American Economy Forbes | Oct. 7, 2020 'We need to step forward': Fed leaders call for new focus on race in the economy Politico | Oct. 7, 2020 Minneapolis Fed joins with other regional banks to tackle racism and the economy Star Tribune | Oct. 7, 2020 Fed's Kashkari Aims for Beige Book That Looks Beyond Business U.S. News & World Report | Oct. 7, 2020 Atlanta Fed President: 'Racism robs our economy' Atlanta Business Chronicle | Oct. 5, 2020 Event Agenda Watch full video from each session by clicking on the session’s title Wednesday, October 7, 2020 12:00 p.m. – 12:05 p.m. CT Introduction & Opening Remarks Raphael Bostic, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 12:05 p.m. – 12:35 p.m. CT Keynote Speaker Angela Glover Blackwell, PolicyLink 12:35 p.m. – 1:15 p.m. CT A Discussion with Leaders Moderator Kai Ryssdal, Marketplace Leaders Geoffrey Canada, Harlem Children’s Zone Carmen Rojas, Marguerite Casey Foundation 1:15 p.m. – 1:40 p.m. CT Armchair Interview Ursula Burns, former Xerox Corporation Neel Kashkari, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 1:40 p.m. – 2:20 p.m. CT Reserve Bank Presidents Discussion Moderator Kai Ryssdal, Marketplace Reserve Bank Presidents Raphael Bostic, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Eric Rosengren, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Neel Kashkari, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 2:20 p.m. – 2:30 p.m. CT Closing Remarks Eric Rosengren, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Presenter Information Angela Glover Blackwell Founder in Residence, PolicyLink Angela Glover Blackwell founded PolicyLink in 1999 with a mission of advancing racial and economic equity for all. Through her work, Blackwell has helped to grow and define a national equity movement focused on innovating and improving public policy with a wide range of partners to ensure access and opportunity for all low-income people and communities of color. As a leading voice in the movement for equity in America, Blackwell is a frequent commentator for some of the nation’s top news publications and programs, including the New York Times , Washington Post , “Marketplace,” and PBS’s “NewsHour.” She is also the host of Radical Imagination podcast. Blackwell serves on numerous boards, including the Children’s Defense Fund, the W. Haywood Burns Institute, the U.S. Water Alliance, Pitzer College, and FSG. She also advises the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as one of 15 members of its Community Advisory Council. She earned a bachelor’s degree from Howard University and a law degree from the University of California, Berkeley. Ursula Burns Former chairman, Xerox Corporation Ursula Burns has extensive international experience in large companies confronting technology change in their industries. In June 2017, she was appointed chairman of VEON Ltd. She became chairman and CEO in December 2018 until June 2020. Burns joined Xerox as an intern in 1980 and ended as the chairman of the board of the Xerox Corporation from 2010 to 2017. President Barack Obama appointed her to help lead the White House national program on Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) from 2009 to 2016. Burns also provides leadership counsel to several other community, educational, and nonprofit organizations. She regularly appears on Fortune ’s and Forbes ’ lists of the world’s most powerful women and is a board director of Exxon Mobil, Nestlé, and Uber. She has received awards from the National Academy of Engineering, American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and Royal Academy of Engineering. Geoffrey Canada President, Harlem Children’s Zone Geoffrey Canada created the Harlem Children’s Zone, which the New York Times called “one of the most ambitious social-policy experiments of our time.” Canada is renowned worldwide for his pioneering work helping children and families in Harlem and as a thought leader and passionate advocate for education reform. In June 2020, Canada founded the William Julius Wilson Institute (WJW), which will serve as the national platform to help communities impacted by poverty across the country design and implement their own place-based programs—and its first initiative will be to combat the devastation of COVID-19 in the Black community. Canada was named to the TIME 100 list of most influential people in the world and one of Fortune ’s 50 greatest leaders in the world. He grew up in the South Bronx and received a bachelor’s degree from Bowdoin College and a master’s degree from the Harvard Graduate School of Education. Carmen Rojas President and CEO, Marguerite Casey Foundation Carmen Rojas , Ph.D., is the president and CEO of the Marguerite Casey Foundation and founder of the Workers Lab, one of the nation’s leading funders and supporters of achieving a society where workers are powerful drivers of economic, political, and social transformation. Rojas is a nationally recognized leader in economic and worker justice and is widely published. She has served on several governing boards, including the General Service Foundation, Neighborhood Funders Group, and Workers Benefit Fund, and is a member of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco’s Community Advisory Council. Rojas earned a doctorate in city and regional planning from the University of California, Berkeley. She is a Fulbright scholar and was awarded a Human Rights and Department of Housing and Urban Development fellowship during her graduate work. Kai Ryssdal Host, Marketplace Kai Ryssdal is the host and senior editor of Marketplace, the most widely heard program on business and the economy—radio or television, commercial or public broadcasting—in the country. In addition, he joins forces with Marketplace Tech’s Molly Wood to connect the dots on the economy, tech, and culture as co-host of the podcast Make Me Smart with Kai and Molly. Ryssdal speaks regularly with CEOs of Fortune 500 companies, startup entrepreneurs, small business owners, and everyday participants in the American and global economies. He first came to Marketplace in 2001 as the host of Marketplace Morning Report, where he covered the economic aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, the collapse of Enron, and the slow buildup to the housing crash, the financial crisis, and the Great Recession. Before his career in broadcasting, Ryssdal served in the U.S. Navy and the Foreign Service. He’s a graduate of Emory and Georgetown universities, and lives in Los Angeles with his wife and four children. Partners Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
