1 From Sustained Recovery to Sustainable Growth: What a Difference Four Years Makes Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco To THE FORECASTERS CLUB New York, New York March 29, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY INTRODUCTION Thank you, President Rupkey, and thanks to everyone at the Forecasters Club. I recently gave a talk to some business leaders back in California, and I found myself describing the Fed as an “amazingly nerdy group of people who pore over data, computer models, and statistical analysis.” So I hope you’ll take it as a compliment when I say that being here with a bunch of folks who’ve willingly given up their lunch hour to discuss economic forecasting makes me feel right at home. Like you, I’ve attended many gatherings such as this in the years since the onset of the Great Recession. Sometime after the coffee is poured and the conversation begins, it invariably turns to where things stand with the recovery. Today, I’d like to propose we do something a little different … With an economy at full employment, inflation nearing the Fed’s 2 percent goal, and the expansion now in its eighth year, the data have spoken and the message is clear: We’ve largely attained the hard-sought recovery we’ve been after for the past nine years. 2 In light of this achievement, we need to shift the conversation from “how do we achieve a sustained recovery?” to “how do we sustain the recovery we’ve achieved?” I’d like to focus my remarks today on this topic of sustainable growth and to address a related question: “What will it take to improve the trend line on GDP growth from the historically low pace we experienced during the recovery?” When I was last here four years ago, I argued that, although the financial crisis had undeniably left its mark on the supply side of the economy, the primary problem we faced from the perspective of monetary policy was a lack of demand.1 The unemployment rate was stuck around 8 percent at that time, and the Federal Reserve was determined to get us back to full employment and 2 percent inflation. Spoiler alert: As our focus shifts to sustainable growth, today I will argue that supply- side factors are the main impediment to growth going forward – and that this calls for actions outside the purview of monetary policy. I know that you’ve heard from quite a few of my Fed colleagues in the past, so the following disclaimer should sound familiar: The views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. FOUR YEARS AGO As I begin, I want to take you back in time. The year is 2013. The month is February. Real GDP growth has averaged only about 2-percent annually since the recession ended in 2009 – a very slow pace compared with the other recoveries of the past. At the same time, the level of real GDP per capita is still about 1.6 percent lower than it had been five years earlier, before the recession started. Many forecasters and analysts, myself included, describe the pace of the recovery to be “tepid,” “anemic,” and “disappointing.” At this moment, it’s still an open question whether a full recovery is even in the cards – especially when it comes to the job market. In fact, there is debate among economists as to whether the unemployment rate will ever return to its pre-recession levels of around 5 percent or if we should adjust to a “new normal” of significantly higher unemployment. THE PRESENT 1 Williams (2013). 3 What a difference four years makes … we’re now very close to reaching the Fed’s dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. In fact, if you do the math, we are about as close to these goals as we’ve ever been. The latest jobs report has the national unemployment rate at 4.7 percent and this is right around where economists and the FOMC put the natural rate of unemployment. Incidentally, the natural rate of unemployment was largely viewed as being in the same neighborhood prior to the onset of the recession. So when it comes to unemployment, the new normal is the same as the old normal. In this one respect, the economy hasn’t changed much over the past decade. But, as I’ll get to in a moment, other more significant changes have taken place. Turning to price stability, downward inflation pressures that have held inflation persistently lower than 2 percent for the past several years have faded – and as I mentioned earlier, we’re near the Fed’s 2 percent goal. I expect that we will reach that goal in the next year or so. With the attainment of our dual mandate goals close at hand, now is more important than ever for monetary policy to work toward what I like to call a “Goldilocks economy” – an economy that doesn’t run too hot or too cold. We want the porridge to be just right. Our aim is to keep the economic expansion on a sound footing that can be sustained for as long as possible. The last thing any of us want is to undermine the hard-won gains we’ve made since the dark days of the recession.2 As it stands today, with the economy in striking distance of our goals, monetary policy still has the pedal to the metal. Even with the rate increase the FOMC announced a couple weeks ago at its March meeting, interest rates remain near historical lows. I’m sure that many, if not most of you, have taken a look at the FOMC’s statement which noted that “the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run.”3 I’m often asked, “since things are going well, why not just keep our foot on the gas?” The answer is that lifting it gradually off the pedal prevents the economy from overheating. 2 See Williams (2016) for further discussion. 3 Board of Governors (2017a). 4 This is why the FOMC took action in March, and why the median view of my FOMC colleagues is for three interest rate increases in 2017.4 My own view is similar to most of my FOMC colleagues. I should note, however, that given my forecast, along with upside risks, I would not rule out more than three increases total for this year. I want to emphasize that I see the pace of rate increases as gradual – that is, slower than in past economic expansions – and intended to bring monetary policy back to a normal stance. Importantly, I am confident that the economy will continue to grow at a healthy pace as we pursue this path of normalization. SLOW PACE OF GROWTH, SLOW GROWTH IN POTENTIAL I’ve spoken a bit about our recent past, and where things stand today. I want to spend the rest of my remarks on the future – particularly as it relates to sustainable growth. As we move forward, I see the unemployment rate nudging down a bit further, ultimately bottoming out near 4½ percent by the end of the year. Since the unemployment rate already has been hovering at or below most estimates of the natural rate for the past year, this implies a sustained, albeit relatively modest, overshooting of full employment. This, in turn, implies that some slowing of growth slightly below potential will be needed in the future. The reduction in unemployment has been very impressive. One of the fascinating things that’s been going on in the economy is that GDP growth has been almost equally unimpressive. As I mentioned, I referred to growth as “anemic” when I was here in 2013. Today, that pace of growth of just above 2 percent during the first half of the recovery is higher than my projection of 1¾ percent real GDP growth for this year and next. Incidentally, I know that many of you have it higher and that the Blue Chip, for example, forecasts 2.3 percent this year and 2.4 percent next. I’ll get into one of the reasons for this difference in a minute – but for the purposes of this discussion, I think we’d all agree that we’d all like to see our economy have the capacity to grow 4 Board of Governors (2017b). 5 faster without creating imbalances. Recently, a team of economists which included the San Francisco Fed’s John Fernald, looked at why GDP growth has been so slow, measured relative to its past relationship with the unemployment rate.5 Their work suggests that, for the unemployment rate to decline as much as it did, growth over this period must have consistently exceeded its potential. In conjunction with related research, it’s clear that the “disappointing” growth in GDP is in part due to slow growth in potential.6 SUPPLY SIDE This brings us back to the demand-supply distinction I made at the start. My contention is that now that we’ve reached maximum employment, demand is not the primary constraint that’s holding back further, sustainable expansion. Our focus going forward, therefore, should be on constraints which are largely coming from the supply side of the economy. As you know, overall economic growth depends broadly on growth in the supply of labor and productivity gains. Let’s start with the supply of labor. In a nutshell, the growth rate of the labor force is shrinking at the very time that demand for workers is rising. We’re no longer living in a 1970s and 1980s world, where a wave of young people and women are entering the workforce. The historical transition of women to the labor force is long complete. Baby boomers are retiring.7 And many prime-age men are beset by health and other challenges that are undermining their willingness or ability to work.8 With this as backdrop, over the next decade the labor force in the U.S. is projected to grow at only ½ percent per year,9 and this represents a considerable drop from the pace we’ve experienced over the past 40 years. This means that, unlike in the 1970s and ’80s, demographics will hold back rather than boost potential output growth. Now let’s look at productivity … As you know, productivity growth has been exceptionally weak over the past five years. I’d imagine some of you are asking, “this guy is coming to us from the backyard of Silicon Valley and he’s talking about weak productivity 5 Fernald et al. (2017). 6 Fernald (2016). 7 Aaronson et al. (2014). 8 Krueger (2016). 9 Congressional Budget Office (2016). 6 growth? Aren’t the streets clogged with self-driving cars out there?” Well, first let me say that, as I’m sure you’d attest, productivity is a notoriously tricky thing to measure. In the tech sector in particular, we hear the common refrain that economists are using outdated methods to quantify the pace of productivity growth. There is some truth to that critique, but the resulting measurement distortion appears small, and it’s not at all clear that it has gotten noticeably worse over time.10 With that said, there is a considerable difference between today’s innovation economy and the tech boom of the 1990s, when many of the new innovations were designed to make businesses more efficient and productive. Today, many new innovations are aimed at our leisure time. Sharing cat videos or finding where Pokémon is hiding can enrich our lives but not necessarily our productivity. Turning back to the data … Over the past 40 years, total-economy productivity growth has typically averaged between 1 and 1¼ percent per year, and I maintain this is a reasonable benchmark moving forward.11 In fact, with growth in the average educational attainment of our labor force slowing down, one important source of past productivity gains is fading.12 Barring the introduction of a major game-changing innovation for businesses (which are notoriously hard to predict), it’s going to be very difficult to get far above that rate of productivity growth. Combining that near 1 percent figure with labor force growth of 0.5 percent yields my trend growth estimate of 1.6 percent. I recognize that this figure is lower than many estimates out there -- and that difference may explain why my forecast of 1¾-percent GDP growth over this year and next is also lower than many private forecasters. But, I find the data and research compelling that the new normal for growth is much lower than in past decades. THE LIMITS OF MONETARY POLICY Four years ago, when we were addressing a lack of demand, there was a major role for monetary policy to play. Four years later, as we set our sights on supply, the limits of our monetary policy toolkit are more telling. Unshackling the economy from these supply-side restraints is instead the purview of things like federal fiscal policy, state and local legislative actions, philanthropy, business investment, public-private partnerships, etc. 10 Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016). 11 Byrne et al. (2016) and Gordon (2016). 12 Bosler et al. (2016). 7 The public and private decision makers who work in these realms have it within their toolkits to spark growth and innovation, if they so choose … to invest in priorities like education, training, safer and healthy neighborhoods, and infrastructure. All these things serve to build human capital and support a growing, productive workforce – supply-side factors that can move the trend line on potential growth. This does not mean that the role of monetary policy is any less important moving forward. To promote sustainable growth, it is critically important that the Fed continue to make data-driven decisions to keep the economy from overheating and to protect the hard-won gains we’ve made. Meanwhile, I believe strongly that any institution that has a stake in the future of American prosperity has a role to play in moving the ball forward. The San Francisco Fed is a founding member of a wonderful coalition called SPARCC – and in fact, I’ll be participating in an event with our partners tomorrow. They include investors and community stakeholders alike – united in the belief that, if we can bring investment in things like education, public health, and transit to underserved communities, then ultimately we all benefit. As the organization’s motto says, we all do better when everyone thrives. CONCLUSION As I wrap up, I must say that, although it’s always wonderful to talk with you, I much prefer being able to do so in light of more than seven years of economic expansion, inflation near 2 percent, and a new normal for unemployment which thankfully looks a lot like the old, pre-recession normal. It’s great to be able to ask questions like how do we sustain the recovery we’ve achieved? – to be able to look at sustainable growth post-recovery, rather than having to focus on creating a sustained recovery. Like I said, what a difference four years makes! Thank you all very much. 8 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. 2014. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197–255. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/labor-force- participation-recent-developments-and-future-prospects/ Blue Chip Economic Indicators. 2017. Vol. 42, No. 3, March 10 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017a. “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement.” Press Release, March 15. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20170315a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017b. “FOMC Projections Materials.” March 15. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20170315.pdf Bosler, Canyon, Mary C. Daly, John Fernald, and Bart Hobijn. 2016. “The Outlook for U.S. Labor-Quality Growth.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-14. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working-papers/2016/wp2016-14.pdf Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf. 2016. “Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, conference draft (March). https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/does-the-united-states-have-a-productivity- slowdown-or-a-measurement-problem/ Congressional Budget Office. 2016. “An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2016 to 2026.” Report, August. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/51908 Fernald, John. 2016. “What Is the New Normal for U.S. Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-30 (October 11). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2016/october/new- normal-for-gdp-growth/ Fernald, John G., Robert E. Hall, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson. 2017. “The Disappointing Recovery of Output after 2009.” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, conference draft (March). https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/the-disappointing-recovery-of-output-after-2009/ Gordon, Robert J. 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Krueger, Alan B. 2016. “Where Have All the Workers Gone?” Paper prepared for the Boston Federal Reserve Bank’s 60th Economic Conference, October 14. https://www.bostonfed.org/- /media/Documents/economic/conf/great-recovery-2016/krueger-presentation.pdf Williams, John C. 2013. “The Economy and Monetary Policy: Follow the Demand.” Presentation to the Forecasters Club, New York, New York. February 21. http://www.frbsf.org/our- district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2013/february/williams-economy-monetary- policy-follow-demand/ Williams, John C. 2016. “Longview: The Economic Outlook.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-24 (August 22). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2016/august/longview- economic-outlook-anchorage-speech/

1 The Jenga Tower of Prosperity: The Strong, Prosperous, & Resilient Communities Challenge (SPARCC) Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco New York, New York March 30, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY INTRODUCTION Good afternoon. You heard correctly, I’m indeed here representing the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. Some of you may be asking yourself, “Why him? What does an economist who traffics in monetary policy and normally focuses on the macroeconomy have to do with efforts like these?” And in a broader sense, why would an institution like the San Francisco Fed be a part of this coalition? These are fair questions. At the same time, I would argue that it would also be fair to ask the inverse … why would an organization concerned with our country’s economic future willingly step aside from big challenges such as these? PROSPERITY IS LIKE A JENGA TOWER Prosperity is like a Jenga tower: Each individual piece matters to the stability of the entire tower. Take one piece out and the whole thing can fall. 2 Since well-being is the sum of a host of intertwined factors, expanding our economic potential means addressing all of these factors holistically. This includes the factors that we’re discussing today; factors like economic mobility, diversity, the built environment and public health: o That’s why the pioneering work on Transit Oriented Development and early education that Nancy Andrews and the Low Income Investment Fund are doing is so important; o It’s why Marion Standish’s work on community power-building through the California Endowment is such an important piece to all this; o It’s why our moderator, Melissa Jones’s work to mitigate displacement matters so much; o It’s why we are all so fortunate that Don Schwarz and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation have connected new and related stakeholders through their leadership with the “Culture of Health.” We live in a world where prosperity for any of our communities is prosperity for all our communities … a world where our ability to reach our greatest economic potential depends on the ability of our neighborhoods and our neighbors to reach their’s: As says SPARCC’s motto, We all do better when everyone thrives. I should pause here to deliver the standard disclaimer that the views you hear today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Even those of us economists who are most dedicated to our craft, recognize that there sometimes is a limit to what economic policy can do. Robert Kennedy once famously noted that the measure of GDP, for example, quote “does not allow for the health of our children, the quality of our education or the joy of our play. It does not include the beauty of our poetry … [or] the intelligence of our public debate … It measures neither our wit nor our courage, neither our wisdom nor our learning, neither our compassion nor our devotion to our country, it measures everything in short, except that which makes life worthwhile.” To this he concluded “it can tell us everything about America except why we are proud that we are Americans.” I had occasion yesterday to speak to a group of economic forecasters about how we can grow our economy faster while still keeping it in the “Goldilocks” zone – the 3 place where the economy is not running too-hot or too-cold and the porridge is just right … the place where we minimize the risks of another economic crisis or recession. One of the points I made, is that doing so will require investment in our communities – and that even though such investments are beyond the purview of monetary policy, there are things that each of us can do, in our own way, to move all of us forward. There is a Talmudic proverb that says that while none of us are obligated to complete the work of repairing the world, this does not give any of us license to step aside and cease from trying. OUR WORK AT THE SAN FRANCISCO FED At the San Francisco Fed this means that although it is not within our purview to make direct investments, it is absolutely within our mission and our values to bring together investors and community stakeholders in pursuit of the future we aspire to for all our communities. We’ve set a goal at our Bank of creating a more diverse and inclusive culture and workforce. We’ve done so not only because it’s the right thing to do from a moral standpoint – not only because a failure to do so means missing out on opportunities to expand our own horizons, vision, and labor pool – but because we produce better research and we’re more adept at monetary, regulatory, and supervisory policy, when we cast the widest possible net for talent, opinions and perspectives. The same holds true when we look more broadly at our communities. Leaving anyone behind, means holding all of us back. The research tells us that when we increase a family’s income, their children’s math and reading scores tend to increase with it. One estimate suggests that child who moves from public housing into a lower-poverty area can earn $300,000 more income throughout the rest of her or his life. Another recent study found that Americans living in poverty here in New York City and in other urban areas can see their life expectancy dwindle by seven years. This is not only a stain on the moral soul of our country, it’s an obstacle to our economic potential, productivity, and global competitiveness. 4 CONCLUSION: WHY WE DO WHAT WE DO This is why the Fed is a founding member of SPARCC. It’s why we’re working with a broad array of partners in cities like LA and San Francisco. It’s why we’re seeking answers to the big important questions like how we move the needle on income inequality … how we can encourage the sorts of investment that deliver results for all Americans irrespective of zip code or race… how we measure what’s working … and how we recruit partners that reflect the diversity which makes our country so strong. It’s why we’re so enthusiastic to join you here today. Thank you very much.

1 PREPARING FOR THE NEXT STORM: REASSESSING FRAMEWORKS & STRATEGIES IN A LOW R-STAR WORLD Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco To THE SHADOW OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE New York, New York May 5, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY INTRODUCTION Thank you all very much … It’s great to be able to join such a powerhouse lineup of economists who are committed to improving the conduct of monetary policy. I was in New York about a month ago to speak to the Forecasters Club. I contrasted where the U.S. economy was four years ago when I last spoke to that group and where we are now. I have to say, it’s a very different conversation when unemployment is below 5 percent than it was in early 2013 when the unemployment rate appeared to be stuck at 8 percent. It’s been said that “getting over a painful experience is much like crossing monkey bars. You have to let go at some point in order to move forward.”1 Now that we’ve gotten the monkey of the recession off our backs, we have the luxury of being able to look to the future. This presents us with the opportunity to ask ourselves whether the monetary policy framework and strategy that worked well in the past remains well suited for the road ahead. 1 Commonly attributed to C.S. Lewis. 2 Such introspection is healthy and constitutes best practice for any organization. In fact, the Bank of Canada has already shown us the way. Every five years, they conduct a thorough review of whether their policy framework remains most appropriate in a changing world. This is an exercise all central banks should undertake, including the Fed. Having said that, I need to remind everyone that the views I express here today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. There’s a buzzword in the world of emergency response: resiliency. You can’t predict precisely when or where the next storm will arrive, or exactly what it will look like. But you can make yourself resilient, so when the time comes, you’re ready and able to limit the damage and recover quickly. We need to think of our resiliency toward the next economic storm in the same terms. Although an inflation targeting framework has served central banks across the globe well in the past, the world has changed in ways that call into question its efficacy going forward. In particular, there is mounting evidence that the natural rate of interest, or r-star, in the United States and elsewhere has fallen to historic lows, which hampers the ability of conventional monetary policy to respond to the next downturn.2 As I have argued before, in the best of all worlds, fiscal and other policies would be put in place that propel long-run economic prosperity and boost r-star on a sustained basis.3 Absent such actions, monetary policy will be severely challenged to achieve stable prices and strong macroeconomic performance in a low r-star world. Therefore, now is the right time to examine whether monetary policy frameworks must adapt to changing circumstances. There are a number of potential alternative strategies to cope with a low natural rate of interest, including regular reliance on unconventional policy tools, negative interest rates, and raising the inflation target.4 Each of these have various advantages and disadvantages. 2 Laubach and Williams (2016), Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016). 3 Williams (2016) 4 See Williams (2009), Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro (2010), Ball (2014), Reifschneider (2016), Bernanke (2016), Williams (2016), and Kiley and Roberts (2017). 3 In my remarks today, I’ll narrow the focus to one alternative policy framework that deserves particular attention because it offers significant advantages over inflation targeting, particularly in a low r-star world: flexible price-level targeting. FIRST PRINCIPLES Before diving into the details of price-level targeting, let’s take a step back to first principles and ask: What makes for a successful monetary policy framework? It comes down to three words: adaptability, accessibility, and accountability. By this I mean that effective strategies should be able to adapt to change in an uncertain world. They should be accessible and transparent so that the public can plan and act in accordance with the strategy. And they should facilitate accountable benchmarking and performance measurement. There’s an old joke about economists stranded on a desert island. A can of food washes up on the shore and they try to figure out how to open it. Their solution? “Assume a can opener.” History teaches us that we tend to run into trouble when we “assume a can opener” rather than being prepared to adapt to the realities around us. As nature abhors a vacuum, monetary policy abhors stasis. Instead of being a rigid set of precepts, it follows the adage of “that which survives is that which is most adaptive to change.” Underlying constants like potential GDP, the natural rate of unemployment, and the natural rate of interest are not really constant: They change over time in unpredictable ways. Monetary policy has proven most successful when it has been able to account for these changes. PRICE-LEVEL TARGETING AND ANCHORING INFLATION EXPECTATIONS Although the natural rate of interest is the topic du jour, the challenges for monetary policy to adapt to uncertain and changing natural rates is not new. In a series of research papers, Athanasios Orphanides and I investigated the design of robust monetary policy strategies that can succeed in the face of real-world uncertainties, including about the natural rates of interest and unemployment. To be precise, we studied what is called a “difference” monetary policy rule. This type of policy strategy is closely related to a version of the Taylor (1993) policy rule, but with the main difference that policy responds to deviations of the level of prices 4 relative to a steadily growing target level, rather than deviations of the inflation rate from a target rate. One recurring finding of our research is that a policy strategy that targets the price level in this way and responds to the unemployment rate can be highly effective at stabilizing both inflation and unemployment in an environment of structural change and uncertainty.5 In a nutshell, the big advantage of this approach is that any surges or drops in the inflation rate need to be made up in the future. This assures that, over the medium term, inflation stays on track, even if policymakers have a very imperfect understanding of the levels of natural rates or other structural changes affecting the economy. As Martin Luther King, Jr. famously said: History is a great teacher. Episodes where monetary policy failed can be just as instructive as times when things went well. In that spirit, Athanasios and I studied a period when monetary policy failed and everyday people paid the price – both figuratively and literally.6 I’m talking about the Great Inflation of the late 1960s and 1970s. With the benefit of hindsight, we re-examined the choices made by policymakers to determine whether the devastating increases in inflation and unemployment that became known as stagflation could have been avoided. Our findings suggest that answer was yes, they could have—if the Fed had instead used an alternative, robust policy strategy that effectively targeted the price level, as well as responded to the unemployment rate. Without going into the details – I invite you to read the paper at your leisure – according to our model simulations, such a robust price-level strategy could have delivered fairly stable inflation throughout the 1960s and 1970s and beyond. This result is seen in Figure 1, where the black line shows the actual inflation rate, which twice reaches double digits. The blue line shows the simulated inflation rate that would have occurred if the Fed followed a policy strategy that aims for a constant 2 percent increase in the price level starting in 1966 (the simulation ends in 2003). Under the price-level strategy, monetary policy would have avoided the mistake of the late 1960s of allowing the unemployment rate to remain very low for a long time, which contributed to the run-up in inflation during that period. As a result, the Great Inflation never materializes. 5 Orphanides and Williams (2002, 2007, 2013). 6 Orphanides and Williams (2013). 5 A key to this strategy’s success is the rock-solid anchoring of inflation expectations. Figure 2 compares a real-world measure of one-year-ahead inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (the black line) to the model’s predictions of what inflation expectations would have been if the Fed had followed the price-level targeting strategy (the blue line). An important aspect of this strategy is that it does not allow inflation to stray too far from 2 percent for long. This “walking the talk” of price stability reinforces the public’s understanding of the policy strategy and creates a positive feedback loop where stable inflation anchors inflation expectations, which in turn fosters stable inflation, which reinforces the anchoring of expectations, and so on. The price-level policy is not only effective in terms of price stability, but also helps stabilize the unemployment rate by avoiding swings in unemployment resulting from the Fed trying to get inflation back on track (Figure 3). With the Great Inflation avoided, the economic slowdown needed to bring inflation down in the early 1980s doesn’t occur. Interestingly, the policy strategy followed in this model simulation implicitly assumes a constant natural rate of unemployment. Nonetheless, the policy does a reasonably good job of tracking the natural rate of unemployment, which is assumed to be equal to the Congressional Budget Office’s estimate shown by the dashed red line in the figure. PRICE-LEVEL TARGETING AND LOW R-STAR This analysis makes a strong case for a flexible price-level targeting in “normal” times of change and uncertainty. But we are now living in a “low r-star world,” and that only strengthens the case for price-level targeting. If you look at natural interest rates across the globe, you’ll find something they have in common: In country after country they’re at historic lows. What’s more, they appear poised to stay that way as trends pushing the natural rate lower are unlikely to reverse anytime soon.7 To put this in perspective, the weighted average of natural rates in Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States, and the euro area currently stands around 1/4 percent. That’s more than 2 percentage points below the average natural rate that prevailed in the two decades before the financial crisis (Figure 4).8 Why is price-level targeting well adapted to a low r-star world? If price growth is a little lower than target, say, during a downturn, the central bank aims to get the price 7 See Williams (2015), Hamilton et al. (2015), Kiley (2015), Lubik and Matthes (2015), and Laubach and Williams (2016). 8 Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016). Estimates are available at: http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/economists/jwilliams/Holston_Laubach_Williams_estimates.xlsx 6 level back up in the years ahead – and vice-versa. Baked into its very design is a “lower for longer” policy prescription in response to sustained low inflation.9 This helps support the return of the price level to the desired level and anchor inflation expectations even when interest rates are constrained at the lower bound.10 This aspect of price-level targeting can be seen by comparing the prescriptions of a standard Taylor (1993) rule to one adapted to a price-level framework.11 Figure 5 shows the prescriptions for these two policy strategies for the years 2005–2016, where 2005 is chosen as a starting point because this is generally viewed as a year that the economy was close to its goals in terms of inflation and the unemployment rate. For comparison, the actual federal funds rate is shown by the black line. Under this price-level strategy, the federal funds rate responds one-for-one with movements in: the inflation rate, the percent deviation of the price level from the target level, and the negative of the percentage point deviation of the unemployment rate from its natural rate. For these calculations, I have assumed a constant natural rate of interest of 2 percent and a constant natural rate of unemployment of 5 percent, consistent with standard views on these natural rates at the start of this sample. What stands out in this figure is how close the prescriptions of these two policy strategies are to each other before and during the recession. They only differ in a meaningful way during the economic recovery after years of inflation consistently running below target. The buildup of one-sided misses below the inflation goal causes the price-level strategy to keep rates low despite the improvement in the unemployment rate and the gradual movement of inflation back towards 2 percent. PRICE-LEVEL TARGETING AND ACCESSIBILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY So there are clear benefits to this framework when it comes to adaptability. How about accessibility and accountability? In terms of accessibility, a price-level goal is easy to explain and is in some ways a more natural way for the public to think of price stability than an inflation target. A price-level target provides greater clarity on where prices will be 5, 10, and 30 years into the future, time horizons that people think about when buying a car, a home, or 9 Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). 10 A further benefit of price-level targeting is a built-in protection against debt deflation; see Koenig (2013) and Sheedy (2014). 11 For these calculations, inflation is measured by the four-quarter percent change in the core personal consumption expenditures price index, and economic activity is measured by the unemployment rate. For both rules, the coefficient on the unemployment gap is set equal to -1. 7 planning for retirement. This should lend itself to greater transparency and clarity for the public—especially when interest rates are constrained by the lower bound. The same logic holds true for accountability. A price-level regime would provide a clear and accessible metric by which to judge whether the central bank is successfully delivering on its price stability mandate by looking at whether the price level is near its stipulated goal. And as the examples I discussed attest, this is not a “dove” or “hawk” issue: a flexible price-level framework is well suited for achieving both price stability and employment goals. In the 1960s and early 1970s, a price-level framework would have called for tighter monetary policy, and thereby avoided the stagflation of the late 1970s. In recent years, it called for easier monetary policy than a standard Taylor rule. CONCLUSION I have highlighted some key potential advantages of a price-level framework over inflation targeting. By the way, some of these are shared by the related approach of nominal GDP targeting, an approach that is also worthy of further detailed study and consideration. It’s important to note that there are potential drawbacks to a price-level framework as well. For one, it is only likely to succeed in the ways that I have described if it is followed consistently over time and well understood by the public (Williams 2006). This is not a short-run “fix” for the low r-star problem, but rather a long-term solution that will take many years to have full effect. Second, it may not be sufficient to deal with a very low r-star world without other complementary policy actions, whether in fiscal or monetary policy. The likelihood that r-star will remain low for the foreseeable future is one of the reasons I’m convinced that we need to assess the pros and cons of alternative frameworks and strategies … because our menu of options looks something like this:  We can hope that another storm doesn’t come;  We can hope that our existing toolkit, perhaps extended to include negative interest rates, is up to the task;  We can brace ourselves for a new normal where recessions last longer and run deeper, recoveries are slower, and we risk losing the nominal anchor; 8  Or we can prepare for the next storm by taking appropriate actions in advance to commit to a more resilient framework; a framework that maintains our commitment to price stability and maximum employment; anchors inflation expectations; and has all the advantages of the current regime. It’s better to study and debate these issues now, when we’ve attained recovery, than to wait for the next downturn or crisis to hit. I don’t know about you, but I’d far prefer to prepare for the next storm while we’re in calm waters, than to wait until our boats are taking on water. I’ll finish where I started by emphasizing the need for monetary policy strategies that will make us resilient and effective in the years ahead: Adaptable. Accessible. Accountable. Under these criteria – and given the realities of the low r-star world in which we live – I believe that a price-level framework merits very serious consideration for central banks including the Fed. Thank you. 9 References Ball, Laurence. 2014. “The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent.” IMF Working Paper 14/92, June. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2014/wp1492.pdf Bernanke, Ben S. 2016. “Modifying the Fed’s Policy Framework: Does a Higher Inflation Target Beat Negative Interest Rates?” Ben Bernanke’s Blog, Brookings, September 13. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben- bernanke/2016/09/13/modifying-the-feds-policy-framework-does-a-higher- inflation-target-beat-negative-interest-rates/ Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia and Paolo Mauro. 2010. “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42(s1), pp.199–215. Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford. 2003. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2003(1), pp. 139–211. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/the-zero-bound-on-interest- rates-and-optimal-monetary-policy/ Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West. 2015. “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings, October. https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-equilibrium-real-funds-rate-past- present-and-future/ Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2016. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-11, December. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working-papers/wp2016- 11.pdf Kiley, Michael T. 2015. “What Can the Data Tell Us About the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate?” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.077 Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts. 2017. “Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, forthcoming. https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/5_kileyroberts.pdf Koenig, Evan F. 2013. “Like a Good Neighbor: Monetary Policy, Financial Stability, and the Distribution of Risk.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(2, June), pp. 57–82. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q2a3.htm 10 Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams. 2016. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux.” Business Economics 51(2, July), pp. 57–67. Lubik, Thomas A., and Christian Matthes. 2015. “Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief 15-10 (October). https://www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/economic_brief/2015/eb_ 15-10 Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2002. “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2002(2, December), pp. 63–145. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/robust- monetary-policy-rules-with-unknown-natural-rates/ Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2007. “Robust Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (August), pp. 1,406–1,435. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2013. “Monetary Policy Mistakes and the Evolution of Inflation Expectations.” In The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking, eds. Michael D. Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c9176 Reifschneider, David. 2016. “Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-068, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.068 Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams. 2000. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(4, November), pp. 936–966. Sheedy, Kevin D. 2014. “Debt and Incomplete Financial Markets: A Case for Nominal GDP Targeting.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 301– 361. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/debt-and-incomplete-financial- markets-a-case-for-nominal-gdp-targeting/ Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion vs. Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39, pp. 195–214. https://web.stanford.edu/~johntayl/Onlinepaperscombinedbyyear/1993/Discreti on_versus_Policy_Rules_in_Practice.pdf 11 Williams, John C. 2006. “Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Economy with Learning.” In Monetary Policy in an Environment of Low Inflation, Conference Proceedings, Bank of Korea International Conference 2006. Seoul, Korea: The Bank of Korea, 2006, pp. 199–228. Reprinted in Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review 2010. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/files/monetary-policy-in-low-inflation-economy-with-learning.pdf Williams, John C. 2009. “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Bound.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009-2, pp. 1–37. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/heeding-daedalus-optimal-inflation- and-the-zero-lower-bound/ Williams, John C. 2015. “The Decline in the Natural Rate of Interest.” Business Economics 50(2, April), pp. 57–60. Williams, John C. 2016. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23 (August 15). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/august/monetary-policy-and-low-r- star-natural-rate-of-interest/ 12 Figure 1 Figure 2 13 Figure 3 Figure 4 14 Figure 5

1 RISK, RESILIENCE & SUSTAINABLE GROWTH: U.S. Monetary Policy in a Post-Recovery Era Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco To THE SYMPOSIUM ON ASIAN BANKING AND FINANCE Hosted by: The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco & The Monetary Authority of Singapore Singapore May 29, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY PREFACE: TRIBUTE TO TERESA CURRAN Thank you, Ravi [Menon] … I’m delighted to have this opportunity to return to Singapore for this year’s Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance. For those of us who have been involved with this symposium over the years, this is a bittersweet occasion. Many in this room had the privilege of knowing Teresa Curran, whose steady hand guided this series for years. Teresa, who was the leader of the bank supervision division at the San Francisco Fed, had a special passion for and interest in this region of the world. The success and vibrancy of this symposium is one of her great legacies. Teresa passed away late last year, and I’d like to dedicate my remarks and participation in this conference to her. 2 INTRODUCTION Over the past decade, this symposium has become a forum for active and substantive dialogue on cooperation and collaboration across the region and the Pacific. The size of this audience and the palpable energy in this room are a testament to its success. This event and its vibrancy are also a testament to the close friendship and collaboration between the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and the Monetary Authority of Singapore, our co-hosts for this event. The philosopher William James wrote that “our lives are like islands in the sea, or like trees in the forest.” He explained that while they appear separate on the surface, they are in fact commingled beneath the soil and through the ocean floor.1 A century later, these words ring as true as ever before. What happens in Singapore or San Francisco, or for that matter Seoul or Shanghai, is not contained by national borders. Rather, the impacts frequently breach the metaphorical gates that once divided East from West. In an increasingly interconnected global society and economy, what happens to one of us impacts all of us. With that said, our economic fates are not necessarily the same. While the U.S. economy, for example, is affected by what happens around the world, it is also very dependent on domestic developments, whether monetary, fiscal, regulatory, or from another area of policy. And this is not a uniquely American phenomenon. Because we are at once both independent and interdependent, dialogues such as this symposium are so valuable. The theme of this year’s conference is “risk and resilience” in global finance. Risk and resilience are also very timely topics in U.S. monetary policy. In the United States, we are making monetary policy decisions against the backdrop of shifting economic realities. Ever since the financial crisis took hold, our focus had been on the question of “how to attain a sustainable recovery?” Today, after a long, hard road, we’re finally able to ask ourselves “how do we sustain the recovery that we’ve worked so hard to attain?” 1 “Perception and Reality,” in William James Essays and Lectures, ed. Richard Kamber. New York: Routledge, pp. 155-156. 3 Recognizing that the decisions we make will have global ramifications, I thought I’d focus the balance of my remarks today on the approaches we’re taking in the U.S. as we make monetary policy decisions in this new “post-recovery” era. Before I go any further, I should mention that the views expressed today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. THE U.S. ECONOMY HAS RECOVERED As President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, I lead the largest of 12 regional banks, which covers about one-fifth of our nation’s population and economy. Among my responsibilities, I bring the perspectives of my region to the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC – the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy committee. The Fed has what we call a “dual mandate” – two big, overarching goals. These goals are maximum employment and price stability. We want everyone who wants a job to be able to find one and for inflation to average 2 percent per year. I once had a T-shirt printed up that reminded folks that the decisions we make at the Fed are “data-driven.” Although we live in a hyper-political era, the Fed is strictly a- political. Our independence from short-term political influence is, in fact, the most important feature of our design.2 When you look at how the data relate to those two big goals I mentioned – maximum employment and price stability – they paint a very clear picture: The U.S. economy has fully recovered from the global financial crisis and the ensuing recession. In fact, the U.S. economy is about as close to the Fed’s dual mandate goals as we’ve ever been. When it comes to employment, economists generally view the natural rate of unemployment in the U.S. – by this I mean the level consistent with an economy that is running neither too hot nor too cold – as somewhere in between 4¾ percent and 5 percent. Today, the U.S. unemployment rate is 4.4 percent -- meaning that we’ve reached and even exceeded the full employment mark. 2 Williams (2017). 4 Meanwhile, although inflation has been running somewhat below the Fed’s goal of 2 percent, with the economy doing well and some of the factors that have held inflation down waning, I expect we’ll reach that goal by next year. RISK Now, I’d love to be able to tell you that the news is all rosy and that our work here is done. Unfortunately, they don't call economics "the dismal science" for nothing. I'm compelled to consider what potholes may be dotting the road ahead. For starters, movement below the natural rate of unemployment carries with it the risk of the economy overheating, which could undermine the sustainability of the expansion. When you’re docking a boat, you don’t run it in fast towards shore and hope you can reverse the engine hard later on. That looks cool in a James Bond movie, but in the real world it relies on everything going perfectly and can easily run afoul. Instead, the cardinal rule of docking is: Never approach a dock any faster than you’re willing to hit it. Similarly, in achieving sustainable growth, it is better to close in on the target carefully and avoid substantial overshooting. RESILIENCY With the attainment of our dual mandate goals close at hand, it’s more important than ever for monetary policy to work toward what I like to call a “Goldilocks economy” – an economy that doesn’t run too hot or too cold.3 We want the porridge to be just right. Our aim is to keep the economic expansion on a sound footing that can be sustained for as long as possible. The last thing any of us want is to undermine the hard-won gains we’ve made since the dark days of the recession. As it stands today, interest rates remain near historical lows, and I’m sometimes asked why we don’t just keep things there. After all, if things are going well, why change? The answer is that gradually raising interest rates to bring monetary policy back to normal prevents our economy from overheating and thereby reduces the risk of a future economic correction. 3 Williams (2017). 5 Now, I know there has been some general concern that as we normalize our monetary policy in the U.S. it could cause market turbulence internationally. I’m familiar with the adage that when the U.S. sneezes, the world catches a cold. While my own primary focus as a U.S. policymaker is on what’s best for our domestic economy, I want to reassure you that we are cognizant of the fact that our domestic actions have a global impact. If you remember nothing else I’ve shared with you today, I hope you’ll remember this: The last thing we want to do is to fuel unnecessary or avoidable volatility or disruption – whether we’re talking about domestic markets or international markets. That’s why we’re taking a gradual approach to normalization and why we’re being very clear, transparent, and open about how we’re making decisions. In fact, this is the most telegraphed monetary policy of our lifetimes. I’d also argue that in an interconnected global economy, when one country takes action to make its economy more sustainable and resilient, that adds to the sustainability and resilience of the global economy in turn. UNWINDING THE BALANCE SHEET My focus to this point has been on conventional monetary policy, and I want to close by saying a few words about how we plan to unwind the unconventional strategies we adopted during the recession and recovery. If our approach on this front sounds familiar, it’s by design. That’s because a gradual, predictable, and clearly communicated strategy is the right way to operate, whether we’re talking about normalizing interest rates or our balance sheet. For those who might not be as familiar with the unconventional strategies we adopted during the recession, let me offer some very, very brief background: In ordinary times, the Fed focuses on affecting interest rates by setting the federal funds rate. Yet, the period since the financial crisis and Great Recession of 2007 through 2009 has been extraordinary … and that’s an understatement. To save the U.S. economy from deeper recession and accelerate the economic recovery, we purchased trillions of dollars of long-term Treasury and mortgage- backed securities. These actions helped the economy achieve the relatively healthy state that it’s in today.4 After making these purchases, we significantly increased the 4 Williams (2014) and Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). 6 size of the Fed’s holdings. Right now the Fed’s balance sheet is around $4.5 trillion and we are currently keeping it at that level. As I alluded to a moment ago, we’re committed to slowly shrinking the balance sheet with the same sort of widely telegraphed, gradual, and – frankly – boring modus operandi that we’ve adopted for normalizing conventional monetary policy. This will occur “organically” over time, as securities mature or are paid off. The more public understanding there is, the lesser the risk of market disruption and volatility. The process will begin when we’re further along the path of normalizing the level of the federal funds rate.5 Based on my forecast, this will occur sometime later this year.6 Of course, none of us have a crystal ball. If there were to be some sort of deteriorating of the economic outlook, or another unforeseen circumstance, this timetable would, of course, have to be altered. It’s worth noting that I view balance sheet management as something that will be taking place in the background – by that I mean that we will continue to use conventional monetary policy tools – raising and/or lowering interest rates – as the lever we operate to keep the economy from overheating or running too cold. CONCLUSION At the end of the day, the success of all these strategies depends on public understanding. That’s why dialogues such as the ones we’re having at this symposium are so important – whether our focus is monetary policy, financial regulation, or fintech. Ultimately, while the specific conditions in each of our countries may be different, the decisions we make on either side of the Pacific do not stop at our shores. So thank you all for being a part of these discussions. I look forward to hearing from you throughout the symposium. 5 Board of Governors (2017). 6 See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2017) for discussion of normalization of the balance sheet under different scenarios. 7 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14–15, 2017.” https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20170315.htm Engen, Eric M., Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider. 2015. “The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005, January. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.005 Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2017. “Domestic Open Market Operations during 2016.” Report prepared for the Federal Open Market Committee by the Markets Group of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/omo/omo2016- pdf.pdf Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/research/monetary-policy-at-the-zero- lower-bound-putting-theory-into-practice/ Williams, John C. 2017. “Keeping the Recovery Sustainable: The Essential Role of an Independent Fed.” Presentation to the Santa Cruz Chamber of Commerce, Santa Cruz, California. February 28. http://www.frbsf.org/our- district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2017/february/keeping- recovery-sustainable-essential-role-of-independent-fed/
