Community Banking and the Community Reinvestment Act Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Community Banking in the 21st Century Research and Policy Conference Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis St. Louis, MO October 3, 2018 1 Introduction I thank President Jim Bullard and the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis for inviting me to present the opening keynote address at the 2018 Conference on Community Banking in the 21st Century. This is the sixth conference in this important series sponsored by the Fed, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). As you look at the agenda, you’ll see that it is quite distinct from other conferences in mixing together researchers, practitioners, regulators, and policymakers. I am a big proponent of the thesis that examining issues from diverse perspectives and discussing those perspectives yields better policy and regulatory decisions. So I am very much looking forward to the conversations we will have over the next two days about the future of community banking. Today, I will focus the bulk of my remarks on the efforts being undertaken to modernize the Community Reinvestment Act. The views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Banking is on a lot of people’s minds these days. Last month marked the 10-year anniversary of the failure of Lehman Brothers, a watershed moment at the start of the global financial crisis. It’s hard to have lived through the crisis and not been changed by it. Researchers had to rethink their well-established theories of how financial markets and institutions actually operate; they had to identify the deficiencies in their models and poor inferences from empirical analyses. Policymakers and regulators had to rethink the effectiveness of banking regulation and supervision in ensuring the stability of the financial system as a whole; their eyes were opened to the inter-connectedness and complexity of the global financial system and its regulations. Bankers had to take stock of how they monitored the risks they were taking and whether they had sufficient capital and liquidity to weather what could be unexpectedly deep shocks. Much has changed over the past 10 years. Credit is generally available to financially healthy borrowers; the financial system is now holding higher levels of capital and liquidity; credit quality is higher; institutions and supervisors have improved their monitoring of risk within institutions; and policymakers 2 are now working to identify emerging risks across the financial sector as a whole. Some of these improvements were mandated by regulation, but others were undertaken by bankers themselves, having seen the damage that can be caused by not fully understanding the risks being taken. I think it would be a mistake to turn back the clock and unwind many of the important steps taken since the financial crisis to improve financial system resiliency. At the same time, I support the efforts that are now underway to better align regulation and supervisory oversight with where the potential systemic risks lie, including proposals to make regulation less burdensome on community banks in the U.S. Better aligning our regulation and supervision with the risks imposed should allow for simplifications without sacrificing safety, soundness, and stability. As we strive to make our regulations and supervision more effective and efficient, we must not forget the important lesson that maintaining a resilient financial system is necessary for a healthy economy. Community Banks Are Trusted Saying that a healthy economy depends on a resilient financial system may seem like an obvious statement for those in this room. But during the financial crisis, many people lost faith that the U.S. banking system could deliver any benefits. The reputation of the financial industry and its regulators was decidedly tarnished, some say deservedly so. But remarkably, the public did not lose faith in their local banks. According to a survey published by the business schools at the University of Chicago and Northwestern University, the public has put and continues to put more trust in their local banks than in nationwide banks, the stock market, or mutual funds.1 I believe this is because the public understands that community banks are important to the economic vitality of households, small businesses, and 1 The University of Chicago’s Booth School and Northwestern University’s Kellogg School publish the Financial Trust Index, which is based on an annual survey of a representative sample of about 1,000 American households. The 2015 results (wave 24) give trust by bank category. I thank Professor Luigi Zingales at the University of Chicago for providing the updated results for 2017. In the 2017 survey, on a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 means “I do not trust them at all” and 5 means “I trust them completely,” the average response was 3.6 for local banks, 3.0 for national banks, 2.7 for the stock market, and 2.9 for mutual funds. 3 neighborhoods.2 Before turning to the Community Reinvestment Act, let me say a few words about the benefits conveyed by community banks. Community Banks Play an Important Role in the Economy but Face Challenges Banks provide funding to creditworthy businesses and households. They offer customers methods for saving and making payments. They help people and firms manage their financial affairs. Community banks, in particular, play a crucial role in their local economies. In many small towns and rural areas, financial service providers are very limited except for community banks.3 By investing in households and neighborhoods, they help promote economic prosperity in local communities. Community banks have been and continue to be an important source of credit to small businesses, which play an important role in the U.S. economy. In fact, three-quarters of U.S. businesses have fewer than 10 employees, and while larger businesses employ the most people, over a quarter of U.S. private-sector jobs are at firms with fewer than 50 employees.4 Because small businesses tend to have less available hard quantitative information, like audited financial statements, on which to make credit decisions, they have more limited access to credit from large banks or capital markets. Community banks fill that void. Research has documented that community banks have had some advantages over larger banks in extending loans to smaller firms for which public information is less available. Being local, community banks can forge relationships with their customers. These relationships help community banks assess the creditworthiness of smaller borrowers. According to the Federal Reserve Banks’ Small Business Credit 2 The Federal Reserve classifies banking organizations with $10 billion or less in assets as community banks. Other analysts define community banks as banks with assets of $1 billion or less. The FDIC uses a larger set of criteria (see FDIC, 2012). 3 See Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (2003). 4 These data are from Supplemental Tables F and G of the National Business Employment Dynamics Data, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. See Mester (2016) for further discussion of the role of small businesses in the economy. 4 Survey, banks remain the most common source of financing for small businesses.5 Community banks account for about half of small-business bank lending in the U.S., and the Fed’s survey indicates that small businesses are more satisfied with their credit experience at small banks than at large banks or online lenders.6 And because they tend to finance themselves with core deposits and are less reliant on volatile short-term funding sources, community banks are better able to continue to lend to their customers through times of adverse financial conditions.7 So small banks offer a service that allows borrowers to weather turbulent times. Despite the benefits provided by community banks, they are facing some challenges. First, the banking industry has been consolidating. Over the past two decades, the number of banking organizations has fallen from nearly 9,000 institutions to about 5,000, and the number of community banks, especially small community banks, has fallen as well.8 There are now about 1,200 banking organizations with assets of $100 million or less, down from about 4,000 two decades ago. At the same time, banks are getting larger. There are nearly 30 banking organizations with $100 billion or more in assets, compared with fewer than 20 two decades ago, and the share of total industry assets held by these large institutions has risen from 43 percent to nearly 70 percent. The community bankers I speak with regularly report that they are facing higher costs of technology and increased regulatory compliance burdens. These reports accord with the data in the national survey 5 Federal Reserve Banks (2017), page 14. 6 Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2017), Table 5, and Federal Reserve Banks (2017), pages 14 and 17. Eighty percent of respondents reported being satisfied with their credit experience at small banks, compared with 78 percent at credit unions, 77 percent at community development financial institutions, 61 percent at large banks, and 46 percent at online lenders. 7 See Berlin and Mester (1999) and Berger, Bouwman, and Kim (2017). 8 These data are compiled from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Community Banking Study Reference Data. A banking organization is defined as an independent bank or a top‐tier bank holding company, with assets consolidated across all constituent subsidiaries. All dollar figures are adjusted for inflation and in 2017 dollars. McCord and Prescott (2014) summarize the changes in the size distribution of banks and discuss some of the causes of the changes. 5 conducted in association with this conference.9 In addition, large banks, fintech companies, and other nonbank providers of bank services have entered local markets. Developments suggest that the advantages community banks have had in offering relationship lending may be shrinking over time.10 Automated lending technologies, such as small-business credit scoring and data-modeling techniques, have allowed larger banks to increase their share of small-business lending, and in recent years, small businesses have increasingly been turning to larger banks for funding. New technologies, including online lending platforms, have also allowed nonbank alternative lenders to increase their share of small- business lending.11 The Federal Reserve Banks’ survey indicates that the smaller small businesses (those with revenues of $1 million or less) frequently turn to online lenders or other nonbank sources for credit, even though they report less satisfaction with these lenders. Some of my own co-authored research has documented that cost considerations may be driving community banks to increase their size.12 First, the average cost per dollar of assets associated with regulatory compliance and technological change decreases with institutions’ asset size; in other words, there are scale economies. Second, larger community banks, those with assets between $1 billion and $10 billion, appear to do a better job capitalizing on their investment opportunities than smaller community banks, and they achieve better financial performance as a result. Given their current portfolios, these larger community banks also appear to have financial incentives to expand further into small-business lending. So we might expect the trend of larger banks providing a larger portion of small- business lending to continue. 9 See Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2017) . 10 See Hughes, Jagtiani, Mester, and Moon (2018) for a review of this literature. 11 See the papers by Jagtiani and Lemieux (2016, 2018). 12 See Hughes, Jagtiani, Mester, and Moon (2018). 6 From the borrowers’ and savers’ viewpoint, entry of new players, new technologies, and increased competition can be beneficial. But from community bankers’ perspective, these factors present challenges and may spur banks to move into products and services with which they have less experience. They also presents challenges to regulators who typically have less insight into nonbank financial providers, making it more difficult to ensure that the institutions providing these services do so in a safe and sound manner. In this challenging environment, the Federal Reserve has been working to ensure that our supervisory oversight aligns with potential risks and that we are bringing a cost-benefit perspective to the rules we use to implement regulations. Recently, attention has turned to the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and ways we might make its implementation more effective and efficient given the technological and competitive changes affecting the banking environment. The Community Reinvestment Act Has Had a Positive Effect on Lending in Underserved Areas In 1977, Congress passed the Community Reinvestment Act to help address concerns about the deterioration in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods throughout the U.S. At the time, many people blamed urban decline on limited credit availability and illegal practices such as redlining. The CRA reaffirmed that insured depository institutions must serve the communities in which they are chartered to do business, helping to ensure equitable access to credit for all individuals and neighborhoods.13 The Federal Reserve and the other federal bank supervisors – the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) – are charged with implementing the act. Regulators periodically review how well a bank is serving the needs in its geographic service area, identified by the bank based on the location of its branches and ATMs and where a substantial portion of 13 For more on the historical context of the CRA, see Braunstein (2008) and Federal Reserve System (2014). 7 its loans are. The CRA requires regulators to make public the ratings and written evaluation of the banks’ performance on the CRA. The Fed is deeply committed to ensuring that the goal of the CRA is met: that banks serve their entire community and, in particular, the credit needs in low- and moderate-income areas. The Fed’s community development function, which grew out of our responsibilities with respect to the CRA, has been helping to build relationships between financial institutions and community development professionals. One example is the Investment Connection program, developed by the Kansas City Fed, which links community and economic development organizations with CRA-eligible projects with banks seeking such investments.14 Work is currently underway to expand the program to other regions. The word “community” is central to the CRA. A body of research has shown that economic opportunity is tied not only to individual circumstances but also to place. Upward mobility – the probability that a child will be better off economically than his or her parents – is dependent not only on the family’s characteristics but also on neighborhood characteristics such as neighborhood income, racial integration, the quality of schools, and access to social services. Lack of access to credit has been found to have long- lasting negative effects on a neighborhood’s economic health,15 and a body of evidence indicates that the CRA has provided some tangible benefits to low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, although the magnitude of the effects varies by study.16 Because of the CRA, investment in low- and moderate-income areas is a fundamental part of bank portfolios. Evidence suggests that, on the margin, bank lending in these areas is higher than it otherwise 14 See Mester (2017) for further discussion of the Fed’s community development function. Information about Investment Connection is available on the Kansas City Fed’s website at https://www.kansascityfed.org/community/investmentconnection. 15 See Aaronson, Hartley, and Mazumder (2018). 16 The Chakrabarti, et al. (2009) volume provides a selection of research articles on the effects of the CRA. 8 would be without the CRA, and that this lending does not appear to be crowding out lending from nonbank lenders, which are not subject to the CRA. There is evidence that CRA assessment areas tend to attract more investment than other comparable areas in a bank’s market,17 although there is some variation across metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs). For example, one study found a positive effect on lending in large MSAs but not in smaller ones. In particular, the study found that the CRA promotes mortgage credit supply to low- and moderate-income borrowers and neighborhoods in large metropolitan areas, particularly at times when merger activity is strong. This suggests that banks pay attention to the CRA’s incentives for compliance.18 Indeed, one way the CRA has encouraged investment in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods is through the formation of so-called public or community benefit agreements.19 These have primarily been used by larger banks during a merger application process and involve the banks committing to a significant increase in lending over a period of years after a merger is completed. Such agreements can qualify for CRA credit, and in the view of some advocacy groups, these agreements can meaningfully increase bank branches and lending in the communities. Another, less direct, way the CRA might increase lending is by creating a positive information externality for other lenders. For example, the study I mentioned which found an increase in mortgage lending also found that in markets with a low volume of home sales, higher levels of CRA lending by banks is associated with higher, not lower, lending by nonbanks, the opposite of crowding-out. It is possible that the higher volume of CRA lending allows other lenders to better judge the credit risk of neighborhoods in 17 Ding and Nakamura (2017) examine lending patterns in the wake of 2004 revisions to the Philadelphia MSA and find that banks supply more credit in low- and moderate-income census tracts where they receive CRA credit than in those areas where they no longer receive CRA credit as a result of the boundary change. Ringo (2017) finds similar results looking at all boundary changes to MSAs in 2014. 18 See Bhutta (2011). 19 See Silver (2018). 9 which the overall volume of home sales is low. Similarly, CRA lending may pay a future dividend to all lenders to the extent that CRA lending in low- and moderate-income communities allows people and businesses to develop their credit histories, which can then be used by all lenders to make more informed underwriting decisions on loans to these borrowers in the future.20 Finally, one might ask whether the increased investment under the CRA is spurring banks to take on riskier loans, which, depending on the degree of risk, might not be a positive. One study did find higher approval rates on mortgage applications in the 1-1/2 year window around banks’ CRA exams and elevated delinquency rates on these mortgages, but the estimated effects were moderate.21 Another study found that while the CRA causes a substantial increase in mortgage lending to low-income borrowers, it does not appear to increase the risk of default on those loans.22 So, in my view, the body of evidence suggests that the CRA has had a positive effect on credit availability in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, thereby supporting economic development in these areas.23 However, just as technological change, the entry of new types of lenders, industry consolidation, and new techniques for delivering credit and other financial services are all affecting banking, they are also affecting the regulations and how the regulators should go about assessing compliance with the CRA. The CRA Will Be Modernized to Enhance Its Effectiveness To ensure that regulations continue to promote the goals for which they were intended, the federal regulatory agencies undertake periodic reviews and offer guidance to bankers in how they assess 20 See Bhutta (2011). 21 See Agarwal, et al. (2012). 22 See Ringo (2017). 23 Not everyone shares this view. See, e.g., Yezer (2017). 10 compliance.24 While regulators have offered moderate updates and guidance on the CRA over time, the last time there were substantial revisions to the framework for assessing CRA compliance was in 1995, over 20 years ago. Earlier this year, the U.S. Department of the Treasury completed a review of the CRA, engaging with a wide variety of stakeholders. The Treasury made some recommendations about how the CRA is administered in order to help ensure that a bank’s CRA activities meet the needs of the communities it serves in a safe and sound manner.25 The OCC, a part of Treasury, has put out an advance notice of proposed rule-making (ANPR) seeking comment on ways to modernize the CRA regulations.26 The Federal Reserve is also undertaking efforts aimed at ensuring that the CRA regulations continue to meet the goals of the legislation amid the evolving financial services environment.27 The legislation is and will remain an important piece of the toolkit for ensuring that all communities have fair access to credit. Assessment areas An important area of focus is the area over which a bank’s CRA compliance is assessed by the banking agencies. I say “important” because, as I’ve just discussed, CRA activity is higher in areas covered by CRA examinations. So getting the assessment area right will influence the CRA’s effectiveness in getting banking services to low- and moderate-income areas. Currently, the regulations largely use the location of branches and deposit-taking ATMs to determine assessment areas. This made sense when the CRA originally became law because these were the main ways that banks delivered services to the markets in which they operated. Now, with interstate banking 24 For an example of this with respect to the CRA, see Interagency (2016). 25 See U.S. Department of the Treasury (2018). 26 See Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2018). 27 See Brainard (2018a and 2018b). 11 permitted and technological innovations like the internet, banks can serve communities in which they don’t necessarily have a branch or ATM, and lending and investment officers can forge relationships at a longer distance than they could before. Indeed, online banks offer services nationwide from one location. Assessing their CRA compliance based on this single location, as is currently done, seems inappropriate. But for those banks using the traditional model, data and research suggest that branches remain very relevant and the presence of a branch helps ensure that communities receive better banking services. Despite a drop in the number of bank branches during the Great Recession, the number of branches per capita is higher now than it was two decades ago, even in the wake of significant technological advances over that time period.28 This suggests that bankers themselves see value in their branch networks. While the recent branch closures have not occurred disproportionately in low- and moderate-income areas,29 these and rural areas are particularly susceptible to becoming so-called “banking deserts,” defined as no banks within 10 miles of populated areas.30,31 People in low-income tracts are more than twice as likely to live in a banking desert than those in higher-income tracts.32 And census tracts in which a majority of the population comprises minorities appear to be the most affected.33 Branch closures do appear to have a serious impact on service in low-income areas. One study found that bank branch closings in the 2000s led to a persistent decline of about 10 percent in local small-business lending, that 28 Based on the FDIC’s Historical Statistics on Banking and U.S. Census Bureau data on resident population, the number of branches of commercial banks per 10,000 people was 2.24 in 1997 and 2.43 in 2017. It peaked at 2.73 in 2008. 29 Morgan, Pinkovskiy, and Yang (2016). 30 See Silver (2018) and National Community Reinvestment Coalition (2017). 31 Yezer (2017) points out that the CRA may have inadvertently discouraged the establishment of branches, because physical offices tend to enlarge a bank’s assessment area and the requirement for more CRA- related activity. 32 Morgan, Pinkovskiy, and Yang (2016). 33 See Nguyen (forthcoming) and National Community Reinvestment Coalition (2017). 12 is, lending within 6 miles of the closed branch.34 And this negative effect on lending was found to last up to 6 years. The author estimates that the decline in lending led to a sizable 2 percentage point reduction in local employment growth rates. Another study found that when the proportion of local bank branches belonging to small banks versus large banks increases, there is an economically and statistically significant decline in the proportion of small businesses that feel financially constrained.35 Results like these point to the importance of continuing to focus on the community aspect of the CRA, even as the definition of assessment area is updated. Allowing flexibility but being consistent This discussion of assessment areas points to another way the CRA can be modernized: namely, recognizing that banks come in different sizes, serve areas with different needs, and use different business models. The focus should remain on making the CRA effective. This means tailoring the assessment approach for different kinds of banks and allowing them to meet their CRA obligations in a way that plays to their strengths while best servicing their communities, which can differ in terms of credit needs and opportunities. Clarifying and perhaps expanding the types of lending and services that qualify for CRA credit should also be considered. Incorporating incentives to lend, invest, and provide financial services in areas with the greatest need should be a consideration in modernizing the CRA because, as I previously mentioned, banks appear to respond to incentives in the CRA. At the same time that they are allowing more flexibility, the rules and the federal banking agencies also need to take a consistent approach, making sure that they set the same expectations and the same examination and rating criteria. Focusing on outcomes rather than process will allow for flexibility and 34 See Nguyen (forthcoming). 35 Berger, Bouwman, and Kim (2017). 13 consistency, and can increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the CRA regulatory framework. Providing better clarity and consistency can yield better CRA outcomes. Summary In summary, community banks have earned a high degree of public trust even as faith in other institutions has fallen. But the banking environment is rapidly evolving. Changes in technology and business delivery models, new entrants, and increased competition all present challenges for both community banks and their regulators. But they also provide opportunities. Community banks are a vital source of financial services in local communities and will remain so as they adapt to the changing environment. The Community Reinvestment Act has been an important piece of legislation, helping to ensure that all communities have access to credit, investment, and other banking services, which are so vital to economic development. The Federal Reserve and the other federal banking regulators are seizing the opportunity to update the CRA’s regulatory framework so that it remains effective in a changing banking environment. In this effort, the Fed plans to continue its engagement with bankers and other external stakeholders to collect their views. Modernization efforts will also need to be informed by research and practice. I am looking forward to the discussions we’ll be having over the next two days as we discuss the future of community banking and its regulation. 14 References Aaronson, Daniel, Daniel Hartley, and Bhashkar Mazumder, “The Effects of the 1930s HOLC ‘Redlining Maps’,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper No. 2017-12, revised August 2018. (https://www.chicagofed.org/~/media/publications/working-papers/2017/wp2017-12-pdf.pdf) Agarwal, Sumit, Efraim Benmelech, Nittai Bergman, and Amit Seru, “Did the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Lead to Risky Lending?” National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper No. 18609, December 2012. (http://www.nber.org/papers/w18609) Berger, Allen N., Christa H.S. Bouwman, and Dasol Kim, “Small Bank Comparative Advantages in Alleviating Financial Constraints and Providing Liquidity Insurance over Time,” Review of Financial Studies 30, October 2017, pp. 3416-3454. Berlin, Mitchell, and Loretta J. Mester, “Deposits and Relationship Lending,” Review of Financial Studies 12, 1999, pp. 579-607. Bhutta, Neil, “The Community Reinvestment Act and Mortgage Lending to Lower Income Borrowers and Neighborhoods,” The Journal of Law and Economics 54, November 2011, pp. 953-983. Brainard, Lael, “Community Development in Baltimore and A Few Observations on Community Reinvestment Act Modernization,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Community Development Gathering, Baltimore, Maryland, April 17, 2018a. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/brainard20180417a.pdf) Brainard, Lael, “Keeping Community at the Heart of the Community Reinvestment Act,” remarks at the Association of Neighborhood and Housing Development Eighth Annual Community Development Conference, New York, NY, May 18, 2018b. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/brainard20180518a.pdf) Braunstein, Sandra F., “The Community Reinvestment Act,” testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, February 13, 2008. (www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/braunstein20080213a.htm) Chakrabarti, Prabal, David Erickson, Ren S. Essene, Ian Galloway, and John Olson, eds., Revisiting the CRA: Perspectives on the Future of the Community Reinvestment Act. A joint publication of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston and San Francisco, 2009. (https://community-wealth.org/content/revisiting-cra-perspectives-future-community-reinvestment-act) Ding, Lei, and Leonard I. Nakamura, “‘Don’t Know What You Got Till It’s Gone’ – The Effects of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) on Mortgage Lending in the Philadelphia Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 17-15, June 19, 2017. (https://www.phil.frb.org/-/media/research-and-data/publications/working-papers/2017/wp17-15.pdf) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, “FDIC Community Banking Study,” December 2012. (https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/cbi/report/cbi-full.pdf). Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FDIC Community Banking Study Reference Data. (https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/cbi/data.html) 15 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Historical Statistics on Banking. (https://www5.fdic.gov/hsob/HSOBRpt.asp). Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, “The Role of Community Banks in the U.S. Economy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, Second Quarter 2003, pp. 15-43 (https://www.kansascityfed.org/Publicat/econrev/Pdf/2q03keet.pdf). Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, “Investment Connection,” (https://www.kansascityfed.org/community/investmentconnection) Federal Reserve Banks, “2016 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms,” April 2017 (https://www.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/small-business-credit-survey-employer-firms-2016) Federal Reserve System, “Consumer Compliance Outlook: Community Reinvestment Act Special Edition,” First Quarter 2014. (https://consumercomplianceoutlook.org/assets/2014/first-quarter/cco_q1_14.pdf?la=en) Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Community Banking in the 21st Century, National Survey, 2017. (https://www.communitybanking.org/~/media/files/CB21pub_2017_BOOK_web.pdf) Hughes, Joseph P., Julapa Jagtiani, Loretta J. Mester, and Choon-Geol Moon, “Does Scale Matter in Community Bank Performance? Evidence Obtained by Applying Several New Measures of Performance,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 18-11, March 2018. (https://www.philadelphiafed.org/-/media/research-and-data/publications/working-papers/2018/wp18- 11.pdf) Interagency (Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Reserve System, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation), “Community Reinvestment Act: Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment,” Federal Register, July 25, 2016. (https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2016-07-25/pdf/2016-16693.pdf) Jagtiani, Julapa, and Cathy Lemieux, “Small Business Lending After the Financial Crisis: A New Competitive Landscape for Community Banks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives 3, 2016. Jagtiani, Julapa, and Catharine Lemieux, “The Roles of Alternative Data and Machine Learning in Fintech Lending: Evidence from the LendingClub Consumer Platform,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 18-15, April 2018. (https://www.philadelphiafed.org/-/media/research-and-data/publications/working-papers/2018/wp18- 15.pdf) McCord, Roisin, and Edward Simpson Prescott, “The Financial Crisis, the Collapse of Bank Entry, and Changes in the Size Distribution of Banks,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly 100, First Quarter 2014, pp. 23-50. (https://www.richmondfed.org/~/media/richmondfedorg/publications/research/economic_quarterly/2014/ q1/pdf/prescott.pdf) Mester, Loretta J., “The National and Regional Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” remarks at the African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania Annual Business Luncheon, 16 Pittsburgh, PA, November 30, 2016 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp- 20161130-the-national-and-regional-economic-outlook-and-monetary-policy.aspx). Mester, Loretta J., “The Federal Reserve System and Community Development: The Why, The How, and The What,” remarks at the 2017 Policy Summit on Housing, Human Capital, and Inequality: Transforming Regional Economies: Growth and Equity through Policy and Practice, Cleveland, OH, June 23, 2017. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20170623-frs-and-community- development.aspx) Morgan, Donald, Maxim Pinkovskiy, and Bryan Yang, “Banking Deserts, Branch Closings, and Soft Information,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics, March 7, 2016. (http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2016/03/banking-deserts-branch-closings-and-soft- information.html) National Community Reinvestment Coalition, “Bank Branch Closures from 2008-2016: Unequal Impact in America’s Heartland,” Research Memo, May 8, 2017. (https://ncrc.org/bank-branch-closures-from-2008-2016-unequal-impact-in-americas-heartland/) Nguyen, Hoai-Luu, “Are Credit Markets Still Local? Evidence from Bank Branch Closings,” American Economic Journal: Applied (forthcoming). (http://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/hqn/nguyen_branches_20170828.pdf) Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, “Reforming the Community Reinvestment Act Regulatory Framework,” Federal Register, September 5, 2018. (https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2018/09/05/2018-19169/reforming-the-community- reinvestment-act-regulatory-framework) Ringo, Daniel, “Mortgage Lending, Default, and the Community Reinvestment Act,” manuscript, December 14, 2017. (https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2585215) Silver, Josh, “The Importance of CRA Assessment Areas and Bank Branches,” National Community Reinvestment Coalition, June 12, 2018. (https://ncrc.org/the-importance-of-cra-assessment-areas-and-bank-branches/) University of Chicago’s Booth School and Northwestern University’s Kellogg School, “The Financial Trust Index.” (http://www.financialtrustindex.org/index.htm) U.S. Census Bureau, Business Dynamics Statistics, Firm Characteristics Data Tables. (http://www.census.gov/ces/dataproducts/bds/data_firm.html) U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Community Reinvestment Act – Findings and Recommendations,” Memorandum for the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, April 3, 2018. (https://home.treasury.gov/sites/default/files/2018-04/4-3-18%20CRA%20memo.pdf) Yezer, Anthony, “Commentary: What Can We Learn From Government Attempts to Modify the Allocation of Mortgage and Consumer Credit in the United States?” Cityscape 19, 2017, pp. 199-206. (https://www.huduser.gov/portal/periodicals/cityscpe/vol19num2/ch14.pdf)

The Economic Outlook, Monetary Policy, and Normal Policymaking Now and in the Future Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Money Marketeers of New York University, Inc. New York, NY October 25, 2018 1 Introduction I thank the Money Marketeers of New York University for inviting me back to speak tonight. When I was here four years ago, I discussed the important role that Federal Reserve communications play in making effective monetary policy and the need for these communications to evolve as we moved from a period of extraordinary monetary policymaking to more normal policymaking. At this point, that transition to more normal policymaking has been underway for some time, reflecting the health of the U.S. economy and the progress that’s been made on the FOMC’s monetary policy goals. Tonight, I’ll talk about the economic outlook and monetary policy, FOMC communications, and upcoming considerations that will help determine what normal policymaking will look like in the future. My remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Economic Growth From the perspectives of the Fed’s goals of maximum employment and price stability, the U.S. economy is doing very well. Growth has been running above trend for the past couple of years, inflation has moved up to the FOMC’s 2 percent target, and labor markets are very strong. The unemployment rate is at its lowest level since the late 1960s and job growth is well above trend. Last year, economic growth picked up to 2-1/2 percent, and it has been running around 3 percent over the first three quarters of this year. Early this month, longer-term interest rates moved up, and over the past couple of weeks, volatility in equity markets has increased. While a deeper and more persistent drop in equity markets could dash confidence and lead to a significant pullback in risk-taking and spending, we are far from this scenario. The S&P 500 index remains higher than it was a year ago. Similar to the swings in the market we saw earlier this year, the movements of late do not seem to be signaling that investors are becoming overly pessimistic. While the market volatility poses a risk to the forecast and bears monitoring, it has not led me to change my modal medium-run outlook. I expect growth to come in 2 a tad above 3 percent this year and to be in the 2-3/4 to 3 percent range next year, well above my 2 percent estimate of the economy’s trend growth rate. Both consumer and business spending are making solid contributions to growth and I expect that to continue. Household incomes have been rising, reflecting the strength of the job market. In the aggregate, households have been able to increase savings and their debt levels are manageable, making for sound balance sheets. The changes in tax policy that became effective earlier this year added a positive element to an already healthy outlook for consumer spending. Business activity and spending have also been healthy. Investment in equipment and intellectual property has strengthened this year and strong order flows suggest that strength will continue. The changes in tax policy, including lower corporate tax rates and full expensing for investment in equipment and intangibles, support further business spending. Increased federal government spending is also a positive for growth over the next couple of years. Despite the uncertainty around trade and tariff policies, business sentiment is high. Earlier, when the expansion was getting underway, businesses’ main concern was weak demand; now it is the difficulty in finding workers to keep up with strong demand. The housing market has slowed somewhat over the past year. Some softening is to be expected as interest rates have moved up; the 30-year fixed mortgage rate is about a percentage point higher than a year ago. In some areas, a lack of housing supply may also be negatively weighing on housing activity. In addition, the tax changes contain several provisions that affect homeownership, including the limit on the deduction for state and local taxes, which includes property taxes, and the limit on the mortgage interest deduction, both of which will affect those taxpayers who continue to itemize deductions. I am not anticipating a strong pullback in housing over the next year, but I also do not expect it to be a strong engine of growth for the overall economy. 3 Growth abroad has improved in recent years, but forecasts have recently been revised down. The divergence between economic growth prospects abroad and in the U.S. puts upward pressure on the dollar and suggests that net exports – the difference between exports and imports – will likely be a small drag on U.S. growth over the next couple of years. However, this assessment is complicated by the uncertainty around trade and tariff policies. The recent U.S.-Mexico-Canada trade agreement to replace NAFTA reduced some of this uncertainty, but rules under which the firms operate – for example, what constitutes off-shore content – still need to be worked out and the agreement needs Senate approval. The impact of trade developments between the U.S. and China will depend on the actions ultimately taken and on whether the uncertainty itself leads to a pullback in spending. The majority of business contacts from my District report that they have not changed their plans or revenue outlook in response to concerns about escalating trade tensions. However, some manufacturing contacts have reported that the tariffs have been quite disruptive to their supply chains, forcing them to find alternative suppliers or face increasing costs of production. These effects could last for some time because reorganizing supply chains cannot be done quickly. Thus, the tariffs will act as a tax on inputs to U.S. production and are a headwind to productivity growth, which has been low during the expansion. Labor Markets Above-trend growth has led to continued strong job growth and declines in the unemployment rate. Payroll job gains have averaged over 200,000 jobs per month this year, up from about 180,000 per month last year, and are well above most estimates of trend, which lie in the range of 75,000 to 120,000. Another sign of a strong labor market is the stability of the labor force participation rate, which demographics suggest will be trending down over time. The unemployment rate has been at or below 4 percent for the past six months. It fell to 3.7 percent in September, which is lower than the levels reached during the past two expansions, and is well below my 4.5 percent estimate of the unemployment rate that is sustainable over the longer run. I expect that strong growth will support further tightening of the labor market, with the unemployment rate falling to slightly under 3-1/2 percent by the end of next year. 4 As I mentioned, firms continue to report that it is very difficult to find workers. These reports are coming from a variety of industries, across skill levels and geographic regions. Firms are responding to labor shortages by offering higher wages and more flexible work schedules. In fact, some of my contacts tell me they are offering incentive payments to workers based solely on their attendance. Other firms tell me they are automating faster, although they recognize that finding even the reduced number of workers needed for automated plants is going to be a problem in the short run. Some manufacturers have told me they would be investing more in plant and equipment if they thought they could find workers. So the tightness in labor markets may develop into a headwind on growth. The official statistics on wages and compensation have been lagging the anecdotal reports, but recently, the readings have caught up. Various year-over-year measures of wage growth are nearing 3 percent, up from 2 percent early in the expansion. Some people ask: if labor markets are so tight, why aren’t we seeing wage growth in the 3 to 4 percent range like we saw in the prior two expansions? This is a legitimate question. First, it has to be acknowledged that it is difficult to know with any precision how tight labor markets are; maybe they aren’t as tight as we once thought. In fact, the behavior of labor force participation and the fact that wage growth has remained moderate even as labor markets have strengthened have led many policymakers to reassess the level of the unemployment rate they view as sustainable in the long run. Five years ago, the central tendency of projections of the longer-run unemployment rate among FOMC policymakers ranged from 5.2 to 5.8 percent.1 In projections this September, the central tendency was 1 See the Summary of Economic Projections section of FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” September 17-18, 2013. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20130918.pdf) 5 about a percentage point lower, at 4.3 to 4.6 percent, with a median projection of 4.5 percent.2 Over time, I have also moved down my own estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate to my current estimate of 4.5 percent. But even relative to these lower longer-run estimates, labor markets are tight, and based on a broad set of labor market indicators, my assessment is that we are beyond maximum employment, one part of the Fed’s monetary policy mandate. So there is still some explaining to do regarding the relatively moderate wage growth we’ve seen so far. Much of the explanation lies with the low levels of inflation and productivity growth over this expansion.3 The recent increase in nominal wage growth reflects the recent firming in both factors, but I wouldn’t expect to see a strong acceleration in wages unless we see a strong pickup in productivity growth. Such a scenario would be welcome, since wage growth reflecting higher productivity growth does not contribute to inflationary pressures in a competitive economy. Inflation The FOMC has set a symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. The goal is symmetric, meaning that the FOMC would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or persistently below this goal and such persistent deviations would warrant a policy response.4 But month-to-month variations in the inflation measures, due to idiosyncratic factors or in response to temporary economic and 2 See the Summary of Economic Projections section of FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” September 25-26, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20180926.pdf) 3 Over the longer run, wages, adjusted for inflation, tend to reflect the marginal product of workers. During this expansion, the annualized growth rate of labor productivity, measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector, has been about 1.1 percent, less than half the pace over the prior two expansions. 4 See FOMC, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 30, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf). 6 financial disturbances, are to be expected. Policymakers look through temporary undershoots or overshoots of our inflation goal and focus on where inflation is going on a sustained basis. As the expansion has continued, inflation has gradually firmed, consistent with reports from business contacts that they now have a greater ability to raise their own prices in response to higher input costs and strong demand. PCE inflation and core PCE inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, have been running near 2 percent for several months. Inflation expectations have been stable, and this has helped anchor inflation despite the tightness in labor markets and the strength of the economy. In this environment, maintaining stable inflation expectations will be the key to maintaining inflation at target. With appropriate adjustments in monetary policy, my outlook is that inflation will remain near 2 percent, subject to the usual monthly variations in the measures. Monetary Policy and Communications At its meeting in September, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points, to 2 to 2-1/4 percent, and continued on its pre-announced plan for gradually reducing the amount of assets held on its balance sheet. As the economy has improved, the FOMC has been engaged in a strategy to gradually reduce the extraordinary accommodation that was put in place to address the Great Recession. This approach is one that balances the upside and downside risks to achieving and maintaining our dual mandate goals so that the expansion is sustained. We want to avoid a buildup in risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy were allowed to overheat, but we also want to avoid choking off the expansion. In addition, gradually reducing accommodation helps mitigate the risks of financial imbalances that can arise in a low interest rate environment. Currently, I would characterize these risks as moderate. But growth in leveraged lending is strong, commercial real estate valuations are lofty, and I believe we are at a point in the business cycle where increased attention to financial stability risk is warranted because the economy 7 continues to grow above trend and financial conditions remain accommodative, even taking into account the recent increase in long-term interest rates. As the funds rate target gets closer to the range of estimates of the neutral rate – the level of interest rates consistent with stable prices and maximum employment in the long run – we are nearing the completion of the exit from the period of extraordinary monetary policymaking and moving close to a period of normal policymaking. Our communications are appropriately changing. You may have noticed that in September, we removed language indicating that the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative. This wasn’t meant to signal any change in policy strategy or the likely path of policy. Indeed, we said that given the economic outlook we expect further gradual increases in the funds rate will likely be warranted. Instead, I view the change in language as an indication that we are getting back to a period of normal policymaking. In the period of extraordinary monetary policymaking, when the policy rate was at its effective lower bound, the FOMC used forward guidance about the expected future path of interest rates as a policy tool. We conveyed that our future path was going to be very accommodative for a long time. But in normal times, there is no need to use guidance as a policy tool and there is less certainty around the future policy path. That path will depend on the evolution of economic conditions and their effect on the medium-run outlook and risks around the outlook. So instead of giving explicit guidance, normal policy communications should convey the rationale for policy decisions and the FOMC’s reaction function, that is, how policy is likely to systematically respond to changes in economic conditions – whether those changes are anticipated or unanticipated. Let me underscore that just because the future policy path isn’t known with certainty and will depend on economic developments doesn’t mean that policymakers will be nonsystematic in their approach to policymaking. It just means that in normal times, it would be inappropriate to commit to a future path 8 because the path taken will depend on how economic conditions evolve. Let me also note that in addition to contributing to transparency and accountability, being systematic and communicating so that the public understands normal policymaking will make the forward guidance we use in extraordinary times more effective. They will understand that keeping interest rates lower for longer is not business as usual, and this awareness can help put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. Might the return to normal policymaking be an argument for the FOMC’s dropping the so-called dot plot from the Summary of Economic Projections, as some have suggested we do? I think it would be a mistake to discontinue the dot plot. The dot plot provides information on the policy paths that individual FOMC participants view as appropriate to promoting the FOMC’s monetary policy goals. The dots can change over time because of economic developments, but that’s a design feature, not a flaw. The FOMC also provides a chart illustrating the uncertainty band around the median policy path across participants.5 It clearly shows that the farther out in the projection horizon one goes, the wider the degree of uncertainty – this is a characteristic of normal policymaking. Omitting this information would not make the divergence in views across FOMC participants or the uncertainty around their projections disappear, but it would be a significant step back in transparency. Let me conclude by touching on two considerations that will help determine what normal policymaking looks like in the future. The first is the operating framework the Fed uses to ensure that its policy rate is 5 The FOMC began providing charts of the confidence bands around the median projections in the March 2017 Summary of Economic Projections. For the latest charts, see the Summary of Economic Projections section of FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” September 25-26, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20180926.pdf) 9 being maintained at the appropriate level, and the second is the monetary policy strategic framework that the FOMC uses to determine what that appropriate level of the policy rate is.6 Monetary Policy Frameworks: Operations and Strategy Since last October, the FOMC has been in the process of gradually and predictably reducing the holdings of Treasury and agency securities that were purchased to address the financial crisis and Great Recession.7 We plan to shrink the balance sheet until the Fed is holding no more securities than necessary to implement policy efficiently and effectively, and as noted in the minutes of the July FOMC meeting, the FOMC will likely soon be resuming a discussion of what that implementation framework will be.8 One option is to try to return to operating like we did before the financial crisis, when the FOMC kept the supply of bank reserves scarce. In June 2007, banks were holding about $10 billion in reserve accounts at the Fed. The FOMC could make small changes in that supply by buying or selling short-term Treasuries, and this allowed the FOMC to ensure that the fed funds rate was maintained at the FOMC’s target. But now, as a result of the Fed’s large-scale asset purchases, reserves are very abundant. While reserve levels are down from their peaks, banks are still holding about $1.8 trillion in reserve accounts at the Fed, and almost all of this is in excess of what is required by regulation. At these levels, small changes in the 6 For further discussion of monetary policy frameworks, see Mester, Loretta J., “Monetary Policy Frameworks,” National Association for Business Economics and American Economic Association Session at the Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, PA, January 5, 2018 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20180105-monetary-policy-frameworks), and Mester, Loretta J., “Remarks on the FOMC’s Monetary Policy Framework,” panel remarks at the 2018 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, NY, February 23, 2018. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20180223-remarks-on-the-fomcs-monetary- policy-framework) 7 See FOMC, “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” June 13, 2017. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf ) 8 See “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” July 31-August 1, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20180801.pdf) 10 supply of reserves have little effect on the fed funds rate. Instead, the Fed brings the fed funds rate into its target range by adjusting the rate it pays on excess reserves, and by using overnight reverse repurchase agreements, which help put a floor on the fed funds rate. Reserves and currency are the main liabilities on the Fed’s balance sheet, so the choice between these two frameworks will determine the volume of assets the Fed will hold on its balance sheet. Both operating frameworks have proven to be effective during the periods in which they have been used. There are several things to consider in determining which implementation framework will be most effective going forward. The fed funds market has changed considerably since the financial crisis,9 and the regulatory changes put in place since the crisis have likely affected the banking system’s demand for reserve balances. This may limit the feasibility of returning to a framework with scarce reserves, and it also raises the question of whether the fed funds rate will remain the best indicator of the general level of short-term interest rates, regardless of the operating framework. On the other hand, a relatively large balance sheet, which would accompany an abundant reserves framework, might be viewed with some skepticism or generate requests for the Fed to aid other industries or use the balance sheet to fund government initiatives, as occurred during and since the crisis.10,11 I believe this type of risk can be effectively handled by clear and timely communication by the FOMC on the rationale for its decision 9 For a review of changes in the fed funds market since the financial crisis, see Craig, Ben R. and Sara Millington, “The Federal Funds Market since the Financial Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, April 5, 2017. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/economic-commentary/2017-economic- commentaries/ec-201707-the-federal-funds-market-since-the-financial-crisis.aspx) 10 For example, during December 2008, as Congress debated a bailout for American automakers, several members of Congress requested of then-Chair Ben Bernanke that the Fed lend directly to auto companies. Needless to say, the Fed was reluctant to go down this path, which would have put it squarely in the midst of industrial policy, a responsibility of Congress. See the discussion in Chapter 17 of Ben S. Bernanke, The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and its Aftermath, New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 2015. 11 More recently, Congress used funds from the Fed’s surplus account to pay for highways and other budget initiatives, and put limits on the size of the surplus. See the 2015 Fixing America’s Surface Act, or FAST Act, and the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018. 11 about the implementation framework, as well as its other policy decisions in pursuit of our goals of maximum employment and price stability. Which brings me to the other important issue that will determine what normal monetary policymaking is in the future, namely, the strategic framework used to determine appropriate monetary policy. Currently, we use a flexible inflation-targeting framework, which has served the FOMC well in effectively promoting our policy goals. But based on demographics, higher demand for safe assets, and other factors, many economists anticipate that the longer-term equilibrium real interest rate will remain lower than in past decades. This would mean there would be less room for monetary policymakers to cushion against a negative economic shock, the probability of the policy rate hitting the effective lower bound would be higher, and nontraditional monetary policy tools would need to be used more often. To the extent that these tools are less effective than the traditional interest rate tool or are constrained from being used, the potential would be for longer recessions and longer bouts of inflation well below target.12 So we need to ask whether there are alternative policy strategies that could lower the probability of getting into this situation, and at the July FOMC meeting, participants agreed to discuss this topic at future meetings.13 Researchers have suggested several alternative frameworks, such as targeting an inflation rate higher than 2 percent, moving to an inflation-targeting range instead of a point goal, or targeting a path for the price level or for nominal GDP rather than for inflation. None of these alternative frameworks are without challenges but all are worth thorough review. It might be useful to do something akin to simulated stress testing to see how each framework might fare when confronted with things like data revisions; uncertainty about the levels of the equilibrium interest rate, potential growth, and longer- 12 Although I don’t discuss them here, other government policies might also be brought to bear to increase the long- term growth rate and equilibrium interest rate, which would give monetary policy more room to act. Such policies would focus on increasing productivity growth and labor force participation. 13 See “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” July 31-August 1, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20180801.pdf) 12 run unemployment rate; and the challenges of effective policy communications. My colleague Eric Rosengren, president of the Boston Fed, recently put out a proposal for regular review of the Fed’s strategic framework.14 I support this idea; it makes sense to me that, as a matter of good governance, a central bank should periodically review its assumptions, methods, and models. I also believe that to inform our evaluation of the framework, we should seek a wide range of perspectives, including those from experts in academia, the private sector, and other central banks. I am confident in predicting that there won’t be a consensus among this wide-ranging group, but I am equally confident in predicting that we will ultimately get to a better decision – whether it be to stay with our current framework or adopt an alternative – if we listen to a diverse set of views on the subject. 14 See Fuhrer, Jeffery C., Giovanni P. Olivei, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell, “Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate its Monetary Policy Framework?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference Drafts, September 13-14, 2018. (https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/BPEA_Fall2018_Should-the-Fed-Regularly-Evlauate-its- Monetary-Policy-Framework.pdf)

Community Development and the Federal Reserve Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Opening Remarks at the Collaboration for Inclusive Economic Development: A Forum for Philanthropies, Policymakers, and Practitioners Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Boston, MA November 29, 2018 1 Introduction I thank Eric Rosengren, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, and the Living Cities Collaborative for organizing this public forum exploring new opportunities for advancing economic opportunity and economic mobility. Based on every event I have attended at the Boston Fed over many years, I know that I will come away with new insights and I look forward to our conversation. Fed governance is arcane and I’m not planning to talk about it today except to say that I chair the committee across the Reserve Banks that focuses on the Fed’s community development work. I have been asked to present some opening remarks on these efforts, why they are important to our mission of fostering a healthy economy, and what the Fed is doing to encourage more inclusive growth. My remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Fed in the Community The origin of the Fed’s community development work lies with the passage of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) in 1977. The CRA was intended to help ensure equitable access to credit for all individuals and neighborhoods by reaffirming that insured depository institutions must serve the communities in which they are chartered to do business. To help these institutions comply with the CRA, the Fed built a function to provide technical training and other support. Over time, the Fed’s interest and activities in community development have grown: today, community development is one of the Fed’s core business functions. The financial health and access to economic opportunity of consumers and communities is a key component of the country’s overall economic health and resiliency. The Fed recognizes that in order to perform our various duties, we need to have a good understanding of all of the interrelated challenges facing lower-income communities as well as more affluent areas. This understanding helps ensure that we are taking a consistent approach to advancing the 2 CRA and promoting access to credit, investment, and financial services across low- and moderate-income households, small businesses, and communities. Our relationships with community development organizations and philanthropies at the local level provide us with valuable sources of information about the economic health of people across various segments of the population and across the communities in our Districts, and this helps us gauge the effectiveness of our monetary policy. Our community development work also helps us gather information on developing trends in financial services and markets that could raise risks to bank safety and soundness or to financial stability more broadly. Many factors determine the economic vitality of households and neighborhoods, including access to credit, capital, and financial services; affordable housing; workforce development; job training and education; health and wellness services; and infrastructure, including transportation and broadband services. Over the next several years, our Community Development staffs across the Federal Reserve System will be focusing their efforts on advancing the economic resiliency and mobility of low- and moderate-income and underserved households and communities. What factors make certain individuals and communities better able to recover from economic setbacks, and how can those factors be promoted broadly? Why are some places and households mired in persistent poverty, and what can be done to turn around those bad outcomes? What factors allow people to move up the economic ladder regardless of where they live or their racial or gender makeup? What policies can ensure broad access to economic opportunity for all people and places? These are hard questions. The Fed is committed not only to increasing knowledge about the economic challenges facing low- and moderate-income households and communities, but also to helping to identify effective policies and best practices to address these challenges. We aim to do that by gathering and disseminating data; conducting applied, action-focused research; and holding forums such as this one. We strive to conduct our data gathering and research with the utmost rigor and the highest standards of quality, looking objectively at all sides of an issue and potential solutions. Our engagement with 3 committed stakeholders like you is critical to ensuring that our research hits the mark, that it contributes to the public discourse, and that it informs public policy and yields concrete and positive outcomes. The people in this room know very well that the issues facing lower-income households and communities in a dynamic economy such as ours are complex ones. Many of the solutions will be complex as well and will take committed and collaborative actions from all of us. The Fed’s Community Development Work in Action I’d like to conclude my opening remarks by highlighting just a few examples of the Federal Reserve’s efforts in community development. On the access-to-credit front, the Kansas City Fed’s Investment Connection program allows community and economic development organizations in the District to have project proposals pre-screened by Kansas City Fed staffers to determine whether the project is CRA-eligible. The organizations then get a chance to pitch their proposals to potential funders, including financial institutions and community foundations. Since 2011, Investment Connection has facilitated more than $30 million in loans, investments, grants, and services to community economic development organizations. And because the program has been such a success, other Federal Reserve Districts, including Minneapolis, St. Louis, New York, and Cleveland, have either started or are considering piloting programs of their own. An example of the Fed’s data gathering, dissemination, and analysis, our annual Small Business Credit Survey, has become a trusted source of information on the conditions of firms with fewer than 500 employees. This survey and the associated analysis, which is a collaboration among all 12 Reserve Banks, are used by a wide range of stakeholders seeking to understand the financing needs of the small business sector, an important driver of the economy. 4 In terms of our collaborative efforts, workforce development is a key issue that affects economic vitality across all regions. So, considerable efforts are underway across the Federal Reserve System and with our community partners to find solutions to ensure that people have access to the education and skill- development programs needed to ensure that they can be productive members of the modern workforce. The Federal Reserve System is engaged with the Heldrich Center at Rutgers University, the Ray Marshall Center at the University of Texas at Austin, and the Upjohn Institute in an effort called Investing in America’s Workforce. This initiative seeks to align the skills of the workforce with employers’ needs by reframing the discussion of workforce development efforts as investments rather than costly social services. Earlier this month, the initiative released a three-volume set presenting workforce development programs and policies that are considered to be best-practice in terms of delivering positive returns to society, employers, workers, and job seekers. The volumes were a culmination of many listening sessions and engagement with a vast number of practitioners and academics from across the country. In addition to these collaborative efforts across the Federal Reserve System, each Reserve Bank also does work on the issues and needs of low- and moderate-income households and communities that are especially relevant to their individual Districts. An excellent example of this is the Boston Fed’s Working Cities Challenge, which began in 2013. Informed by the Boston Fed’s research and designed in partnership with its network of community development stakeholders, the Working Cities Challenge is a grant competition aimed at strengthening civic collaboration and partnerships to help low-income areas and households in the Northeast in an enduring way. Another example is the Cleveland Fed’s work on the opioid crisis, an issue that disproportionately affects the people in our District and their ability to productively engage in the economy. Cleveland Fed research has documented the effects of opioids on different segments of the population, in terms of race and gender, and across geographic areas. In addition to research, the Cleveland staff has engaged our community contacts and advisory councils to provide insights into this public-health problem, which is 5 having significant economic consequences in terms of workforce attachment. As I said, this is just a taste of the type of work being undertaken by the Federal Reserve to better understand and help to provide workable solutions to these complex community development challenges. These problems are not going to solve themselves. Determining viable solutions will take collaboration among all stakeholders, as underscored by the title of today’s program, Collaboration for Inclusive Economic Development. As I am certain you are too, I am looking forward to today’s panel sessions featuring leaders from philanthropic foundations and some of my Fed colleagues. They will discuss the barriers to inclusive economic progress, what responses are being brought to bear, and where the Federal Reserve System, philanthropies, and others can collaborate to foster further innovative approaches and solutions. Thank you all for being here today to participate in this important dialog.
