Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Federal Reserve/Conference of State Bank Supervisors Community Banking Research Conference, St. Louis, Missouri Share It is a pleasure for me to join Jim Bullard and John Ryan in welcoming all of you to the second annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors. I had the privilege of addressing the inaugural community banking conference held here last year, and as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board's Subcommittee on Smaller Regional and Community Banking, I am delighted to return to this venue to participate in this year's event. 1 As all of you surely know, community banks play a vital role in America's financial system, providing essential services to households, small businesses, and small farms in communities throughout the country. Community banks differ from their larger cousins, not just in size, but in the fundamental focus of their business. Community bankers' primary objective is to serve the members of their local communities, who are not only their customers but also their neighbors and friends. They have strong links to the people and businesses that reside in their communities, as well as direct knowledge of local economic conditions. These close ties give community bankers a clear advantage in understanding local needs and tailoring their products and services to meet those needs. I will confess that I have never worked at a community bank; however, I have been a community bank customer, and in that role I have had personal experience interacting with bankers whose mission is to provide high quality of service to every customer who walks in the door. Despite the advantages that I just mentioned, life is not always easy for community bankers. The number of community banks in the United States has declined sharply over the past three decades, due to a combination of failures and acquisitions. 2 And many remaining community banks have struggled to survive, especially during the last five or six years. Although improving overall economic conditions have begun to provide some relief to these struggling banks, they continue to face significant challenges. The burden of regulatory compliance can be particularly daunting for small banks. And competition, from large banks and credit unions as well as other nonbank financial service providers, is always a concern. My colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board and I are committed to making sure that we understand the challenges faced by community banks. One way that we further our understanding is by talking to the bankers themselves. The entire Board of Governors meets twice a year with the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, which includes representatives of community banks, thrifts, and credit unions in each of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. 3 Individual governors also take advantage of opportunities to meet with community bankers from time to time. During last year's conference I met with a group of St. Louis area community bankers to hear what was on their minds. I will conduct a nationwide webinar with community bankers next month. In fact, I speak regularly to a number of bank executives, including those who run smaller institutions. I find these types of conversations--with people who live and work in the world outside the Capital Beltway and far from Wall Street--to be particularly enlightening. And, of course, this conference, which was conceived as the result of a successful collaboration between the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, provides an annual opportunity for community bankers, bank regulators, and academic researchers to come together to share ideas and insights surrounding the issues that matter most to community bankers. This year's program includes presentations by the authors of a number of excellent academic research papers, the unveiling of the results of a new survey of community banks conducted on behalf of the conference organizers, reactions by community bankers to the research and survey findings, and several compelling speeches. The primary focus of today's agenda is research. The response to the conference's call for papers was quite impressive, and the conference research committee faced the challenging task of selecting the most relevant, interesting, and high-quality papers to be included in the program. The authors of these papers include academics and policymakers, with backgrounds in law, economics, and finance. The topics covered clearly demonstrate a desire, on the part of the researchers, to promote a deeper understanding of what makes community banks tick and of how a wide range of government policies affects the activities, profitability, and viability of community banks. The first session considers factors underlying community bank formation, behavior, and performance. The first paper looks at characteristics of newly chartered banks--where they form, and how they fare over time. The second paper also focuses on newly chartered banks, considering possible explanations for the near absence of new bank charters over the past few years. Those of us at the Fed pay a great deal of attention to this type of bank formation, because it is the primary source of new competition in the markets in which community banks compete. The third paper in this session looks at how rivalry among banks affects their decisions to adopt new technology, and the fourth seeks to explain the persistence of low net-interest income among community banks in recent years. The second session addresses the effects, both intended and unintended, of specific government policies on community bank behavior. One paper looks at how the 2006 commercial real estate guidance for banks affected loan growth. 4 Another paper examines the effect of the creation of the Small Business Lending Fund on community bank lending to small businesses. The third paper in this session focuses on what happens when banks perceive that examiners have given them inappropriately negative evaluations. The underlying theme of the third research session is how broad government policies affect community bank profitability and viability. The first paper provides an overview of the effects of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act on community banks. The second paper considers whether a provision of the JOBS Act that modified the threshold for Exchange Act reporting for unlisted banks and bank holding companies helped or hurt small banks. The third paper contrasts the thousands of small community banks operating in the United States with the handful of very large financial institutions and proposes a new approach to regulation that recognizes the very different business models of these two types of institutions. The fourth and final paper takes a high-level look at the effects of regulatory policy on the structure of the U.S. banking system and the viability of community banks. On day two of the conference, you will learn about the results of a recently conducted survey that was completed by more than 1,000 community bankers from across the country, as well as the feedback obtained from more than 1,300 bankers participating in town hall meetings hosted by state bank commissioners in 30 states. The presentation of these findings will be followed by a panel discussion by a select group of community banking experts. I hope I have succeeded in whetting your appetite for the sessions that lie ahead, and I encourage you to make the most of this unique opportunity to interact with bankers, regulators, and researchers who share a common interest in the future of community banking. 1. For more information on the Board's committees, including membership, see http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm . Return to text 2. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012), " FDIC Community Banking Study (PDF) ," December. Return to text 3. For more information on the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, see www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm . Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2006), " Federal Banking Agencies Issue Final Guidance on Concentrations in Commercial Real Estate Lending ," press release, December 6. Return to text Last Update: September 23, 2014 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Panel Discussion on "Debt Management in an Era of Quantitative Easing: What Should the Treasury and the Fed Do?", Washington, D.C. Share Watch live at: http://www.brookings.edu/events/2014/09/30-debt-management-quantitative-easing-treasury-fed Thank you for the opportunity to be here today. Given my role at the Federal Reserve, I am not in a position to comment on debt management policy. 1 I would like to begin by complimenting the authors of this highly interesting paper for their systematic approach to thinking about a wide-ranging and difficult set of issues. After a period during which the Treasury's debt management needs dominated Federal Reserve policies, the Fed began to regain its independence with the Treasury-Fed Accord of 1951. Since the 1970s, there has been little or no coordination between the two institutions over debt management. This paper argues that the extraordinary response to the global financial crisis brought about a conflict between debt management and monetary policy that should have been avoided through collaboration. The paper proposes a regime in which the Treasury and the Fed would cooperate around debt management at all times and would fully collaborate in the case in which the monetary policy rate is pinned at the zero lower bound. As a policymaker, I bring a degree of skepticism to a proposal to make major changes to institutional arrangements that seem to me to have served the public well. I will mention three areas where I have significant concerns. First, the literature on financial stability and monetary policy is still in its infancy. There is no consensus that monetary policy (or debt management policy) should assume the kinds of roles assigned by the authors. In particular, policymakers are addressing the problem of private money creation through an array of regulatory initiatives. Second, in describing the costs of the existing arrangements, the paper estimates that the Treasury's post-2008 extension of the weighted average maturity (or duration) of the Federal debt offset--in a purely mechanical sense--about 35 percent of the effect of the Federal Reserve's large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs on the level of 10‑year Treasury yields. 2 I would challenge this ex post framing of the issue. Maturity extension merely continued a policy begun by the Treasury well before the crisis and was also broadly consistent with the Treasury's past behavior at times of substantial increases in borrowing. My starting point would be that the Federal Open Market Committee did what it thought was appropriate ex ante to return the economy to full employment and stable prices, taking Treasury decisions concerning debt management as exogenous. As the authors acknowledge, there are good reasons to think that any term premium effect of the maturity extension must have been much smaller than the "35 percent" figure implies. The paper's estimate is based solely on what is sometimes referred to as the "duration removal" channel. There are other channels that would not be offset by maturity extension--in particular, a channel by which the Federal Reserve signals the strength of its commitment to achieving the dual mandate. My view is that it is quite difficult to explain the observed effects of LSAPs on asset prices without reference to these other channels. In addition, according to the authors' estimates, the "announcement effects" of the Treasury's maturity extension policy seem to be only half the size of the effects of comparable Fed announcements. The LSAPs tripled the Federal Reserve's share of outstanding 10-year duration, from 12 percent to 36 percent, and had quite significant effects on the prices of financial assets. By most estimates, the 10-year Treasury term premium was deeply negative from mid-2011 through mid-2013; it remains near zero today, far below normal pre-crisis levels. Given the very low level of rates over this period, it is not clear to me that a slightly more negative term premium would have produced materially different real economy results. Third, the authors' proposals seem to me to be fraught with risk for the Federal Reserve. I believe that the existing institutional arrangements have served the public well. The independence of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy is highly valuable to society. There is considerable evidence that monetary policy independence leads to better macroeconomic outcomes. Any active collaboration between debt management and monetary policy, even in a crisis, would risk calling into question that independence. That is a risk I would be very reluctant to take. The period after the Second World War during which debt management imposed requirements upon monetary policy was marked by strains between the Treasury and the Fed and less than full independence for monetary policy. While current institutional arrangements may be imperfect, history suggests a need for caution before allowing these two policies to become entangled once again. Thanks again, and I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views offered are mine alone and not necessarily those of my colleagues at the Federal Reserve. Return to text 2. The term "LSAPs" is used here to include QE1 (that is, the first round of quantitative easing by the Fed), QE2 (the second round), the maturity extension program, and QE3 (the third round). Return to text Last Update: September 30, 2014 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Webinar on Community Banking, Washington, D.C. Share Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today about some of the key issues facing community banks. As the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board's community and regional bank subcommittee, I try to meet with groups of community bankers whenever I can to better understand what is on community bankers' minds. While today's webinar is no substitute for face-to-face meetings with bankers, it is a special treat to be able to leverage technology to speak to and hear from so many community bankers across the country at the same time. As all of you surely know, community banks play a vital role in the U.S. financial system. Community banks have strong links to the people and businesses in their communities, as well as direct knowledge of local economic conditions. These close ties give community bankers a clear advantage in understanding local needs and tailoring their products and services to meet those needs. My colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board and I are committed to making sure that we understand the issues that are most important to community banks as you strive to serve the financial needs of your communities. One way that we further our understanding is by talking to the bankers themselves in a variety of venues, such as this webinar and a community banking research conference that I attended last month in St. Louis, which was co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. And there is another opportunity to communicate with the Federal Reserve and our fellow regulators that I want to make sure you are aware of. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) of 1996 tasked financial regulators with reviewing regulations issued by the agencies at least every 10 years to identify outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulations. The agencies kicked off that process earlier this year, and in addition to collecting comments in writing, we are beginning a series of meetings with the public in December. One of the themes that we hear in our interactions with community bankers is concern that the regulatory environment could be tailored more effectively for community banks, and the EGRPRA process gives all interested parties a voice in identifying areas where regulatory requirements may be disproportionate to risk. I therefore encourage you to participate in this important process and hope you will raise any concerns and ideas you have. The Federal Reserve is committed to tailoring its supervisory practices as appropriate for community banks to reduce unnecessary burden, while still ensuring that community banks continue to operate in a safe and sound manner. I am looking forward to our conversation today and, in particular, am interested in hearing about topics that are of importance to you as you work to serve your customers, meet the credit needs of your communities, and thrive. Last Update: October 20, 2014 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the "The New International Financial System: Analyzing the Cumulative Impact of Regulatory Reform", 17th Annual International Banking Conference, Chicago, Illinois Share Thank you for the opportunity to address the important topic of how the financial system and its regulation have evolved in response to the global financial crisis. I will focus my remarks on the global initiative to expand central clearing of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives. While we have made significant progress in enlisting central clearing to reduce systemic risks, I will argue that there is a good deal more to do to ensure that the reforms achieve their potential and minimize the possibility of unintended and undesirable consequences. 1 Prior to the crisis, the then highly opaque market for OTC derivatives grew at an astonishing and unsustainable pace of nearly 25 percent per annum in a context of relatively light regulation and bilateral clearing. 2 With the benefit of hindsight, we know that along with this torrid growth came an unmeasured and underappreciated buildup of risk. The spectacular losses suffered by American International Group, Inc., or AIG, on its derivatives positions, and the resulting concerns about the potential effect of AIG's failure on its major derivatives counterparties, serve as particularly apt reminders of the wider failures and weaknesses that were revealed by the crisis. The threats posed were global, and the response was global as well. In September 2009, the Group of Twenty (G-20) mandated that all sufficiently standardized derivatives should be centrally cleared--a sea change in the functioning and regulation of these markets. And in the five intervening years, substantial progress has been made in the United States and abroad to implement this reform and begin to reduce systemic risk in these markets. According to public data, roughly 20 percent of all credit derivatives and 45 percent of all interest rate derivatives are now centrally cleared--amounts that have grown substantially since 2009, when central clearing of credit derivatives began and the amount of cleared interest rate derivatives was at roughly one-half of its current level. 3 These amounts should continue to grow over time as central clearing and, especially, client clearing requirements take effect in more jurisdictions. Given the global nature of derivatives markets, the success of the reform agenda depends critically on international coordination. Thus, to support the move to central clearing and address other lessons from the financial crisis, regulators developed the new Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMIs) for the infrastructures that clear derivatives, securities, and payments. 4 The PFMIs are comprehensive international standards for the governance, risk management, and operation of central counterparties (CCPs) and other financial market infrastructures. Such standards are essential given that, in the interest of transparency and improved risk management, policymakers have encouraged the concentration of activities at these key nodes. And it is particularly important that the standards be promulgated globally, given the potential for OTC derivatives to span multiple jurisdictions and to migrate to jurisdictions where standards and risk management are less robust. Regulators are now engaged in the important work of translating these principles into national regulations. Only when these strong international standards have been implemented at CCPs around the world can the risk reduction promised by the global clearing mandate be fully realized. Further Challenges Facing Central Clearing The task is far from complete. We must consider how central clearing and CCPs fit into the rest of the financial system. From this systemwide perspective, central clearing raises a number of important issues that should be kept in mind as its use increases. I will now consider several of those issues and associated challenges in some detail. A number of commentators have argued that the move to central clearing will further concentrate risk in the financial system. There is some truth in that assertion. Moving a significant share of the $700 trillion OTC derivatives market to central clearing will concentrate risk at CCPs. But the intent is not simply to concentrate risk, but also to reduce it--through netting of positions, greater transparency, better and more uniform risk-management practices, and more comprehensive regulation. This strategy places a heavy burden on CCPs, market participants, and regulators alike to build a strong market and regulatory infrastructure and to get it right the first time. It has also been frequently observed that central clearing simplifies and makes the financial system more transparent. That, too, has an element of truth to it, but let's take a closer look. Charts similar to the ones shown in figure 1 are frequently offered to illustrate the point that, as a CCP becomes a buyer to every seller and a seller to every buyer, it causes risks to be netted and simplifies the network of counterparties. The dizzying and opaque constellation of exposures that exists in a purely bilateral market, illustrated in the chart on the left, is replaced by a neat hub-and-spoke network that is both known and more comprehensible, illustrated in the chart on the right. The CCP and its regulators are then in a position to observe the CCP's entire network, which can be important in the event that one or more clearing members become impaired. CCPs may also be able to coordinate a response to problems in their markets in ways that individual clearing members would find very difficult. Figure 2 shows that, at the same time, in the real world CCPs bring with them their own complexities. As the figure shows, we do not live in a simple world with only one CCP. We do not even live in a world with one CCP per product class, since some products are cleared by multiple, large CCPs. 5 Also, significant clearing members are often members of multiple CCPs in different jurisdictions. The disruption of a single member can have far-reaching effects. Accordingly, while CCPs simplify some aspects of the financial system, in reality, the overall system supporting the OTC derivatives markets remains quite complex. To carry out their critical functions, CCPs rely on a wide variety of financial services from other financial firms, such as custody, clearing, and settlement. Many of these services are provided by the same global financial institutions that are also the largest clearing members of the CCPs. The failure of a large clearing member that is also a key service provider could disrupt the smooth and efficient operation of one or multiple CCPs, and vice versa. In the event of disorderly CCP failures, the netting benefits and other efficiencies that CCPs offer would be lost at a point when the financial system is already under significant stress. Ultimately, the system as a whole is only as strong as its weakest link. People often think of these relationships between CCPs and clearing members in terms of credit exposures, but there are also important interconnections in the need for and use of liquidity. Historically, some CCPs viewed liquidity in terms of daily operational needs. From a macroprudential perspective, this view of liquidity is far too narrow. If a CCP is to act as a buffer against the transmission of liquidity shocks from a clearing member's default, the CCP itself must have a buffer of liquidity it can draw on to make its payments on time even during periods of market stress. The PFMIs introduced a new liquidity standard that requires CCPs to cover, at a minimum, the liquidity needs of the CCP on the failure of the single clearing member and its affiliates with the largest aggregate position, in extreme but plausible market conditions. Liquidity needs are to be met with a predefined list of liquid resources, starting with cash. Moreover, the largest clearing members participate in many CCPs around the world. Cash management at these clearing members, particularly intraday cash management, involves interconnected cash flows to and from a clearing member's various CCPs, other market infrastructures, and other financial institutions. If a clearing member were to default, cash flows and needed financial services could be disrupted simultaneously at several CCPs. Failure of one or more CCPs to pay margin or settle obligations as promised could impair the ability of a clearing member to meet other obligations and transmit liquidity risk to others in the financial system. Accordingly, CCPs require a liquidity profile that will allow them to absorb rather than amplify the liquidity shocks that are likely to materialize during a period of financial stress following a member's default. Of course, clearinghouses have been around for quite some time and have generally stood up well even in severe crises. 6 But let's look a little deeper at the risks. During the global financial crisis, governments around the world took extraordinary actions to shore up many of the large financial institutions that are also large clearing members. While it is not possible to say with confidence what would have happened if these measures had not been taken, it is surely the case that whatever pressures CCPs faced would have been many times greater, and the potential consequences much greater as well. Moreover, as CCPs grow into their enhanced role in the financial system, they will represent an ever larger locus for systemic risk. It is therefore important not to be lulled into a false sense of security that past performance is a guarantee of future CCP success. After the crisis, governments firmly resolved that even the largest financial institutions must be allowed to fail and be resolved without taxpayer support and without threatening the broader financial system or the economy. CCPs therefore need to adapt to a world in which their largest clearing members will be allowed to fail and to be resolved without taxpayer support. And, as I will discuss a little later, the same is true of CCPs--they, too, should have no expectation of taxpayer support if they fail. To say it as plainly as possible, the purpose of all of this new infrastructure and regulation is not to facilitate the orderly bailout of a CCP in the next crisis. Quite to the contrary, CCPs and their members must plan to stand on their own and continue to provide critical services to the financial system, without support from the taxpayer. The Road Ahead: Meeting the Challenges As you can see, central clearing represents the confluence of critical market infrastructure and systemic financial institutions. As a result, the regulation and supervision of CCPs present particular challenges. What matters most is the stability of the entire system, not that of one sector or another. In the United States, CCPs are primarily regulated by either the Commodity Futures Trading Commission or the Securities and Exchange Commission. Under authority provided by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, the Federal Reserve also plays a role in supervising and regulating systemically important CCPs and other financial market utilities. 7 In addition, the Federal Reserve is the holding company supervisor of a number of the largest clearing members. The challenge is to ensure that regulation and supervision take into account the broad implications of derivatives trading for CCPs, their members, and the broader financial system. Close collaboration between regulators--both domestically and internationally--will be necessary to ensure that central clearing can promote the kind of financial system resiliency that will be required when another severe crisis threatens. While central clearing and CCPs do present a number of complex and unique challenges, these challenges are not insurmountable. Several measures should be considered in the near term to further strengthen the market and regulatory infrastructure relating to liquidity, transparency, stress testing, "skin in the game," and recovery and resolution. Liquidity The adoption of the PFMIs around the world is driving improvements in CCP liquidity. 8 Ultimately, CCPs and their supervisors will need to maintain vigilance to ensure that liquid resources are sufficient to withstand the kinds of liquidity shocks that would likely accompany a member's default. In addition, it is crucial that liquidity scenario analysis be a regular part of a CCP's stress-testing program to help ensure that appropriate liquidity planning does not suffer from a lack of vision or imagination. Transparency Enhanced transparency is central to the reform agenda, and there has been some progress in this area. But CCPs need to provide still greater transparency to their clearing members and to the public. The G-20's central clearing mandate shifted a significant amount of activity and control away from dealers to CCPs. With this shift, CCPs took on the responsibility of managing risks in a way that is transparent to the clearing members who are subject to the decisions of the CCP. Clearing members need a full and detailed understanding of their risk exposure to CCPs, which means that clearing members must have detailed and appropriate information on stress-test results, the specification and application of margin models, and the sizing of default funds to cover losses. Without a clear picture of a CCP's risk profile, clearing members cannot make informed decisions about whether to clear with a particular CCP or how to judge their exposures to it. All major stakeholders--clearing members, clients, regulators, and the broader market--should be aware of the risks involved so that they can take appropriate steps to mitigate them. Stress testing The disclosure of CCP stress-test results to clearing members is important so that clearing members can have a full understanding of a CCP's risk profile. This disclosure, however, would be of little help if the stress tests themselves were insufficiently comprehensive and robust. For example, consider a case in which a bank belongs to two CCPs that clear similar products but the disclosed stress tests for the CCPs are based on materially different scenarios. This state of affairs could easily result in more confusion than clarity. It is time for domestic and international regulators to consider steps to strengthen credit and liquidity stress testing conducted by CCPs. Currently, most major CCPs engage in some form of stress testing. However, both clearing members and regulators need a more systematic view of what stress tests are performed, at what frequency, with what assumptions, and with what results. Aside from these issues involving individual stress tests, there are also important questions about the comparability of stress scenarios, assumptions, and results across similar and different types of CCPs. A related issue is whether regulators should consider some sort of standardized approach to supervisory stress testing. Not all CCPs are alike. But there may be approaches that could bring some of the benefits of standardization while allowing tailoring of some scenarios to the activities of particular CCPs or groups of CCPs. Clearly, a greater degree of uniformity would be helpful to clearing members that are comparing test results across several CCPs and to regulators that are considering systemwide stability. For example, there are likely some financial market stresses, such as rapid and significant increases in market volatility, that would be expected to have broad effects across financial markets and participants. Coordinated stress tests could also help us better understand the macroprudential risks around liquidity that I discussed earlier. Understanding the effect of such correlated stresses on a wide array of CCPs will be important for ensuring overall system resiliency. Going forward, regulators will need to work collaboratively to ensure that stress tests are robust, informative, and appropriately comparable. Skin in the game A number of commentators have urged U.S. authorities to consider requiring CCPs to place significant amounts of their own loss-absorbing resources in front of the mutualized clearing fund or other financial resources provided by clearing members. These skin-in-the-game requirements are intended to create incentives for the owners of CCPs for careful consideration of new products for clearing, for conservative modeling of risks, and for robust default waterfalls and other resources to meet such risks as may materialize. 9 The issue is a complex one, however, and a number of factors would need to be considered in formulating such a requirement. Recovery and resolution I have focused so far on what we can do to ensure that CCPs do not fail: more transparency, enhanced stress testing, more robust capital and default waterfalls, stronger liquidity, and increased incentives to appropriately manage risks. I will conclude my remarks today by discussing what happens when all of these efforts encounter a severe stress event. Try as we might to prevent the buildup of excessive risk, we need to be prepared for the possibility that a CCP may fail or approach failure in the future. When and if such a crisis materializes, CCPs will be called on to stand on their own. CCPs and regulators need to develop clear and detailed CCP recovery and resolution strategies that are well designed to minimize transmission of the CCP's distress to its clearing members and beyond. Recovery and resolution planning is a matter of intense focus among regulators and industry participants. Just last month, the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and the Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions released their final report on the recovery of financial market infrastructures. 10 The report is part of an ongoing effort to provide guidance on implementing the PFMI requirements for recovery planning. On the same day, the Financial Stability Board released a new report on the resolution of financial market infrastructures and their participants to supplement its earlier work on the report Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions. 11 These reports stress that CCPs must adopt plans and tools that will help them recover from financial shocks and continue to provide their critical services without government assistance. It has been a challenge for some market participants to confront the fact that risks and losses, however well managed, do not simply disappear within a CCP but are ultimately allocated in some way to the various stakeholders in the organization--even if the risk of loss is quite remote. This realization has generated a healthy debate among CCPs, members, and members' clients and regulators that has provided fertile ground for new thinking about risk design, risk-management tools, and recovery planning. To ensure that CCPs do not themselves become too-big-to-fail entities, we need transparent, actionable, and effective plans for dealing with financial shocks that do not leave either an explicit or implicit role for the government. Conclusion: Realizing the Promise of Central Clearing A key question posed at this conference is whether the reforms instituted in response to the crisis have improved the strength and stability of the financial system. In my view, the answer for OTC derivatives reform--and central clearing, in particular--is a positive one. But final pronouncements are premature. Post-crisis reforms and the rise of central clearing have started us down a path toward greater financial stability. At the same time, central clearing brings with it a number of complexities that relate to the interaction between CCPs and the rest of the financial system, especially the global systemically important financial institutions that represent many of their largest clearing members. Given the increasingly prominent role that central clearing will play in the financial system going forward, it is critical that we collectively get central clearing right. To do so, I have argued that it is imperative that we consider central clearing from a systemwide perspective, and that regulators will need to continue to work collaboratively with each other, both domestically and internationally. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. According to the Bank for International Settlements, the notional amount of OTC derivatives outstanding grew from $80.3 trillion in December 1998 to $598.1 trillion in December 2008, which corresponds to an annual growth rate of 22.2 percent per year. For more information, see Bank for International Settlements, " Derivatives Statistics ," webpage. Return to text 3. Financial Stability Board (2014), OTC Derivatives Market Reforms: Seventh Progress Report on Implementation (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, April). Return to text 4. See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012), Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements and International Organization of Securities Commissions, April). Return to text 5. As an example, both the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Intercontinental Exchange clear credit default swaps. Return to text 6. See, for example, Jerome H. Powell (2013), " OTC Market Infrastructure Reform: Opportunities and Challenges ," speech delivered at the Clearing House 2013 annual meeting, New York, November 21; and Ben S. Bernanke (2011), " Clearinghouses, Financial Stability, and Financial Reform ," speech delivered at the 2011 Financial Markets Conference, a meeting sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, held in Stone Mountain, Ga., April 4. Return to text 7. The Federal Reserve Board's authority to supervise systemically important CCPs is provided in title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act. Return to text 8. In the United States, these standards were implemented by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission for derivative-clearing organizations in November 2013 and by the Federal Reserve for certain financial market utilities that are designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council in October 2014. Return to text 9. See, for example, the related discussion in Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (2010), Market Structure Developments in the Clearing Industry: Implications for Financial Stability (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, November). Return to text 10. See Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2014), Recovery of Financial Market Infrastructures (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements and International Organization of Securities Commissions, October). Return to text 11. See Financial Stability Board (2014), Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, October). Return to text Figure 1 Figure 2 View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: November 06, 2014 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Global Research Forum on International Macroeconomics and Finance, Washington, D.C. Share Watch live Our panel's topic--"Monetary Policy Spillovers and Cooperation in a Global Economy"--is surely a timely one. I will offer brief introductory thoughts and then discuss some recent research by Federal Reserve Board economists that has bearing on these matters. 1 The Federal Reserve's monetary policy is motivated by the dual mandate, which calls upon us to achieve stable prices and maximum sustainable employment. While these objectives are stated as domestic concerns, as a practical matter, economic and financial developments around the world can have significant effects on our own economy and vice versa. Thus, the pursuit of our mandate requires that we understand and incorporate into our policy decision-making the anticipated effects of these interconnections. And the dollar's role as the world's primary reserve, transaction, and funding currency requires us to consider global developments to help ensure our own financial stability. Since the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has pursued a highly accommodative monetary policy, which has had important effects on asset prices and global investment flows. With unconventional tools, the scale and scope of these effects were difficult to predict ex ante. Nor is it possible to predict with confidence how markets will react day to day as policy returns to normal. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has gone to great lengths to provide transparency about its policy intentions. Yet, since Chairman Bernanke first discussed the end of the asset purchase program in mid-2013, volatility has surprised both on the upside (the "taper tantrum") and on the downside (the actual taper and the low volatility throughout most of 2014). In my view, while market volatility will continue to ebb and flow, these fluctuations are not likely to have important implications for policy. The path of policy will depend on the progress of the economy toward fulfilment of the dual mandate. Overall, accommodative monetary policy seems to have provided significant support for U.S. growth. And, of course, a strong U.S. economy contributes to strong growth around the globe, particularly in the emerging market economies (EMEs). But what of the so-called spillovers in the form of flows into, and out of, EMEs, whose financial sectors are small compared with global investment flows? Such spillovers could merely reflect investor responses to changing differentials between rates of return abroad and in the United States. But these spillovers could also reflect shifts in investor preferences for risk. By design, accommodative monetary policy--whether conventional or unconventional--supports economic activity in part by creating incentives for investors to take more risk. Such risk-taking can show up in domestic financial markets, in the international investments of U.S. investors, and even, ultimately, in general risk attitudes toward foreign financial markets. Distinguishing between appropriate and excessive risk-taking is difficult, however. I now turn to some recent research on whether there has been an increase in the riskiness of our investments abroad and whether such increases might be traced to the current low-interest rate environment. Many studies of the pre-crisis period document the pro-cyclical nature of bank lending and leverage, and the buildup of risk-taking and leverage by banks. 2 It is much harder to find evidence that low interest rates have led to increased post-crisis risk-taking by U.S. banks. Growth in overall lending by U.S. banks has been modest at best. However, some pockets of increased risk-taking by banks and other investors are observable in domestic markets, such as leveraged loans. And on the international front, there has been a notable increase in syndicated loan originations. Recent research by Board staff, using a database of loans primarily to U.S. borrowers but also to some foreign borrowers, suggests that lenders have indeed originated an increased number of risky syndicated loans post-crisis, based on the assessed probability of default as reported to bank supervisors (figure 1) . 3 Regression results confirm that the average probability of default is significantly inversely related to U.S. long-term interest rates. This increase in riskiness of syndicated loans post-crisis has been accompanied by a shift in the composition of loan holders: An increasing share is now held not by banks but by hedge, pension, and other investment funds (figure 2) . These nonbank investors also tend to hold loans with higher average credit risk (figure 3) . These data suggest that a tougher regulatory environment may have made U.S.-based bank originators unable or unwilling to hold risky loans on their balance sheets. Related work by the same researchers, using a database with more-extensive coverage of loans to foreign borrowers, shows a similar pattern of increased risky loan underwriting by international lenders, an increase that is also significantly inversely related to U.S. interest rates. Together, these results suggest a potential spillover from accommodative U.S. monetary policy through increased risk-taking in syndicated loans globally, although preliminary results also indicate that investors still require extra return for this extra risk. Another area in which to look for links between low interest rates and risk-taking is in cross-border securities purchases. The role of low interest rates in advanced economies in encouraging capital flows to EMEs where returns are higher has been a familiar theme. 4 And recent studies have found that asset prices in EMEs do respond systematically to U.S. monetary policy shocks. 5 For evidence of increased risk-taking in cross-border investment, let's look at the composition of U.S. investors' foreign bond portfolios. Although emerging market bonds remain a relatively small proportion of the aggregate U.S. cross-border bond portfolio (figure 4) , within foreign government bonds, U.S. investors have modestly shifted their portfolio shares toward higher-yielding bonds of emerging market sovereigns (figure 5) . Ex post, these portfolio reallocations delivered a higher return to U.S. investors on this part of their portfolio relative to what they would have received if they had left portfolio compositions unchanged at the average shares in 2008 and 2009, but at a cost to the portfolio's credit quality (figure 6) . Regression results confirm that in choosing among foreign government bonds, U.S. investors have put more weight on returns since the crisis. 6 But search for higher returns has not been the only motivation for international investors post-crisis: Demand for liquid high-grade "safe" or money-like assets has also increased from foreign official investors for investment of foreign exchange reserves, from pension funds and other institutions who face portfolio allocation constraints or regulatory requirements, and from investment strategies requiring cash-like assets for margining and other collateral purposes. Some shift to safe assets is also seen in U.S. portfolios: U.S. investors actively rebalanced their holdings of foreign financial sector bonds toward those with higher credit ratings, but at some cost in returns ( figure 7 ; figure 8 ). 7 Taken together, developments in U.S. bond portfolios do not indicate a worrisome pickup in risk-taking in external investments. But it is important to recognize that portfolio reallocations that seem relatively small for U.S. investors can loom large from the perspective of the foreign recipients of these flows. At roughly $400 billion at the end of 2012, emerging market bonds accounted for a tiny fraction of the roughly $25 trillion in bonds held by U.S. investors. But to the recipient countries, these holdings can account for a large fraction of their bond markets. Even relatively small changes in these U.S. holdings can generate large asset price responses, as was certainly the case in the summer of 2013. Likewise, a reassessment of risk-return tradeoffs could disrupt financing for projects that are dependent on the willingness of investors to participate in global syndicated loan markets. We take the consequences of such spillovers seriously, and the Federal Reserve is intent on communicating its policy intentions as clearly as possible in order to reduce the likelihood of future disruptions to markets. We will continue to monitor investor behavior closely, both domestically and internationally. 1. The views expressed herein are my own and not necessarily those of other FOMC participants. Return to text 2. See Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin (2010), " Liquidity and Leverage ," Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol. 19 (July), pp. 418-37; Valentina Bruno and Hyun Song Shin (2013), " Capital Flows, Cross-Border Banking, and Global Liquidity ," NBER Working Paper Series 19038 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May); and Valentina Bruno and Hyun Song Shin (2013), " Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary Policy ," NBER Working Paper Series 18942 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April). Return to text 3. See Sirio Aramonte, Seung Jung Lee, and Viktors Stebunovs (2014), " Risk-Taking and Low Longer-Term Interest Rates: Evidence from the U.S. Syndicated Loan Market (PDF) ," paper presented at the 14th Annual Bank Research Conference sponsored by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's Center for Financial Research and the Journal of Financial Services Research , held in Arlington, Va., September 18-19, and Seung Jung Lee, Lucy Qian Liu, and Viktors Stebunovs (2014), "Risk-Taking and Interest Rates: Evidence from Decades in the Global Syndicated Loan Market," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 4. See Jerome H. Powell (2013), " Advanced Economy Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies ," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2013 Asia Economic Policy Conference, San Francisco, November 4. Return to text 5. See Shaghil Ahmed and Andrei Zlate (2013), " Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World? " International Finance Discussion Papers 1081 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June); David Bowman, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2014), " U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies ," International Finance Discussion Papers 1109 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June); and Marcel Fratzscher, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013), " On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing (PDF) ," ECB Working Paper Series 1557 (Frankfurt, Germany: European Central Bank, June). Return to text 6. See Carol Bertaut and Alexandra Tabova (2014), "Reach for Yield versus Search for Safety," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 7. See Carol Bertaut, Alexandra Tabova, and Vivian Wong (2014), " The Replacement of Safe Assets: Evidence from the U.S. Bond Portfolio (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Papers 1123 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: November 14, 2014 Back to Top
