September 24, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Economic Inequality Policy Forum: The Impacts of COVID-19 on Communities of Color and Policy Insights for an Equitable Economic Recovery (delivered via videoconference) As prepared for delivery Hello everyone, and welcome to the New York Fed’s third Economic Inequality Policy Forum . It’s a pleasure to speak with all of you who are joining us for this conversation. For me, today’s event is about sharing research and hearing your recommendations, so I’m going to keep my opening remarks brief. Before I continue, let me give the disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Since the outbreak of the pandemic, we’ve seen severe economic pain, unprecedented levels of unemployment, and enormous uncertainty about the future. The health and economic effects of COVID-19 have created tremendous hardship for many Americans across the country, but they have been especially painful for communities of color. We know that people of color and Black people in particular have experienced higher rates of illness and death. Significant representation in essential services work and insufficient access to healthcare are key factors that have contributed to these outcomes. 1 The pandemic’s convergence with a moment of reckoning for the United States around racial justice makes conversations on issues like equitable growth even more important and relevant. When I think about equitable growth, I think about an economy where everyone can realize their full economic potential. While today’s conversation is about equitable recovery , everyone here is aware that an equitable economy did not exist before the pandemic. Another important dimension of equitable growth is equal access. And the pandemic exposed just how dramatic the fault lines in racial disparities are, for access to things like healthcare, credit, and housing. Recent research by the New York Fed revealed that Black-owned businesses are almost twice as likely to shutter during COVID-19 as white-owned firms. Black-owned businesses are also more likely to be located in coronavirus hot spots. 2 I’m hearing about how these statistics are playing out for families through regular conversations with community leaders like many of you in our district and beyond. Far too many are facing unemployment, losing access to their healthcare, and dealing with the threat of eviction. Structural inequality stifles growth, but there is no single silver bullet that can solve the problems laid bare by the pandemic. As we look ahead to a full recovery from the downturn, we need to set a stronger foundation. We need more investment in health, in education—especially in the earliest years—in infrastructure, and in training and skills for well-paying jobs. There is so much work that needs to be done to make sure that we are fostering an equitable recovery and ensuring that everyone is able to fulfill their economic potential. That’s why at the New York Fed and across the Federal Reserve System, a key area of focus is to better understand what contributes to economic inequities and to finding solutions. 3 Our economic research and analysis, which my colleagues will share shortly, highlights many of these stark disparities. 4 In addition, hosting conversations like this one creates dialogue around these issues and builds connections between those working for change. Another important role the Federal Reserve plays in promoting economic equity and access is supervising banks with respect to the Community Reinvestment Act. This law requires banks to lend, invest, and offer services to low- and moderate-income communities in areas where the banks operate. To emphasize all of our work in this space, the New York Fed recently published a statement reinforcing our commitment to fostering a more equitable economy and society: 5 The New York Fed stands in unity with all those who oppose racism, hate, and violence. We join them in a shared desire to root out the intolerable inequities and injustice grounded in systemic racism that persist in our society. We are firm in the belief that economic equality is a critical component for social justice and that we will never have the truly inclusive and strong economy we seek until access to health, education, safety, and justice knows no racial or other boundaries. We are dedicated to understanding and finding solutions to the numerous forms of inequality that communities of color experience and working with communities in our District to address deep-seated inequities. We are steadfast in our commitment to work for a more equitable economy and society for all, and will redouble our efforts in pursuit of this essential mission. The pandemic painfully demonstrates the need for us to redouble our efforts in working with stakeholders from the community, business, nonprofits, and governments to build a stronger, more equitable foundation for our economy’s future. This makes conversations like the ones we are having today so important for us to listen to and learn from. Our shared commitment to an equitable recovery is needed now more than ever. 1 Coronavirus in African Americans and Other People of Color , Johns Hopkins Medicine, April 20, 2020. 2 Claire Kramer Mills and Jessica Battisto, Double Jeopardy: COVID-19’s Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities , Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020. 3 Economic Inequality & Equitable Growth , Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 4 Heterogeneity: A Multi-Part Research Series on Liberty Street Economics , Federal Reserve Bank of New York, accessed August 8, 2020. 5 About the New York Fed: Announcements , Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 12, 2020. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

September 29, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the 2020 U.S. Treasury Market Conference (delivered via videoconference) As prepared for delivery Good morning, everyone, and welcome to the sixth annual U.S. Treasury Market Conference. I wish we were able to meet in person at the New York Fed. But, while the location for this year's conference may have moved from an auditorium to your living room, the goal remains the same: To bring together market participants and representatives from five public sector bodies—the New York Fed, the Board of Governors, the Treasury, the SEC, and the CFTC. And, the events of the past year make the conversations we will have today all the more valuable and timely. Today, I'd like to begin with stressing the importance of well-functioning financial markets and then look at two recent episodes of volatility and the lessons learned. I'll close by explaining the Fed's role to support functioning in this critical part of the financial system. At last year's conference, I spoke about the transition away from LIBOR. Because I am certain all of you have committed to memory everything I said then, I'll keep my remarks on LIBOR today short and to the point: We have only 459 days until the availability of LIBOR can no longer be assured, and everyone needs to put their nose to the grindstone in their efforts to prepare for the move off LIBOR. In the immortal words of Captain Jean Luc Picard—make it so! Before I continue on to today's topic or quote other favorite Star Trek characters, I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. The Heart of the Economy The markets that are the center of attention today—the Treasury market, the repo market, and the mortgage-backed securities market—represent the heart of the circulatory system of our financial system and our economy, and indeed the global economy. When they are working smoothly, all the other parts of the system can perform as they should. But, the opposite is true as well. If these critical markets break down, credit stops flowing, and people can't finance the purchase of a car or a home, businesses can't invest, and the economy suffers, resulting in lost jobs and income. 1 Financial markets aren't static—they evolve over time in response to changes in technology, regulation, and business models. The Treasury market is not immune to this process of change. We have seen the emergence of principal trading firms, changes in regulations of key intermediaries, and the growth of nonbank financial institutions. 2 With this evolution, it is vitally important to ensure that safeguards and systems also evolve so that these markets function well in all circumstances and conditions, including unprecedented events like the pandemic. We need to reflect on and learn from these experiences and consider ways to make these and other markets more robust, thereby minimizing the potential negative consequences to the economy and the need for extraordinary policy responses. Market Conditions in September and March I know it might seem like a lifetime ago, but allow me take you to mid-September of last year. A number of otherwise ordinary occurrences—including corporate tax payments and settlement of newly issued Treasuries—were expected to put some upward pressure on short-term rates, but the market response was out of proportion to the magnitude of the shock. Conditions in funding markets became highly volatile, with both secured and unsecured lending rates rising sharply. Indeed, the size of the reaction in repo rates, the spillover to the federal funds market, and the emergence of strains in market functioning were well outside of recent experience. And the market stress was looking to get worse, not better. 3 4 In response to these developments, the Federal Reserve conducted a series of large-scale repo operations with the aim of calming conditions in funding markets and bringing the federal funds rate within the target range. The provision of liquidity had the desired effect of reducing strains in markets, narrowing the dispersion of rates, and keeping the federal funds rate within the target range. 5 Moving to more recent events, in March of this year the global spread of the pandemic led to a rapid and massive movement of funds around the world as investors sought to protect themselves from the highly uncertain and darkening economic outlook. These flows threatened to overwhelm the financial system and resulted in intense strain and disruption in short-term funding markets and markets for Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. 6 Measures of market functioning deteriorated to levels near, or in some cases worse than, those we saw at the peak of the 2008 global financial crisis. 7 In response to the extraordinary volatility and signs of market disruption caused by the pandemic, the Federal Reserve greatly expanded its repo operations and decisively and immediately began purchasing enormous quantities of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. Our approach was to deliver a rapid and overwhelming response that would give assurance to market participants that liquidity would be there in the coming days and months. These actions, combined with the introduction of emergency lending facilities to provide liquidity to funding and credit markets, proved successful. They quickly restored market functioning and averted what could have been a much more severe pullback from markets and the flow of credit to households and businesses. 8 Indeed, the rapid restoration of market functioning helped restore a robust flow of credit at historically low interest rates to the economy, which has provided a boost for the recovery. Lessons Learned I don't like to be ominous or foreshadow the future. But, if another crisis were to occur, we must to be able to look back on this time and know that we learned everything we could from recent events. After the financial crisis of 2008, a significant amount of work both in the United States and around the world was invested in studying the causes of that crisis and finding ways to make the financial system more resilient. The ultimate goal of those reforms was to ensure that the next time the global economy was hit by a major shock, the financial system would be a source of support for the economy, rather than amplify weakness. Those efforts were hugely successful. The resilience of the U.S. banking system in particular has been a key factor in positioning our economy for a strong recovery, despite the enormous challenges posed by the pandemic. It's crucial that our financial system can handle shocks and disruption. We must use the opportunity before us and study the events in September and March to identify the root causes for the market stress and disruption. 9 We need to understand how changes in the market ecosystem—whether due to regulation, technology, or other factors—have influenced market resilience. Like the post-financial-crisis reforms, this is an opportunity to think hard about what changes will help fortify the financial system against future shocks. The Role of Central Banks Despite our best efforts, we should not fool ourselves that we can design a system that is bulletproof against every circumstance. The events of the past year have demonstrated the critical role central banks can and must play in extraordinary times when market stress and dysfunction threaten to spill over into the economy. No private institution has the ability to provide liquidity at the speed or scale that the Federal Reserve and other central banks have this year. Although we often talk about the Fed in terms of monetary policy and interest rates, the Federal Reserve System was originally created to ensure the stability of the financial system. 10 That role is as relevant today as it was 107 years ago, and will continue to be in the future. Conclusion Let me conclude by returning to my analogy of these critical markets as the heart of our circulatory system. Recent events have reaffirmed what many already knew. Liquid, well-functioning markets for Treasury and related securities are absolutely essential for credit to flow and the economy to prosper. Assuring that these markets are robust and resilient to unknown future circumstances may seem like a daunting task, but as Captain Picard also taught us, "Things are only impossible until they're not." Thank you. 1 John C. Williams, Rising to the Challenge: Central Banking, Financial Markets, and the Pandemic , Remarks at the 16th Meeting of the Financial Research Advisory Committee for the Treasury’s Office of Financial Research (via videoconference) (July 16, 2020). 2 U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 , July 13, 2015. 3 John C. Williams, LIBOR: The Clock is Ticking , Remarks at the 2019 U.S. Treasury Market Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City (September 23, 2019). 4 John C. Williams, Money Markets and the Federal Funds Rate: The Path Forward , Remarks at the MFA Outlook 2019, New York City (October 17, 2019). 5 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Repurchase Operations , September 20, 2019. 6 The impact of these strains on liquidity in the Treasury market is discussed in Michael Fleming and Francisco Ruela, Treasury Market Liquidity during the COVID-19 Crisis , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , April 17, 2020. 7 For the Treasury market, see Michael Fleming and Francisco Ruela, Treasury Market Liquidity during the COVID-19 Crisis , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , April 17, 2020. For MBS, see Jiakai Chen, Haoyang Liu, David Rubio, Asani Sarkar, and Zhaogang Song, MBS Market Dysfunctions in the Time of COVID-19 , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , July 17, 2020; and Jiakai Chen, Haoyang Liu, David Rubio, Asani Sarkar, and Zhaogang Song. Cash-Forward Arbitrage and Dealer Capital in MBS Markets: COVID-19 and Beyond , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports , no. 933, revised September 2020. 8 For the various New York Fed Open Market Desk statements on the expansion of repo operations during March 2020, see Repo and Reverse Repo Operations . FOMC statements regarding asset purchases at this time include: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 15, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 23, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support the Economy , March 23, 2020. The improvement in Treasury market functioning following these actions is discussed in Michael Fleming, Treasury Market Liquidity and the Federal Reserve during the COVID-19 Pandemic , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , May 29, 2020. In the March 23 statements, the FOMC also announced it would start to purchase agency commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS) to smooth market functioning in that market that helps to finance multi-family housing. For more on the deterioration of CMBS market functioning, the Fed purchases and their impact on the CMBS market during this period, see Woojung Park, Julia Gouny, and Haoyang Liu, Federal Reserve Agency CMBS Purchases , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics , July 16, 2020. 9 FSB Sets Out Action to Maintain Financial Stability during COVID , July 15, 2020. 10 John C. Williams, Rising to the Challenge: Central Banking, Financial Markets, and the Pandemic , Remarks at the 16th Meeting of the Financial Research Advisory Committee for the Treasury’s Office of Financial Research (via videoconference) (July 16, 2020). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

October 07, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Virtual Series: The Road Ahead for Central Banks (delivered via videoconference) As prepared for delivery It's great to be back in California participating once again in a Hoover Institution monetary policy event, even if only virtually. These conferences have provided an excellent opportunity for academic experts, policymakers, and practitioners to share research and perspectives on critically important issues. John Taylor is both a friend and a mentor, so it's a particular pleasure to be sharing this online platform with him today. This summer, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) completed its review of the Fed's monetary policy framework. This culminated in August with the issuance of a new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. 1 The FOMC put this strategy into practice in its September policy statement, explicitly tying its policy actions and intentions to the new framework. 2 The new policy framework represents a substantial evolution of the FOMC's thinking and approach since the Committee published its first framework statement in 2012. Today, I'm going to talk about what these changes mean for policy as the economy recovers from the effects of the pandemic. But what I'm really looking forward to is our conversation around these important issues, so I'll keep my opening remarks brief. Before I go any further, I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the FOMC or others in the Federal Reserve System. Our Dual Mandate Goals While our monetary policy approach has shifted, our fundamental goals have not. The Fed has two goals set by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. These "dual mandate" goals remain on an equal footing, and our commitment to delivering on both has not changed. In addition, our assessment that a 2 percent long-run inflation rate is most consistent with achieving both of our dual mandate goals is unaltered. What has evolved is how we think about best achieving them. Like all institutions, the Federal Reserve must be responsive to changing circumstances and adapt to new realities. Since 2012, we have learned a great deal about the behavior of the economy, employment, and inflation—both in the short and longer run—and these lessons have informed our approach to policy. There are three key takeaways worth highlighting: First and foremost is the secular decline in the neutral rate of interest, or r-star, which has brought neutral real interest rates to near zero in the United States. This decline in r-star in turn implies that the constraint on monetary policy from the lower bound on nominal interest rates has become a central aspect of the landscape with which policymakers must contend. Second, over the past decade, inflation in the United States has been below our 2 percent longer-run target most of the time, and a number of measures of inflation expectations have drifted down in recent years. 3 It is important to note that these first two observations are closely connected, as emphasized in the paper with Thomas Mertens that I presented at last year's Hoover conference. In a world of low r-star and a lower bound on nominal interest rates, a standard inflation targeting approach can lead to inflation and inflation expectations that are anchored below the targeted level. 4 Third, during the long economic recovery following the 2007-09 recession, we saw the unemployment rate reach 50-year lows without causing an undesired rise in inflation. Structural changes in the economy—and in particular the labor market—have greatly expanded the level of employment that can be maintained without creating inflationary pressures. But, changes like those are hard to see in real time, making estimates of the natural rate of unemployment or other barometers of the economy's potential inherently uncertain and subject to change. 5 Evolution in Our Thinking One clear lesson is the critical importance of formulating a policy approach that effectively and consistently keeps longer-run inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent. Perhaps the most notable change we announced to our framework was explicitly describing success in terms of achieving inflation that averages 2 percent over time. In particular, "following periods when inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, appropriate monetary policy will likely aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time." 6 A second tangible evolution in our approach is that we made explicit that in seeking maximum employment, we are focused on eliminating shortfalls from that goal. We also emphasized the inclusive nature of our maximum employment goal. This means thinking more broadly than the aggregate rate of unemployment and examining the full range of indicators when it comes to assessing shortfalls from maximum employment. Together, these changes position us to deliver on our dual mandate goals in a world of very low r-star and persistently low inflation. What Does This Mean for Policy? My colleagues at the FOMC and I have talked extensively about the nature of these changes and how we drew our conclusions. But, it's important to apply these decisions to the current situation. The pandemic has presented us with extraordinary and devastating economic circumstances. The good news is that the economy has started to recover and the unemployment rate has come down. About half of the jobs lost during March and April have been regained. Despite these improvements, we are nowhere near where we want to be: the total number of nonfarm jobs is still 10.7 million below February's level, and the unemployment rate is nearly 8 percent. These overall statistics mask the severity of the health and economic hardships felt by lower-income families and communities of color as a result of the pandemic. To cite just a few statistics, the Black unemployment rate is above 12 percent and the Hispanic unemployment rate is over 10 percent, and Black-owned businesses were shuttered at more than twice the rate of white-owned businesses during the early stages of the pandemic. 7 In terms of monetary policy, the appropriate focus right now is on getting the country back to work. For that reason, policy is supporting very low interest rates to provide stimulus to the economic recovery and keeping inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent. In thinking about the future path of policy, it is important to recognize that the pandemic engenders a unique and highly uncertain economic outlook. This is not a standard recession and the economic future is inextricably tied to the spread of the virus, people's behavior in containing that spread, and the development of vaccines and therapeutics. Given this uncertainty, transparency and flexibility in our policy approach will enable us to respond to changes in the outlook as they happen. Indeed, these are key features of the forward guidance we issued after the FOMC meeting in September. 8 September's FOMC statement clearly linked our policy to the key elements of the new policy framework. In particular, it stated that the Committee expects it will be appropriate to maintain the federal funds rate at its current target range until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. 9 By linking future policy actions to economic outcomes and ultimately our dual mandate goals, this forward guidance clearly describes the key elements of the FOMC's reaction function to economic developments and a changing outlook. Ready to Adapt One of the most important, but perhaps overlooked parts of our August announcement is that we will review our longer-run framework roughly every five years. This represents the Fed's commitment to transparency and our willingness to continue to adapt to changing circumstances. Reviewing our longer-run framework and approach to our goals more frequently will ensure we are well prepared for the future, whatever it may bring. Conclusion I'll conclude with this: these are extraordinary times. The announcement of changes to our longer-run framework comes during one of the most challenging periods our country and our economy have ever faced. These changes to the framework mean that we are well positioned to deliver on our dual mandate goals and support a strong and sustained economic recovery. 1 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy , as amended effective August 27, 2020. 2 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , September 16, 2020. 3 John C. Williams, A New Chapter for the FOMC Monetary Policy Framework , Remarks at “In Conversation: New York Fed Presidents on COVID-19” (Bretton Woods Committee Webinar) (September 2, 2020). 4 Thomas M. Mertens and John C. Williams, “ Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates .” In John H. Cochrane and John B. Taylor (eds.), Strategies for Monetary Policy , Hoover Institution Press, Palo Alto, CA, 2020. 5 Athanasios Orphanides and John C. Williams, Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2002, No. 2. 6 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy , as amended effective August 27, 2020. 7 Claire Kramer Mills and Jessica Battisto, Double Jeopardy: COVID-19’s Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities , Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020. 8 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , September 16, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Transcript of Chair Powell’s Press Conference , September 16, 2020. 9 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , September 16, 2020. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
