Bostic Launches Atlanta Fed Pandemic Response Webinar Series April 16, 2020 Speech Atlanta Fed president and CEO Raphael Bostic hosted the first session of a live webinar series about the Federal Reserve's actions and continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic. He explained the Federal Reserve's recent monetary policy actions and answered questions. Transcript Kim Tyson: Today we are honored to have Atlanta Fed president and CEO Raphael Bostic as our featured speaker. President Bostic will take a few minutes to explain some of the Federal Reserve's recent monetary policy actions, and then he will answer some of your questions that were submitted at registration. Welcome, Raphael. Raphael Bostic: Thank you, Kim, and it's really good to be here. I want to thank you all for joining us. It is a pleasure to start this series and I want to thank my staff, to start, for thinking of this and thinking this would be a good thing to do. I wanted to spend about 10 minutes of our time together just giving you a sense of where we are and the picture of our thinking as we at the Fed and other places have really worked to try to respond to the crisis and get us to a better place. I want to make sure we have the bulk of the time to really address some of the questions that have been sent in. I want to thank all of you who sent any questions in advance. It really helps us stay focused and be clear on the things that you want to know about. All right, so where are we to start? The numbers that have come in in the last couple of—I guess the last week, week and a half—have been pretty rough, but not so far from what we have expected. Unemployment claims have come in at around... I guess the number today was about five-and-a-half million. A week, two weeks before, we were in the six-to-seven-million-new-claims range. These are historic levels and as quite a reference, in the weeks leading up to the crisis, we were at about 200,000 new claims a month. So this is just a sea change in terms of its difference. Last month, in March, the economy had a loss of 700,000 jobs. That is a big change. That's pretty much the same as what we saw at the depths of the Great Recession and so this is a pretty significant hit. The other thing I would say here is that in this first wave, what we've seen is a real industry-specific focus in terms of impact, where a lot of public-facing sectors have taken the brunt of the pain so far. So that would be things like restaurants, hotels, educational services, arts and entertainment, and we're starting to see some issues around manufacturing as well. And then the numbers that we're seeing coming in off of that across the sector are coming in quite weak. Retail sales are weak. We are expecting manufacturing numbers over the next couple of weeks to be the same. All of these are going to be continued over the next several weeks as the impacts of the response to the COVID crisis become realized in the data. And we're all living this now and so it's important to just understand that what these things are going to report are just going to verify the things that we know already. So in terms of response, I would say that we are, at the Federal Reserve, viewing this as a public health crisis first. That's how I think about this. And so the biggest issue that we have is to make sure that as we go through the public health crisis, and make the response necessary to reduce the length of this pandemic, that we do all we can to make sure that the economy, and the U.S. economy, which was in a very stable place before, comes out of this crisis as close to that stability and solidness as possible. So pretty much all of the responses that we've done—I like to think of as relief or a support to try to keep our basic gears of the economy functioning as normally as possible. So at the very early stages of the crisis, first thing we did was reduce our fed funds rate to close to zero. That was really designed to send a signal that when we get to the other side, the cost of capital is not going to be a constraint for businesses as they're trying to recover. And then we introduced a number of what we call facilities, all of which were designed to make sure that basic parts of the economy that we rely upon to raise capital, to get money, and to get households with income and cash flow keep functioning. So at the very early stages of this we started to see the Treasury market, which is the deepest and most liquid market in the world, start testing stresses to suggest that might be breaking down. We wanted to make sure we had the facilities to accommodate that. We saw that mortgage markets were starting to show signs of stress as well, as the spreads above Treasuries started to increase and so we thought it would be important to provide support for that part of the marketplace as well. Then we started to see stresses on large corporations and the corporate credit markets. And corporations really access these markets, grew in the capital markets and investors. And so when corporations issue their debt through bonds, typically they get a lot of investors to buy them. The investors that were participating were asking for much higher premiums or returns than they normally do, which is another sign of stress. So we wanted to make sure that market was as normal as possible and have provided a facility to make sure there's liquidity there to make sure that corporations don't have difficulties raising capital. Of course, that capital and stuff they're going to use to pay for rents and salaries and the like. So we want to make sure that's sustainable. The nice thing—and the good thing, I would say—is that the support that we've gotten coming out, that we've offered, seems to have reduced some of the stress associated in those markets. And we're starting to see those spreads come down, which I think is quite positive. And then since then, we've continued to look to see where there are other parts of the economy where we might see stresses. So you've seen us issue facilities around money market mutual funds, and also from municipal bonds. Those are really designed to try to keep the funding sources for public sector institutions as secure and stable and as robust as possible so that local and state governments can continue to provide the services that communities need. You've seen us issue support for a Main Street Lending Program. That is really designed to target businesses, medium-sized businesses, those above the SBA [Small Business Association] limit up to $2 billion in revenues, up to 100,000 employees, to make sure that they still have the cash flows that they need to continue to pay their workers. And then we've also announced some support for the Paycheck Protection Program. And this is the program that I'm sure you're all aware of through the SBA that is providing support for small businesses, up to 500 employees, to make sure that they keep as many of their workers as possible on the payroll. Now in addition to these things, all of these, I think, are really important to help businesses that were healthy and functioning well just up to the crisis go through, because the issue was not their business models, it wasn't that they were taking extra risk. Rather, this is a really unprecedented exogenous event, and we need to make sure that that outside shock doesn't destroy businesses and business models that have been lasting for a long time. And to that end, we've also engaged with the banks that we oversee and regulate and really encourage them to be a partner with small businesses and to help those businesses figure out how do we manage debt in a period where our revenues and cash flows may be zero or close to zero. So we really encourage our banking partners, and those who we work with, to find ways to work with their customers to provide forbearance and principle and interest. Maybe extend the term of the loan—just change some of the structures so that those businesses don't feel like there are these extra stresses that they have to face in the immediate time. And I would also say that that runs through for borrowers and regular families and households as well. This is a time of crisis and this is a time where we all need to come together to make sure that we all get through this together. And I think that's the message we're going to continue to send. I continue to say this as much as possible. And I can say with a high degree of certainty that the banks that do those things are not going to be penalized for that in the future. These, we all recognize, are important steps to make sure that the pain that we're going through now does not become permanent damage when this crisis is handled. Then the last thing I'll say before turning this over to the question portion is that, as I said before, it's really important to remember that this is a public health crisis first and foremost. And so a recovery and a renewal, revival will really happen only at a great pace—after we get that public health issue handled and into a place where we feel comfortable, where all of us feel comfortable, that we can go leave our homes, go to stores or go to the workplace and not be at significant risk of catching the virus, because we don't have natural antibodies for this. So if you catch the virus and you are left to whatever's going to happen, and so it’s my sense that we will not have a lot of confidence from consumers or from families or from anybody to go out and do the regular things that are associated with our basic economy, until that gets handled. So that's job one. That's our first and foremost focus, and should be. And then all of the things that we're doing are really to support all of us as we do the appropriate responses to get this under control. Let me stop there. Well, let me say one other thing and then I'll stop, which is we continue to monitor the marketplace to see if there are places where those stresses that I mentioned before are starting to emerge, and we continue to think hard about whether there are pools that we have at the Federal Reserve that might provide some relief and some support for those. And I will, if I see those stresses, strongly encourage us to jump in and provide that support, help those segments of the economy, and get through this with as little damage as possible. Let me stop there and we can go to questions. Tyson: OK, wonderful. Thank you so much. As you said at the beginning, we did have numerous questions submitted at registration time, so we will not be using the live chat feature to take questions during today's session. So the first question is: How long will it take for this economy to come out of recession after we go back to work? How do you see the shutting down of the economy to slow the spread of the pandemic affecting real GDP [gross domestic product] growth, inflation, and unemployment in the near to medium term? Bostic: Well, in the near term, I think it's pretty clear that we're going to see a significant hit to growth, to GDP, to all those things. And that's fully expected. If you go to social distancing posture, that means that a lot of the discretionary spending that families might do is going to go down or disappear, and that will mean that demand for a lot of businesses across the economy will fall pretty significantly. That's going to have a short-run hit and that's fully expected. I think the bigger question, and it is an unknown, I have to say, is, how fast will we be able to turn that economy back on? As I closed that last segment, my opening remarks, with a lot of—that depends on the public health response and then a lot of it also depends on how businesses respond in terms of changing policies and practices to create that safety and that security for workers and for customers. So I know here at the Federal Reserve, we've been on work-from-home [status] since the middle of March, and I actually just got off of a call where we started to have conversations about what are the list of things that we're going to have to consider in terms of changes? How people get into the building. Is it how the cafeteria is laid out? Is it things that we need to put in place on an elevator or in the hallways? These are all questions that business leaders and merchants are going to have to manage and understand because if a potential customer goes into a store and sees things that make them nervous, they're not going to stay there. So we all are going to have to work on this. And I know from my perspective, I'm not going to ask my staff to come back and amass until I feel like we've got answers for those things that can give them confidence. So in terms of timing, I saw that there's a model for Georgia that would suggest that our peak is going to be somewhere around May 1st. If that holds, then we should be in a place to really be considering reopening sometime in the mid to late summer. And so I'm really looking at the third quarter at the time. Start to see the wheels start to roll again. But as you know, there's a huge variation in this. I was talking to an elected official earlier today and they said they're breaking up maybe a little later. Others, like folks in the Administration, are looking to move a little sooner. All right. Now I think it all really depends on the nature of the public health response and how we change our policies. But I know this has got everyone's attention. I'm hopeful that that attention will mean that we find answers sooner rather than later. Tyson: OK. Well, number two is: Why does liquidity from the last recession cause a higher inflation rate? How do you think this new infusion of liquidity into the financial system will impact the inflation rate in the U.S. in the next year? Bostic: Well, inflation has been something that has been something of a puzzle for quite some time, for at least 20 to 30 years. And what we've seen over that time is a real secular reduction in the natural rate of interest, which is probably more technical a term, but how people are viewing the cost of money over time. And if that's gone down, that means that inflation is going to be lower. And so what we've seen in the question you mentioned, that our quantitative easing, which is our buying of bonds and securities that occurred during the great recession, did not translate into- [Brief audio loss] Tyson: Some people are saying that the Fed's policy moves will a) ultimately come from taxpayers and b) ultimately add to the national debt. Is there any sense in which either of these are correct? Bostic: Well, I would say on the first point, some of this response is coming from taxpayers in the sense that many of the facilities that I mentioned can only be stood up if there is a pledging of collateral from the U.S. Treasury for any losses that might accrue. And so we call those 13(3) facilities, and all of those have some backstop from public funds. I would say that the CARES [Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security] Act included provisions for this. And so we're working at the direction and with the full authorization of Congress. And that's an important thing for everyone to keep in mind. In terms of national debt, I think a lot of this depends on what happens in the future. So you'll recall in the Great Recession there were funds that were provided to a number of companies. The TARP {Troubled Asset Relief Program] money went to banking institutions, large bank institutions. We recouped all of that money and, in some instances, recouped quite a bit more. I know that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac remitted back to the government millions and millions of dollars more than they received in terms of assistance. So part of what we're thinking about, and what we have to be mindful of, is whether the response is sufficiently strong to cover the expenses that we incur. And also to what extent are their losses associated with those loans. So the PPP, the Paycheck Protection Program, is really trying to help keep small businesses alive. If that doesn't happen over the long run, then there may be losses there and that will have to go onto the accounting. But the other thing I would say on that is that for me, it is more important that we do everything we can today to save as many businesses as we can. It'd be a terrible story in my mind if, two years from now, people say, "Oh, but the debt’s lower, but we lost a third of our company." I think that that priority is a little backwards. We need to do all we can to save companies, save families, and keep them out of deep, deep hardship and desperation today, and then deal with whatever we have to deal with in the future. And so that's been the order of my thinking in terms of a response, and I think that's the right way to go. Tyson: This question comes from a seventh grade civics teacher. The common questions my students ask is, why isn't the government just printing more money and giving it out? How would you answer a 12-year-old student? Bostic: Well, I think to some extent, we are doing that by going into debt, by spending extra money, and finding ways to finance it. We are saying we're going to get a much larger supply of dollars into the economy. I think the second part of the question is, really, how do you do that most effectively? Do you give it directly to families? Do you give it directly to businesses? Do you give it to parts of government? And I think what we've seen in terms of response is, really, all of the above, right? So we at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta have played an integral role in making sure that families get those $1,200 checks that were authorized through the CARES Act. I mentioned the PPP and the Main Street Lending Program—t`hose are designed to go directly to businesses as support, and we are also working with governments through our Municipal Facility and the Money Market Facility to make sure that there are funds that are going to those as well. So I think we are seeing a significant deployment of funds that were not originally available. So I would say the seventh-grade class you're seeing a very energetic and active federal government and the Federal Reserve. I think we've done an unprecedented number of things in a very short amount of time, and you will be able to continue to see that as we move forward. Tyson: Well, somewhat related to what you just spoke about: what steps is the Fed taking to ensure the money is going to the purposes intended, and how are we making sure that the money is getting into the economy and not just being used to shore up individual companies’ investors? Bostic: So that's a good question, and it's a difficult question, because there's a trade-off in all of these things about getting money out fast and getting money out carefully. And the more careful you are in setting up those criteria to start, the longer it's going to take to get that money in the hands of businesses and organizations that might need them to survive. So we've really tried to pick a middle ground. And so some of our facilities set up criteria that rely upon assessments of other organizations, like rating agencies. So if you take our corporate facilities, we're looking for an investment grade, basically AAA-type rated companies. And that has been the minimum threshold to participate. If you look at the SBA program, that's been structured to say, "Okay, there's certain size limits that are required," but also we're having business leaders attest that they need these funds to survive, to some extent. And I'm fully expecting there will be a set of audits that happen as weeks go along to verify, and businesses will be asked to prove it. And if they're not, they can be held particularly liable. I think in all of these programs, there are things that are set up that provide some degree of review to make sure the businesses that should be getting these things are. I would say surely there're going to be those who try to get in inappropriately. It'll be really up to us to have systems in place to try to catch as many of them as possible. But you can rest assured that this is something that has been in our thinking and we've had conversations about every step of the way because these are, in a larger sense, taxpayer dollars and we must be good stewards of those funds. Tyson: What opportunities do you see this pandemic creating in terms of structural economic changes moving forward? Bostic: So this is a really interesting question. As we've gotten... I'll say for myself: as I've gotten used to working from home—you can see I'm sitting in my home office—it's gotten me to think about, well, what are the things I'm doing today that I'm getting done that I didn't think I could get done from my home office before? And it's been a large and growing set of things. These sort of... these webinars and these web meetings have been to some extent actually more productive for me in terms of getting right to the points. And it's really neat to see people because you can see their reactions in real time and keep them focused. So I think all businesses are going to think about that in terms of, well, what are the things that we need to do in an office versus what are the things that we could do more virtually taking advantage of technology? I know for our [Federal Reserve] System, we've done a lot of upgrades in terms of our technological capacity to facilitate those sorts of things. Those investments are going to remain with us and so a question will be, to what extent do we use them? Another question is, how do we do restaurants, right? Do the same space? [Do we] now need to have more spacing between tables in order to accommodate some more distancing and more care? If that's the case, then cash flows per hour are going to be lower and so we may need to think about an extended business day for those sorts of things. I think all of these things are really going to come into play. It would be quite interesting to see how we can get responses to that. One of the things I'm asking my staff to do is, as we look further along into this, to ask those questions exactly. To figure out, are there some things that everyone is settling on that are becoming new norms for how we do business and how we live together? But I think this is going to create and really force us to face some experiments and figure out if they really work for us. Tyson: We've got about five minutes left. I'm going to- Bostic: I'll try to keep my answers short. Tyson: OK, I'm going to try to get two more questions in. The Wall Street Journal recently had an editorial which stated that the Fed's goal is to save Wall Street by raising asset prices and hopes that the wealth effect trickles down to the rest of the economy. What is your response to this assertion? Bostic: Yeah, I don't think that's really true. You know, I think that financial markets certainly are important or an important source of funds and capital for a lot of people. So we need to make sure they work. But our conversations with banks have all been focused on Main Street and not about trickling down but trying to say we need to create a structural environment at that level that can work for people. And then I mentioned the PPP, we're running a lot of liquidity into that and we're going to support that to whatever is appropriated by the Congress. And I mentioned the Lending Program as well, [which] is really focused on business and the many people who get their incomes and salaries from that. So I actually think that we are touching, across the board, Americans to try to help reduce their stress and strain. The last thing I want to say—I know we're running short on time—is that we are also responsible for making sure that there's enough cash out there in the system, so all the cash you get at ATMs and at banking institutions, they started out as our facilities and demand for cash has gone up about 25 to 30 percent since this has started. Our teams are working overtime. So we are really touching and affecting people across the board at all parts of our economy, and I think that's one of our basic missions and we're committed to fulfilling it. Tyson: What are your top three lessons learned so far from this unprecedented situation? Bostic: Well, lesson one is that our organization has really been adaptable. We've adapted quickly, and technology can work in ways that I really hadn't imagined, and that's been quite gratifying. In terms of a second lesson, I think, is that communities can come together. I've been really gratified by how our teams, as they've gone out and engaged with businesses and communities and leaders, have gotten really clear communications, where we're really focused and tight on the same things, and it's really helping us be much more creative and expansive about the types of things that are possible. And that's been quite good. And the third thing is that I'm really surprised. I learned that I can work a couple of feet from my kitchen and not be eating continuously. And that's been a good thing. So a little more self-discipline and restraint than I thought I might have. First two days were not so good. The last couple weeks have gotten a lot better, and so that's gratifying as well. Tyson: All right. Well, thank you so much, Raphael. We did sort of run out of time, but thanks, everyone, for joining this important conversation. The slide that's up now is showing you how you can text to join and receive our weekly newsletter to keep informed. I think many of you are already subscribers, but if you're not, we hope that you will do that. Thank you to everyone that joined us. We will continue to host these webinars, and subsequent sessions will feature other Atlanta Fed experts highlighting additional actions the Fed has taken to support our communities in these uncertain times. All sessions are being recorded. The transcripts of the recording and the Q&A for all sessions will also be available on frbatlanta.org . Next Monday, April 20th, Mike Johnson, Atlanta Fed's executive vice president of Supervision, Regulation and Credit will explain the Federal Reserve's posture related to banking supervision and recent actions related to credit flows and liquidity for banks, and answer your questions. Please see our website, frbatlanta.org , to register. Thank you, and take care. Close Enter your information First name * Last name * Email * Message * * Required field Success! :-) Failure :-(

COVID-19 Community Impact Survey Webinar May 27, 2020 Speech Atlanta Fed president Raphael Bostic participated in a webinar discussing the results of this nationwide survey of nonprofit organizations, financial institutions, government agencies, and other community organizations. The survey was conducted in April 2020 with nearly 3,900 respondents serving rural, suburban, and urban communities. Bostic was joined by Atlanta Fed vice president of community and economic development, Karen Leone de Nie, and her counterpart at the St. Louis Fed, Daniel Davis. Transcript Karen Leone de Nie: Hello, everyone. Let's go ahead and get started. I know that some people are still filtering in, but I wanted to welcome those who've been able to join us. My name is Karen Leone de Nie. I'm the community affairs officer for the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. And so I welcome you to today's discussion of community impacts of COVID-19. I'm now going to turn the conversation over to Daniel Davis, my counterpart at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Daniel Davis: Well, thank you so much, Karen, and good afternoon everyone. It's great to join you for this session today. A couple of housekeeping items before we get started, I wanted to let you know we are recording this session to share later. We'll also be accepting your questions during the session. We'll try to get to as many of those as possible, but due to the volume of attendees, we may not be able to get to all of them. So why are we here today? Well, if you're tuning into this session, you're likely already aware that the Federal Reserve works to foster economically resilient communities, and as a part of that, we regularly monitor the conditions of communities regionally and nationwide as well. Learning from and listening to the frontline entities working to support local communities is critical to shaping effective policies and programs. So in April, the Federal Reserve conducted a survey of communities nationwide to better understand and collect information on the effects of COVID-19 on communities and also on the entities serving them. I'm going to be very excited later to dig into the results of that survey, but right now I'm thrilled to introduce you to President Raphael Bostic of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. President Bostic, thank you for joining us for this session today. It's great to share virtual space with you today. I'm very much looking forward to hearing your reflections on the Federal Reserve, the response during this pandemic, as well as on the state of the economy. And after your remarks, I look forward to diving into a conversation with you about the survey's results. So President Bostic, I'll toss it over to you. Raphael Bostic: Well thanks, Daniel. And it's actually very good to see you as well. I haven't seen you in it seems like forever and I half expected you to have a hipster beard, so this is sort of a welcome surprise. Good afternoon, everyone. It's really good to see you all. I'm glad you were able to join us for this webinar. I want to just give a shout-out to Karen and Daniel both for their initiative in making sure the survey got off and will continue to provide us with information that will give us really good insights into what's happening in lower- and moderate-income communities. Those insights will then help us make sure that policies are as effective as possible. So shout-outs to both of you. Thank you for all your work. It's been really appreciated by me and by my colleagues. What I thought I would do to kick off the webinar is really just give you some picture of how I'm seeing things today in terms of the pandemic and in terms of the Fed's response and what we might think about in terms of the economy. When I talk about this, the very first thing that I take pains to make clear is that this is really a public health crisis first and foremost. Before we started having to deal with the COVID virus on our shores, the economy had been growing for 11 years continuously. Inflation was low. We were not seeing spikes of risk that would suggest that economic growth was not at a sustainable pace. And unemployment was at historic lows. Those are all things that we had been celebrating, and they suggested that fundamentals were quite strong. Then the virus hits us, and the virus mandates a public health response, and that public health response is that we've got to be separate from each other, which means we've got to not do economic things that would keep us strong. And so this wasn't about excessive risk-taking that might have driven the Great Recession or Great Depression. Rather, this is really about the public health situation. And that reality is really the shape of how I think a response should look like from policymakers, and it really is, in my view, the objective to preserve those fundamentals as much as possible, make sure that as we go through this crisis and we have the disruptions that we have that we don't create lasting damage such that all the good things that we had prior to the crisis can't actually revive themselves and lead us and drive a strong and robust recovery afterwards. So, you think about what's happening with the shutdown. It's hitting families—they're not getting income. It's hitting businesses—they're not getting revenues. It's hitting nonprofits, who are not able to access their donors. And we're going to talk more about those impacts there. It's hitting governments as well, state and local governments who are not getting income tax revenues that have been deferred. They're not getting sales tax revenues that have been halted. And what we know in all of these sorts of shutdowns is that the most vulnerable among us are usually the ones who get hit the hardest, that the disruptions are things that they're least able to manage and so the impacts are much more severe. Now, all that's the backdrop. In terms of what we've done—and I will say we have learned a lot from history. History has taught us that when the Fed acts slowly and acts timidly, when economic dislocation happens, they're deeper and they last longer. And so starting in March, we actually got out in front of things and very much tried to act boldly, decisively to make it clear that we were going to provide support and relief to marketplaces however we possibly can. And that last phrase—"however we possibly can"—is actually quite important because we're a central bank. We're not the fiscal side of the house so we don't give grants directly to individuals or organizations. Rather, we are in the credit space and the lending space, and we work through financial institutions and financial markets really to make sure there's enough liquidity to keep financial functioning happening, and also to see that the amount of credit that's made available to provide support is as large as it possibly can be. Because if credit markets freeze up, then we're going to see layoffs and business closings and financial hardships that are going to spread and persist. And the reason why I want to focus on credit is because we know that the regular cash flows aren't happening. So if you don't have those cash flows, you're going to have to resort to credit markets in order to get funds to do the things that you want to do, whether you're a household or a business. And indeed, at the very start of this crisis, we saw a lot of businesses start to tap into their lines of credit because they had uncertainty about what they were going to be able to carry in terms of cash flows. And so we were starting to see those strains and those stresses and we really stepped in to try to smooth those markets and make sure that they continue to operate so that those markets are not stressed and there aren't spillovers into other parts of the economy. So that's been kind of where we've tried to get to and I will say that the signs have been quite positive in terms of how financial markets have responded. The amount of interest rates that get charged to these markets that spiked to very high levels have all come down. They're still elevated relative to what you might have expected in terms of normal times, but they're far, far away from where we were at the height of the current crisis. And I would also say, although our instruments are best suited for financial markets and credit flows, wherever we've seen stress and there's a possibility for us to act, we've tried to find ways within our legal authority to do so. So we've been present in terms of the Paycheck Protection Program and have actually really helped to reshape its functioning to make sure that nonbanks and the CDFIs—which are institutions that are really quite critical in lower-income communities and in minority communities and rural communities as well—have access to the program and can actually provide their services to get that relief into the other communities. We're providing support also for municipal governments through bonds. We're looking at trying to help either hospitals and all these other places that are facing stress. These are things that we will continue to do as we fulfill our mission to make sure this economy operates in a sound and resilient way. Now, what I want to say is, that's all the past. Usually when I get asked questions today, it's, "What's going to happen next? How should we think about the future?" And I would say that we really need to focus on two things. One is the public health side. This is a public health crisis so public health officials and the leaders have got to get that under control so that the trajectory of the virus is well understood and it's not a source of concern for consumers and leaders in business. But the second thing has to do with the nature of the shutdown and its duration and how we get to economic recovery. And this gets to questions about as we reopen the economy: How do we respond to that? And what kind of things might matter? So, for me, I'm looking a lot about do we see congregations happening in ways that might lead to exacerbated or increases in infections, because those will potentially lead to a second wave that then induces a whole other shutdown. If that happens, I think that there are significant concerns there. And our team right now is really trying to gather as much information as we possibly can because this is unprecedented times. The usual surveys that you would ask and go out on a regular basis don't give us the same amount of guidance that they might otherwise. So we are doing a lot of outreach at the Federal Reserve System. That's one of the reasons why we have you here today, because we think that you can be a good contributor to get us information so that we can do our policies in the right time and have the maximum impact. Now, as I say, we're doing a lot of outreach. Let me tell you a little bit about what we're hearing. First, across the board, everyone has said, "This impact has been significant," and it really is across the board. So it's not localized in specific sectors. Certainly some sectors are being hit more than others because of the nature of their business, but pretty much every business out there is seeing a change in their experience based on the presence of this crisis. Workers, clearly they're concerned about their job markets. They're concerned about income. They're concerned about how long this is going to last. They're concerned about—particularly those who don't have the luxury of working from home—how do they manage this and what kind of risks are they putting themselves and their families into, when we really are thinking about health insurance? And a bunch of other concerns For businesses, what we've heard is, "We're trying to hang on, but we're not sure how long we can." Many businesses have told us in April that they had only several weeks or maybe a couple of months' worth of savings that they could fall back on, and so they're concerned. And we also know that smaller businesses and minority-owned businesses are going to be less likely to have that [inaudible 00:11:44] at all, and so the stress and strain there is going to acute. And then I'm a housing guy, and so there's been a lot of talk and concern about housing markets. The good news I would say is we did not see a spike in foreclosures and evictions. But I talk to a lot of advocates across the country and they're really concerned that as this extends, whatever forbearance programs are out there or whatever arrangements families have with their landlords, they're going to get strained and stressed so the longer this goes, the more likely we're going to have a challenge in terms of housing markets and housing stability. And that is something that we are definitely paying close attention to and will continue to moving forward. Now, look, this is a really hard thing. This is extraordinary. This is like a hurricane. Usually when we have a hurricane or something like that, it hits one market in one state. This is like a national hurricane and so when you think about the recovery here, it's going to require a lot of effort. And it's going to require effort across the board. This is not just going to be a Federal Reserve issue or a congressional issue or a state and local government issue. We're going to need philanthropy. We're going to need the private sector. We're going to need nonprofits. We're going to need financial institutions and banking institutions to all come together and think about good ideas and really be willing to go out and test them because we're really in an unprecedented situation. Now, my goal is, as I said earlier, to get us to something close to where we were pre-pandemic. But I also want to make it clear that I understand that even pre-pandemic, there were a lot of communities that weren't working as well as they might have otherwise. So as we think about moving forward, first of all, that reality is going to affect the speed at which some communities can respond and will recover. So there's going to be a bit of diversity in terms of the pacing of that. But I do think that it's important that this crisis time gives us an opportunity to really step back and question a lot of the fundamentals that have worked in these communities and see if there are ways that we can work together to find both sources of relief but also sources of new relationship building, new network building, new models of how we invest and how we do entrepreneurship. As I think about this, there are a couple of sectors that are going to be particularly important. What we have seen—and we think and talk about this a lot in the Southeast—is that philanthropic venture capital is rarer than it should be. And so finding ways to get venture capital and philanthropy to invest in communities that have needs but haven't been getting those investments is going to be an important thing. So I would encourage more creative sourcing of those funds. CDFIs, as I mentioned before, they are mission-driven and they have relationships in many of these communities. I think we need to really make sure that they have a full voice at the table as communities think about moving forward. I think government is going to play a critical role as well, particularly at the state and local level. They have a tremendous convening power and they have an ability, once we have a vision that's understood, to make sure that everyone buys into that vision as it moves forward, and that's something I think can be important. And nonprofits also are quite important as well. So there is a lot that's going on here. I would say that we have examples of success in all of these. You take Hope Enterprise Corporations in Mississippi. They're a CDFI. They're working with nonprofits and local governments really to make sure that they have full participation in the PPP program. And so they've underwritten on almost 1,000 PPP loans and the total is $67 million. But the most interesting thing here is that the average size of these loans, for many of them, are less than $20,000. So they're getting money to institutions, organizations, at the scope that they need and that they can manage in a way that you might not expect from something like Bank of America or a larger institution. Now, I want to say that this is hard, again. There's no perfection here. And we're going to have to try a bunch of things and be nimble and be agile and respond with learning as that happens. And to that end, we have really, in our System, the Federal Reserve System, stepped up to try to do that. And I called up Karen and Daniel. We have community development people all throughout the system who are working hard to focus on supporting economic resilience and mobility for all communities. This is a strategic priority for the Atlanta Fed, but it's one that the System broadly has embraced. In terms of how we do this and why I think it's so important that you're with us on this call is that we do this through intelligence gathering–getting out on the ground, talking to institutions, talking to leaders, talking to organizations that have relationships that we may not have as clear a direct sight line into. We try to talk to those folks, understand what's happening in that space, find out what solutions are, and then, to the extent that we can, we lift them up. So I'm going to stop here. I'm going to say, "Thank you for being here." I'm really looking forward to the conversation. But before Daniel joins, I want to invite you to stay in touch with me and my colleagues at the Atlanta Fed. We do a weekly newsletter and if you text the initials of our organization, FRBA, to 33777, you'll get our weekly newsletter and know what we're doing. I will also say you can follow me on Twitter. So I'm on at just my name @Raphaelbostic and that's another way that I try to keep people up to date with what's going on and how we're thinking about things at the Fed. So I want to thank you all for being here and I guess it's time for me and Daniel to have a little conversation, so Daniel, fire away. Davis: All right. Well, thank you so much, President Bostic. I'm taking away several things. Bostic: Stop that President Bostic thing. Just call me Raphael. Davis: Raphael, I'm taking away several things already from your remarks that you've shared today, and I've captured a few highlights. I just want to mention a couple of those that seemed especially salient to me. You mentioned the real impacts you're hearing COVID-19 have on communities. From the concern for lower-skilled and low-wage workers, those who may not have the ability to work from home, may not access the benefits that often cushion the impacts that are experienced. You talked about how this is impacting businesses of every size right now. The significant impact on the business community and especially vulnerable perhaps, smaller businesses including minority-owned businesses at this time. You [missing audio]. And I heard you acknowledge the role of financial institutions including community development financial institutions, the nonprofits, the philanthropic communities, government entities, too. They're all playing a role in the response on the ground and then you've identified opportunities for collaboration and key roles that they can play going forward as well. Many of these happen to be the same kinds of entities that we heard from in this survey that we conducted. And for those of you in the audience maybe who haven't had a chance to check out the report yet, this [missing audio]. Leone de Nie: Daniel, are you still with us? It looks like we may have had a little bit of a challenge with our connection. If Daniel is able to join us, I'll turn it back over to him, but in his stead, I will try to jump in and do what I think he was about to do. So just one moment. Bear with me as I get this started for us. Bostic: This is an agility practice everyone. Leone de Nie: Okay, Daniel was, and I appreciate the transition, so Daniel was telling us more about the impact of the COVID-19 survey that the Federal Reserve System launched and which many of you participated in. And so I want to start by saying, "Thank you so much for the time that you put into telling us what's happening in your community and what's happening with your organization." We very much appreciate that information. It's critical to making good decisions and helping us with our own roadmap, but also helping us be able to share this information with you and others that are making some very critical decisions right now. So what I'm going to do is just show you a couple of the quick results from that survey in case you haven't had a chance to look at it yet. And then I'm going to pose some questions to Raphael to talk a little bit more about this. I think you'll find it's no surprise, but when we asked the organizations what level of disruption is COVID having on the communities that they serve, 69 percent of them said that it was a significant disruption and that they anticipated that the recovery was going to be difficult. I'll have you keep in mind that the questions were answered in early April and things have changed a lot since then. At that point in time, there was a lot of organizations that were in early triage mode. Let me talk a little bit more about the impacts that they were seeing in their communities. Obviously, as many of the governments did broad shutdowns, you saw massive losses of jobs and also losses of income from self-employment and that was leading to a significant inability to service debt and pay bills. At the same time, those closures, as we've already talked about, have had significant impacts on the businesses through revenue losses and supply chain disruption—and supply chain disruptions that you continue to see. Obviously, as a public health crisis, health concerns remain top of list as well as things like preserving health, prevention of COVID-19 spread, but really a lot of the comments were about the limited availability of testing and personal protective equipment. And finally, and repeatedly, we heard from many of the respondents that food and housing and the other basic consumer needs were very quickly being distressed in a lot of communities. Respondents also told us that there are particular vulnerable populations that long-term disparities were driving a lot of the most deep and severe impacts in the crisis. Among those, we heard the challenge around the digital divide. As we move to these remote learning environments, remote work environments, remote access to services increasingly individuals that lack access to either broadband internet or a computer were struggling to be served. So finally we asked about communities how long was it going to take before your community would recover and go back to previous conditions pre-COVID-19 crisis. Thirty-five percent as you see here said that it was going to take over a year and while we know that in some of these areas, the economy may be recovering right now, we also know that in low-income communities, that recovery often takes much longer. So I'm going to turn off these slides for a second. I'm going to see… Bostic: We have Daniel back. Leone de Nie: Ah! Back? Bostic: He was back. Leone de Nie: Daniel, are you back? Davis: I'm back, Karen. I'm sorry about that. Leone de Nie: That's okay. We are resilient. So, Daniel, why don't you ask your questions and start the conversation with Raphael? Davis: Yeah, of course. Thanks for walking through that, Karen. And Raphael, I'm curious as you hear Karen talk about those things, things like our survey takers mentioning that nearly 70 percent of communities have experienced a significant disruption that will be difficult to recover from and that over a third believe that an eventual recovery will take more than 12 months. How does that information shape how you're thinking about national recovery? Bostic: Well, that's a good question, and I think that it's an important point for all of us to keep in mind that our communities started in different places when this started, which means that the impact is going to look different in the different places and its duration is going to be different. The thing I worry about the most is that once we get to a place where GDP is at 1½ percent or 2 percent as opposed to the negative number it's at now, people throw up their hands and say, "We're done," and we move on. I think that will really not do justice to the millions of people who will be in communities that are still maybe just starting to feel like there's a turn in proceeds or in their fortunes. So, for me, I think it's really laid clear the fact that the relief portion of this experience we're going through is going to have to last longer than I think some people have in their heads. But I'm hopeful that as we move along we can be more nuanced in how it's allocated. So as we do see that a relief is really working and that communities are starting to turn around, seeing if there are ways that we can sort of repurpose those relief funds and get them into other communities where that may not be happening, just to make sure that we are providing an appropriate level of support for communities given where they were. So it's almost like a means testing for relief in terms of funds and timing. Davis: Those employment challenges seem especially salient to me. Karen walked through those top impacts and income loss was kind of that key top impact that our survey takers told us about. How might you speak to our audience today about the challenges they're experiencing in their local communities when it comes to those employment challenges and how those may connect to recovery efforts? Bostic: Well, the first thing I would say is, make sure that people, to the extent they can, are using the resources that are available. Unemployment insurance is out there for many. Please make sure that everyone is taking advantage of that because that can be an effective and important bridge to help people get through some of the issues. Beyond that, I think it's important that workers stay in contact with businesses to the extent that they're staying open. Or even if they're not staying open, making sure they continue that contact so that when opening happens, they're positioned and prepared to restart their jobs. Then there's a third piece which, I think, is actually on some level the most interesting and the most difficult but it's that this is triggering changes in how we think about how we work. I know at the Federal Reserve, at our bank, we were having a lot of discussions about whether we should ever let anybody work from home and overnight, they see everybody was working from home and we are discovering that there are a bunch of things that we could get done in ways that we didn't understand we can get done. And I've talked to business leaders across the country and they're all coming to the same recognition. They're starting to say, "Well, maybe we'll look differently on the backside of this and maybe we'll deploy people differently. We'll use capital differently." And so thinking creatively and sort of proactively about what skills are the skills that we're going to need for tomorrow is going to be really important. And in that regard, I think that it's important to just recognize that there are jobs available today for people that don't require four years of training or those sorts of things. We have on our website, for example, an opportunity occupations monitor which details county by county the types of jobs that are available that offer living wages, that don't require that extensive amount of training. I would encourage…this is really a time to know where your tools are so that you can make sure that people are using all the information that's available, because I want to make sure that no one is just sitting there wondering "I don't know what to do" and feeling lost and forgotten. We need to make sure that everyone gets some touch. Davis: You mentioned in your remarks that it doesn't necessarily mean that everybody is still included in the economy that wasn't [missing audio] recovery to... I think I may have lost you for a moment, President Bostic. Bostic: Yeah. Davis: You just mentioned in your remarks that everybody wasn't included in the economy pre-COVID-19, and so when we think about recovery, that still doesn't mean an economy that works for everyone. I'm curious, how do you think about or how might you challenge our audience to think about reimagining an economy that works for more people as we shift towards thinking about recovery? What could that reimagination look like? Bostic: Well, I spend a lot of time working on issues around equal access to opportunity and making sure that we do all that we can to make sure that every American, regardless of where they live, has a reasonable opportunity to get a good education, have access to a job network, hopefully get access to capital. These are high-level principles and ideals that I think we have to continue to work towards, but I do actually think that this experience just in the last month-and-a-half has been quite instructive, that there may be some more creative ways that we can accomplish that. I think about the role of technology in distance learning to provide training to families, and it may be that perhaps the next philanthropic push or the next charitable push would be to get a computer in everyone's home and make sure they have access to high-speed broadband. That may be the most effective thing we can do to tap people into information. We're thinking a lot about just basic policies that we have as an organization that might make it more difficult for lower-income and minority families to operate in terms of reimbursements and the like. We're having conversations around payments and innovation in payments to make sure that innovators as they think about bringing their new tools to the marketplace have a consideration for how does this play out in minority communities and in lower-income communities. I often tell a story about how the California toll roads went cashless, and I got on one of those things and I only had cash. We know that there are many communities and subgroups in our population where cash still is king, and if we innovate away cash, it's going to make it much more difficult for those folks to get to work and to invest and to do all the things that are going to make it possible for them to be resilient. So there's a lot going on here, and I think there's a lot of opportunity to move forward. Davis: It would be great maybe, Karen, if you could put the next slide up on the screen. Part of the survey was focused on trying to understand the conditions that entities themselves are experiencing. So, again, these are majority nonprofits and so if we look at this first slide, Karen, on the screen, we asked entities what level of disruption COVID was having on the entity they represented. And you can see that over 70 percent said there was a significant disruption, with 30 percent of those saying that it was going to be a difficult recovery. We can go to that next slide and we can see that we asked about a range of changing conditions perhaps. Demand for services—entities told us that demand was increasing. Ability to provide for services seemed to be decreasing. Staffing levels, expenses, fee for service—all staying about the same. Some idea that philanthropic funds may decrease and that government funds may increase. And then just one more slide. This last slide here, we asked them how many months their entities could operate in the current environment before exhibiting financial distress. And you'll see here that 25 percent said that it would be less than three months, which gets us to about July. And then another 26 percent said three to six months, which maybe gets us to September. So, Raphael, I want to come back to you with the question, with this idea that demand is increasing and ability to meet demand may be decreasing, what, if anything, do you want to say to the frontline workers who are in communities doing what they can to respond to this pandemic? What can you say about the important role that they themselves are playing in the economy right now? Bostic: Well, let me just say first of all, thank you everyone for all that you're doing, because this is an extremely special time, I know, for you personally and for all the people who are around you and the support that you're giving is really critical. You may not be hearing thanks a lot these days because people are kind of stressed, but know that we do appreciate all the things that you're doing. The second thing I would say is look to each other. I've been really impressed. Here in Atlanta, the nonprofit community has partnered with the philanthropic community to raise the funds that is designed to provide support for a bunch of nonprofits that are providing essential services. It's been really quite remarkable how quickly the private sector has been willing to step up if given a structure to step into. My experience a lot has been that there are a lot of people who want to do the right thing, they just don't know what that thing is. And if you can ask them with some degree of specificity, you can get to a really muscular response. So keep up the fight. Keep up the faith. It's really important that you do those things. See if there are ways to build coalitions that can provide support because the folks I talk to, if they're in a position to provide that help, they'll be happy to do so. Davis: Karen, I think we've got just a few minutes left. I want to turn to you and see if there might be a question from the audience that we could pose to Raphael. Leone de Nie: Great. Well, I appreciate the conversation so far. I am going to share one question from the audience here. What have you learned about COVID-19's impact on housing stability, including evictions and homelessness as well as housing conditions, particularly safety that have either given you pause as you thought about the crisis and also have given you any reflections on what a recovery should be focused on? Bostic: So in terms of housing instability, this is actually a kind of a shrouded thing right now in the sense that we know people don't have incomes and to the extent that that job loss becomes permanent, that's a real-time crisis and there's uncertainty about whether that's happening. The second thing we know is in many cities and states, there are forbearance policies that are preventing eviction from happening over a certain period of time. So it's unclear how this is actually going to play out. But what we do know is that stress has gone up for everybody. We know that these families did not have in many instances very much savings to fall back on. And so as the duration of this lingers on, the likelihood that we're going to have significant housing instability is going to be significant. Now, I think about this in a couple ways. One, we need to make sure that those voices are not forgotten and that relief remains available for them. The unemployment insurance, as I mentioned before, I think that goes up to the end of July. That's longer than what we're seeing and hearing for many of our rental assistance programs and that's something that I think policymakers need to think about. Then the second thing is this could be an opportunity to really ramp up the production of a lot of affordable housing. In a place like Atlanta here, we have housing shortages in specific places and neighborhoods that are the hot places. This could be a time to really try to see if we can galvanize some resources to maybe claim some parcels that might become available and then build quickly with a high level of quality to make sure that there is housing that's available for people where they need the housing to be, where they need to spend their time in terms of work and other things. And so I think that two-pronged approach is going to be necessary. Supply and preserving of affordable housing is going to be critical, but we also need to make sure that we don't forget that there's still some immediate relief that's needed. Leone de Nie: Great. Davis: Yeah. Just one more. Leone de Nie: We have time for one more question and if we can keep our answer short, just to keep us… Bostic: I'll be brief. Leone de Nie: We have another question, and actually, I'm combining a couple of questions that I've heard from the audience. We talked a fair amount about community development financial institutions—these mission-driven institutions focused on providing access to low- and moderate-income communities. But a question has been asked, what is the role that banks should be playing, and what are some of the most important things that banks should be doing broadly to support consumers right now? Bostic: Well, I think it's really important that banks take the stance that their customers are going to be in distress and that while they have to provide a service, they also need to provide a service that doesn't destabilize the very customers that they're hoping to serve over an amount of time. So whether that be forbearance or providing relief on mortgage payments or other kinds of debt payments, saying "You don't have to pay now your principal and interest and we'll extend the term of your loan so you can start that clock again later on." Or whether it's partner with a CDFI to understand where there are investible credits per se. Where the CDFI may have a different vision or sight line into certain types of businesses in certain communities that can create partnerships that can get the capital flowing into those places. And banks are also working with small businesses through things like the Paycheck Protection Program. They actually are putting in some of their capital at risk so they're taking a 5 percent stake in much of this stuff to the extent that it's not forgiven. So they are stepping forward and the Main Street Program that we're going to put together is going to have a similar character to it. I think that it's important for us to ask our bankers to be partners with us in trying to be a piece of the solution when we think about relief and recovery. I know that wasn't short enough, so I'm sorry about that. Leone de Nie: It was perfect. Thank you. Daniel? Oh, it looks like we may have lost Daniel again for a moment, so I'm going to take this opportunity to say, Raphael, thank you so much. We really appreciate your time and you sharing your thoughts on everything that's happening right now. Bostic: Really a pleasure to be here. I want to thank everyone who's on this for participating with us, for being part of our community. I hope very much that when and if you get the survey in the next round that you'll participate and help inform our understanding of what's happening in lower- and moderate-income communities. That's the only way we're really going to be able to even think about having a policy that's going to work for them and make sure that all policymakers are aware of what's going on so that when you call them, they're aware and they're already working on it, hopefully. So that's what we're going to try to have happen. It's only going to work to maximum effectiveness with your help, so please do join us. Leone de Nie: Well, thank you so much for that. Thank you all for joining us. We have attendees from all over the country. I really appreciate your time. We will follow up on this webinar and share with you the recording of it as well as trying to answer many of the questions that came in through the Q&A that we were not able to get to today. So we'll be following up with that as well. Please reach out to us if you have questions, and we appreciate your time today. So thank you so much. Bostic: Thank you, guys. Be safe everyone. Close Enter your information First name * Last name * Email * Message * * Required field Success! :-) Failure :-(
