-1- Risk Management in Monetary Policy Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Risk Management Association 2019 Economic Update Richmond, Virginia September 26, 2019 Thank you very much for inviting me to speak with you this afternoon. I’d like to take a moment to share some thoughts on monetary policy, specifically how risk management principles inform our approach. Before I say more, I have to note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System.1 I joined the Richmond Fed last January after a 30-year career in consulting at McKinsey, where—in addition to consulting—I had multiple roles including serving as our chief risk officer. We had a lot of risks to manage—the media, unhappy clients, cybersecurity defense, individual behavioral issues and even crises such as an Ebola outbreak. So you might imagine that retiring and moving to public service has been a relief. But the Fed has its own risks to contend with, and the stakes are high. We’re concerned about cybersecurity. We face operational risks when it comes to processing payments and implementing monetary policy. We oversee risk in the financial system. Any of these topics -2- could be a speech in themselves, but today I’d like to talk in more detail about one I hope you’ll find interesting: risk management in monetary policy. Economic Update Let’s start with a baseline look at the economy. Overall, if you look at the data, things are good. GDP has been pretty solid, averaging 2.7 percent over the past two years. The labor market is very strong, with unemployment at 50-year lows. Although the pace of job creation has slowed some, we’re still averaging around 160,000 new jobs per month since the beginning of the year, well above the pace necessary to accommodate growth in the workforce. Bolstered by the strong labor market, consumers are confident and are spending. We are facing several headwinds, however. There is a great deal of uncertainty around trade and politics, which matters for business confidence. Confidence is critical for businesses to want to invest and for markets to be willing to finance that investment. So I’m particularly concerned about the roller coaster we’ve been on recently. Between Brexit, the ongoing negotiations with China, tensions in the Middle East and the political headlines—to name just a few—it’s been tough for businesses to feel like they’re on solid ground. That might be why business investment shrank 0.6 percent in the second quarter. I watch that number closely because eventually lower investment affects jobs. The headwinds are having an impact overseas as well; GDP growth has slowed in China and stalled in the eurozone. In the second quarter, growth was negative in Germany, Europe’s largest economy. There’s a risk that weakness will affect us. -3- At just 1.6 percent over the past 12 months, inflation has been running persistently below the FOMC’s 2 percent target.2 We’re not that far away—if we just rounded, we’d be at target—but it’s also possible that the uncertainty I’ve discussed is limiting firms’ ability and willingness to raise prices. And the bond market has sent some concerning signals recently. The yield on 10-year treasuries has been very low given the overall strength of the economy and has actually been lower at times than the yield on 2-year treasuries. As you probably know, such an inversion of the yield curve is historically a good predictor of a recession. But is that what the yield curve is signaling now, or are we just seeing a move toward higher-yielding safe assets at a time when international rates are historically low? Monetary Policy Response Overall, I think it’s safe to say the economy is giving us conflicting signals. The strength of the labor market might be saying “hold” or even “raise rates,” while inflation and the bond market might be saying “lower rates.” How should policymakers think about it? In 2018, the risk seemed to be the economy “overheating.” With interest rates well below “normal” levels, strong GDP growth, fiscal stimulus and a tight labor market, we raised the target rate four times, with many FOMC participants projecting additional rate increases the following year. -4- But in early 2019, political and global turmoil signaled more risk to the downside, so the committee decided to pause and take a patient approach, with a much flatter projected rate path. Then, over the last two meetings, with inflation muted, continued uncertainty and international weakness, we took the target rate down 50 basis points. This doesn’t mean a recession is imminent, nor that we are in a prolonged period of easing. As Chair Powell said after last week’s meeting, the change was intended “to provide insurance against ongoing risks.” There is a lot of uncertainty about the outlook, particularly with respect to global growth and the impact of trade, so it seemed prudent to take out some insurance—which I’m sure a room full of risk managers can appreciate. The Risk Management Problem We have a difficult risk management situation. We have a dual mandate, which means that right now we are trying to close the gap on our inflation target while avoiding policy that’s too accommodative, pushing inflation too high or causing financial instability. And we battle constant uncertainty. The dynamics of the economy are complex and constantly evolving, and the information we get about those dynamics comes with a lag and are often revised. Add the fact that monetary policy can take a while to have an effect on the economy, and you see the challenge. Further complicating matters, we face risks in multiple directions. -5- Easing isn’t risk free. It’s tricky to stimulate the economy to a precise level, and we run the risk of overshooting our objective, as one could argue we did in the late 1960s. Even if lowering interest rates doesn’t end up overstimulating inflation, it could affect other areas of the economy.3 For example, it’s possible for low interest rates to distort markets by shifting resources into the most interest-sensitive sectors or encouraging firms to over-substitute capital for labor. Or low interest rates could fuel an asset price bubble, as some have suggested happened last decade. But there are risks to not easing. We undermine the credibility of our 2 percent inflation target, which could lead to a decline in inflation expectations and thus to even lower inflation.4 In addition, if economic activity does slow further, we could find ourselves behind the curve, wishing we had moved more and sooner. This is especially relevant given how close we are to the effective lower bound.5 In addition to the risk of missing on the upside or downside, we also have a trade-off between short and longer term. Any rate move can be seen as facilitating a choice between consuming or investing today or tomorrow. At lower rates, you might accelerate a car or house purchase; at higher rates, you might defer. So we also face the question, should we move quickly in order to have more impact? Or does that waste vital ammunition we might need for the next downturn? Economist William Brainard -6- famously said that when uncertainty is high, proceed with caution—but sometimes caution is a risk in and of itself. Managing the Risks How do we manage these risks? Five themes: First, we try hard to specify a clear risk strategy. We release each January a “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” This statement articulates a balanced approach to our dual mandate and gives the public a sense of our risk appetite. We also communicate our reaction function through speeches, press conferences and other media so that markets understand what we’re doing and work alongside us. Second, our governance and culture help us. We operate by committee, which gives voice to a range of views, and the presence of regional Reserve Banks, with regional perspectives, helps us avoid “group think.” We are data-focused and invest in having the best analysis possible so we can make decisions with confidence. There are around 350 economists on staff at the Board of Governors, and each regional Bank has a team of economists as well. To test and supplement the data, each Bank also maintains very strong external networks, so we are constantly out talking to businesses to gauge their sentiment and gain a real-time perspective on the economy. We also have a number of surveys to develop a richer understanding of trends in our District. -7- Third, we have a deep commitment to risk modeling. Every Tealbook, which FOMC participants receive before each meeting, details a range of scenarios for how the economy could evolve and fully tests the potential upsides and downsides of possible policy changes. We also conduct a similar risk assessment of our financial system on a quarterly basis; key elements of which we’ve recently started publishing twice a year as a Financial Stability Report. Fourth, we constantly review and revise what we do in order to evolve along with the economy. That is helped by the constant attention we get from the entire macroeconomics profession, the media and the markets. We get a lot of help! That said, we listen and we change. For example, in an effort to tame inflation in the late 1970s and early 1980s, the Fed began targeting monetary aggregates (the quantity of money). When financial innovations made monetary aggregates a less useful gauge of the state of the economy, the Fed shifted its attention away from them and now targets the federal funds rate (the price of money). More recently, we have been using the interest rate paid on excess reserves to influence the federal funds rate rather than the traditional tool of open market operations. In the last downturn, we introduced more specific forward guidance, an explicit inflation target and quantitative easing. Finally, we push outside our borders to enable an environment less susceptible to risk. When we anchor inflation expectations, we reduce the chance that a few volatile inflation readings will have an adverse effect. When we properly supervise the banking system, we reduce the risk of financial market distress. And there’s some history of Fed chairs (like Alan Greenspan) calling out deficits or “irrational exuberance.” I do worry now about the impact of today’s large federal budget deficits on our resiliency in the next downturn. -8- All that said, we’ve made mistakes. Modern scholars generally attribute the severity of the Great Depression to errors in monetary policy, and we accept much of the blame for the Great Inflation of the late 1960s and 1970s as well. But I hope you believe we’ve learned from those mistakes. The lessons of the Great Depression guided the Fed’s response to the financial crisis. The Great Inflation taught us the importance of maintaining the credibility of the Fed’s commitment to price stability. Currently, in the spirit of continuous improvement, the Fed is reviewing its monetary policy strategy, tools and communication practices to ensure that we can continue to achieve our dual mandate given low inflation and the risk of returning to the effective lower bound. As part of that review, we’ve been holding a series of “Fed Listens” events to get input from business leaders, community members, academics and other stakeholders. We’re talking about a range of approaches, and the insights we’ve gained from these discussions have been invaluable. Now, in the spirit of continuous learning, I’m looking forward to learning from you. 1 Thank you to Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Based on core PCE inflation. 3 For example, see Esther George, “Is Low Inflation a Problem for the United States?” Speech at the Economic Club of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minn., May 14, 2019. 4 For example, see James Bullard, “President Bullard Explains His Recent FOMC Dissent,” June 21, 2019. 5 For example, see John Williams, “Living Life Near the ZLB,” Speech at the 2019 Annual Meeting of the Central Bank Research Association, New York City, July 18, 2019.

-1- Moving the Needle in Smaller Towns Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Investing in Rural America October 2, 2019 Harrisonburg, Virginia Thank you for coming to join us today. Before I say more, note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System. I came to Richmond a little more than 18 months ago. In that time, I’ve been very much “on the ground” and have enjoyed the opportunity to dig into the Fed’s Fifth District, which spans from Maryland to the Carolinas. It didn’t take me long to learn that we have two economies in our District—one in bigger cities and one in smaller towns. Now, I’ve seen small towns that represent the best of what our country has to offer. But I’ve also seen many communities that have lost ground. I believe the Richmond Fed has an opportunity—and a responsibility—to contribute to the understanding of what is happening and how it might change. That’s why we’re sponsoring this conference. As Kartik Athreya is going to talk about in more detail, smaller towns are different from bigger cities along a variety of dimensions, including demographics, geography and educational attainment—all of which contribute to differences in labor market outcomes. Smaller towns also have what we call “thinner” markets, ones with fewer employers. So if dislocation hits even one sizable employer, the whole town feels it. -2- The solutions will vary from place to place. A coal mining town in West Virginia doesn’t necessarily face the same challenges as one on the Eastern Shore of Maryland or a farm town in central Virginia. But broadly speaking, research suggests the need to address four core issues to move the needle in these communities: education, connection, isolation and participation. Theme 1: Education Let’s start with the first and arguably the most important—education or, more broadly, preparing people to enter the workforce. On average, people with bachelor’s degrees earn more money, are more likely to be employed and even have better health outcomes. But the answer isn’t just to send more kids to college because a large share of students who go don’t graduate. We also have to focus on preparing people for college, and an important place to start is early childhood education. That’s because there’s a tremendous amount of evidence that “skills beget skills.” Early childhood lays the foundation for later learning, both “hard” and “soft” skills. Many studies have found that children who attend a high-quality preschool are likely to have higher test scores, higher educational attainment, higher adult earnings and lower rates of incarceration and teen pregnancy.1 One study suggests that attending pre-K boosts high school graduation rates by 11 percentage points.2 The availability of early childhood education also matters for parents. Greater access to high- quality child care, including full-day preschool, has been shown to increase women’s labor force participation.3 Yet nearly 60 percent of rural communities have few or no options for licensed -3- child care.4 That contributes to a gap between bigger cities and smaller towns. In the Fifth District, 20 percent fewer small-town 3- and 4-year-olds are enrolled in pre-K. While we do have many strong school districts in our region, there are also districts where fewer than 30 percent of third graders can read at grade level and barely 60 percent of students graduate from high school—imagine the possibilities if we could increase these communities’ access to high-quality early childhood education. Of course, there are serious obstacles to scaling up pre-K, particularly in small towns where children and families are more dispersed and it might be harder to recruit teachers. But it’s not impossible. Oklahoma and Georgia, for example, have offered nearly universal pre-K for roughly two decades, raising preschool enrollment in rural areas by 24 percent.5 In West Virginia, pre-K is now offered in all of the state’s 55 counties. Let me stress, however, that while the return on investment for preschool is quite large, it’s not a silver bullet. Early childhood education is a vital first step. The academic gains of pre-K can fade if children subsequently attend lower-quality schools, so we must continue to invest in improving K-12 education. And, as I’ll discuss later, communities need to attract and retain educated workers as well. Theme 2: Connection Next, I’d like to talk about connection: facilitating workers’ access to good jobs. I’ve talked about the benefits of obtaining a bachelor’s degree. But a four-year college isn’t necessarily the right path for everyone, and there are well-paying jobs that don’t require a four-year degree. As -4- we’ll hear more about in the first panel, career and technical education in high school and community colleges also are important pieces of the puzzle. They’re relatively low-cost ways for students to focus their efforts, learn about themselves and get additional preparation.6 In addition, we’re seeing more and more productive collaborations between schools and employers to provide small-town residents with in-demand skills, which I’m looking forward to hearing more about in our first panel. These partnerships are good for employers, who need skilled workers. They’re good for students, who get a direct entrée to a quality job. The school plays a critical connector role. I’ve also seen community colleges play a critical role in fostering a startup ecosystem, bringing access to coaching and connection to investors for prospective entrepreneurs and, thereby, growing critical jobs for communities that struggle to recruit them. I was recently in West Virginia, for example, where the Eastern West Virginia Community and Technical College operates the NewBiz Launch Pad accelerator program and the Institute for Rural Entrepreneurship and Economic Development, which supports new businesses in agriculture, manufacturing, arts, tourism and technology. But funding is a major challenge for community colleges. Certificate programs offer the most direct path to employment, but students can’t use federal financial aid to pay for them. Often state scholarship programs can’t be used for them either. State funding formulas are complex, and community colleges generally don’t receive as much state money for students enrolled in noncredit programs. So I’m excited about programs like Fast Forward in Virginia, which funds -5- short-term training through the state’s community colleges, and West Virginia Invests, which covers tuition and fees for students seeking certificates in high-demand fields. Many community college students also face obstacles such as inadequate academic preparation or the need for child care or transportation. Successful initiatives help students address these challenges. That’s the goal of programs like Tennessee Promise and Tennessee Reconnect, which provide students with mentors and “navigators” to help them stay on track. Theme 3: Isolation Third, let me discuss isolation. While it’s almost definitional, any effort to help those outside our largest cities needs to address a core challenge: social and geographic remoteness. I don’t mean to imply that there aren’t strong social networks in place. On the contrary. Small- town residents often report feeling stronger ties to their community and their neighbors than people in other areas. That’s why it’s not helpful for a policymaker like me to say, “Everyone should just move to the big cities where the jobs are.” We need to address the informational gaps that often exist. For example, family, friends, neighbors and co-workers play a fundamental role in people’s aspirations and decisions about education and work.7 So if you live in an area where fewer adults have attended college, you might be less likely to view college as an option for yourself. Or, if you live in a more remote area, college reps might not come visit your high school. This is borne out by the data. Even -6- controlling for academic preparation and income, research has found that rural students are less likely to apply to high-resource colleges.8 The disappearance of anchor institutions such as banks, hospitals and colleges is part of the challenge. The number of rural counties with fewer than two bank branches per 10,000 residents in the Fifth District roughly doubled between 2012 and 2017. Eleven rural hospitals in our District have closed since 2010 and another 21 hospitals—nearly 20 percent of those in our District—are at high financial risk. Many rural colleges also face serious financial struggles. Ten in our District have closed their doors since 2000.9 The loss of these institutions creates direct costs in terms of residents’ access to financial services, health care and education. But there are also large indirect costs. Anchor institutions provide civic leaders and high-skilled workers who can raise the aspirations of those around them. They invest in their communities and educate residents about health, careers or finances. They supply amenities that attract talent. They create incentives for other businesses and signal a community’s vibrancy. I’m intrigued by initiatives that work to “thicken” these “thin” markets. The College Advising Corps, for example, based in Chapel Hill, places advisers in high schools to provide personalized college guidance to students from disadvantaged backgrounds. In addition to helping students navigate the application and enrollment process, advisers also help students and their families to see college as an option in the first place. I’m also interested in initiatives that bring the community to isolated families in ways that broaden their perspectives and improve their fortunes. I recently visited Garrett County, -7- Maryland, where they operate a 2-Generation model that works with both parents and children. They help each family define a tailored pathway, simplify full access to available funding and provide critical wraparound services like transportation and financial coaching. They support parents pursuing employment or training efforts in ways that help children receive high-quality early education. Coaching has also been critical to the success of Taylor County, West Virginia, where over the past five years more than 220 new businesses have opened—in a county of fewer than 17,000 people. The town of Grafton, in the county, is participating in the Energizing Entrepreneurial Communities Program, which pairs coaches with local entrepreneurs. More broadly, the most compelling way to reduce isolation is to invest in infrastructure. Historically, that was highways; today, it’s broadband. It’s expensive to build new infrastructure in areas with low population density and challenging terrain, as the members of our second panel will discuss. But even if broadband is available, not every household can afford it. That’s evident here in Virginia, where just 49 percent of households making less than $20,000 per year have a broadband subscription, compared with more than 93 percent of households making at least $75,000 per year.10 But, like rural electrification 80 years ago, the benefits—in terms of opportunity identification, skill building, telemedicine and the like—are too big to pass up. Theme 4: Participation Finally, I want to discuss two impediments to labor force participation: disability and addiction. -8- In the Fifth District’s smaller towns, 6.7 percent of the residents between the ages of 16 and 64 receive disability insurance, compared with 3.8 percent of residents in larger cities. This insurance is a vital safety net for many of our citizens, but there is also some evidence that the state of the overall economy influences disability rolls. I’m hopeful the gap will narrow if job prospects improve, and in fact there’s some evidence this is happening in the United States overall as the labor market tightens. More broadly, health in rural communities matters a lot, and we support the large number of initiatives working to reduce chronic illness and thereby improve job attendance and productivity. Opioid addiction is a tragedy that knows no geographic or social boundaries, but it may be more concentrated in rural areas. In the Fifth District, average opioid prescription rates are almost 30 percent higher in smaller towns, and overdose death rates are higher as well. With respect to the effects on the labor market, it’s very hard to disentangle cause and effect, but some preliminary research suggests that the increase in opioid prescription rates between 1999 and 2015 could account for 43 percent of the decline in prime-age men’s labor force participation.11 There’s no easy solution, but there are promising addiction-to-work programs, such as CARITAS Works in Virginia, which could help mitigate the effects. Making Change Happen I’ve had the opportunity this year to travel the smaller communities in our District. I’ve been to Hartsville and Bamberg, Greenville and Wilmington, Petersburg and Wise, Frederick and the Eastern Shore, Beckley and Bluefield. In all of these communities, I’ve seen local leaders -9- passionate about leading their towns forward. What seems to work? I might point to four imperatives: 1. A good story. The story is for employers, and the story is for talent. But, importantly, the story is less about marketing the plan to outsiders and more about marketing it to those who live there—why one should come and why one should stay. A beautiful town square, an annual festival, attractive housing, a great school system and attractive amenities are often part of that story. But changing the prospects of a town, it seems to me, starts with aligning the mindsets of the people in that town. And a great metric is whether the kids who grow up and go to school there choose to come back. 2. Integrated leadership. The local leadership, of course, needs to be inclusive, but it also needs to be regional in its nature. Almost by definition, small towns are surrounded by other small towns, and the strategy for that region needs to be integrated across jurisdictions. They need to speak with one voice and operate together, whether it’s on education, business recruitment or housing development. Similarly, a nearby bigger city isn’t a problem but a benefit—as proximity to amenities and transportation can enhance the story. The path to success isn’t going it alone; instead, it’s working together. 3. Opportunistic funding. As we’ll hear about during and after lunch, funding is a challenge. But—perhaps surprisingly—a lot of money goes toward smaller markets, often in a patchwork fashion. Making progress requires finding a source of committed funding, whether it be federal or state agencies, local donors or foundations, local businesses, hotel -10- taxes, tobacco settlement funds or asset sales. It also requires developing the capacity to absorb that funding. The towns that seem to have the most momentum are the ones that seem to make the most out of their potential funding sources. 4. Staying power. This kind of transformation takes time. Success breeds success, but it requires patience and persistence. Often, core institutions near the town, such as universities, companies or foundations, can help provide that continuity across political eras. I’ve encountered arguments that the challenges of distressed rural communities are too difficult to solve. They’re not. I’m old enough to remember when there was a similar pessimism about our major cities, which appeared during the 1970s and 1980s to be doomed to perpetual decline. They weren’t. From my perspective, the first step in thinking about the problems of these areas is to approach them as solvable—by good policymaking, by markets, by local leaders and by small-town residents themselves.12 Thank you, and I’m looking forward to the conversations we’ll have throughout the day. 1 Visit https://heckmanequation.org/ for an overview of research on early childhood education. 2 Dana Charles McCoy et al., “Impacts of Early Childhood Education on Medium- and Long-Term Educational Outcomes,” Educational Researcher, November 2017, vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 474-487. 3 See Table 1 in Rasheed Malik, “The Effects of Universal Preschool in Washington, D.C.,” Center for American Progress, September 26, 2018. 4 The Center for American Progress defines a child care desert as a ZIP code with at least 30 children younger than 5 and either no child care centers or more than three times as many children as available spaces. 5 Maria Donovan Fitzpatrick, “Preschoolers Enrolled and Mothers at Work? The Effects of Universal Prekindergarten,” Journal of Labor Economics, January 2010, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 51-85. 6 Nicholas Trachter, “Stepping Stone and Option Value in a Model of Postsecondary Education,” Quantitative Economics, March 2015, vol. 6, pp. 223-256. -11- 7 Santiago M. Pinto, “Social Interactions and the Effectiveness of Urban Policies,” Review of Regional Studies, June 2016, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. pp. 117-126. 8 Emily E. Cook, Jessie Romero, and Sarah Turner, “Transitioning from High School to College: Differences across Virginia,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief no. 17-12, December 2017. 9 Helen Fessenden, “Too Small to Succeed?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Econ Focus, First Quarter 2017. 10 Data come from the American Community Survey. “Broadband” in these data includes cable, fiber, DSL, satellite and cellular connections. 11 Alan B. Krueger, “Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2017. 12 Thomas I. Barkin, “The Supply Side of Rural Economic Development,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Econ Focus, Third Quarter 2018.

-1- The New Environment for Monetary Policy Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Greater Baltimore Committee Economic Outlook Conference Baltimore, Maryland November 5, 2019 Thank you very much for inviting me to join you. You’ll be hearing a lot about the national and regional economies this morning. So I thought I would take a step back and talk with you about policy—specifically, how I interpret economic data through the lens of monetary policy. Please note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System.1 Economic Outlook Before I talk about how I’m interpreting the data, let me say a few words about my background and perspective. I joined the Richmond Fed almost two years ago after a 30-year career in consulting at McKinsey, where I had roles including chief financial officer and leading our offices in the South. I’ve spent my professional life helping firms make decisions about hiring, compensation and prices, and I’ve made a lot of those decisions myself. So I hope I’m bringing a different perspective to the FOMC. My colleagues on the committee are some of the most talented macroeconomists, bankers, academics and financial regulators in the country. But as the only committee member coming from management, I approach things differently. So how do I take a policy look at the national economy? First, I ask where we are today: My answer is that the economy remains healthy. GDP growth was 1.9 percent in the third quarter. It -2- has averaged 2.3 percent year to date, which is above the trend of around 2 percent you’d estimate from the sum of population and productivity growth. That growth is being strongly supported by consumers. Households are spending, and that’s important because consumer spending accounts for nearly 70 percent of GDP. And even with some recent drops, consumer confidence is near all-time highs. What’s behind that confidence? Primarily, it’s the strength of the labor market. The unemployment rate is near a 50-year low, at just 3.6 percent in October. In fact, there are roughly 1 million more job openings than there are people looking for work; and there have been more jobs than job seekers since March of last year, the first time that’s happened in the 20-year history of this data series. And wages are increasing while inflation remains muted. In October, wages were up 3 percent over the year before, while inflation has been running around 1.7 percent, just under our 2 percent target. The resulting increase in real wages matters. Although job growth has slowed some, which you’d expect to see as we near trend and markets tighten, we’re still averaging nearly 170,000 new jobs per month this year. That’s still above “breakeven”—the Atlanta Fed estimates we need 107,000 jobs per month to maintain 3.6 percent unemployment with current population growth. So, the economy remains sound. The second question I ask is, even with a healthy economy today, how likely is it that there’s a recession on the horizon? You may have the same question, as I get asked this a lot. I have to say—absent shocks—I don’t see one being imminent, unless we talk ourselves into one.2 In other -3- words, as long as consumers keep spending, we will be in a good place. Housing demand has rebounded over the past several months, and auto spending has continued to be strong. Both of these are reliable indicators of the strength of consumer mindsets. And, if you want to test the health of the labor market, you might monitor initial claims for unemployment insurance, a rough measure of layoffs. They are as low as they’ve been since the late 1960s in absolute numbers, despite the growth in our population. Finally, the Conference Board publishes a pretty credible set of leading indicators of the economy. There is no evidence there that we’re faltering, so I remain hopeful about our prospects. The third question I ask myself is whether the risks are balanced, and here I would acknowledge that they are tilted to the downside. These headwinds are mostly driven by uncertainty around trade and politics. Between Brexit, the Middle East, immigration, and the ongoing negotiations with China—to name just a few—it’s been a roller coaster both here and abroad. And we’re seeing international economies struggle. GDP growth has slowed in China and stalled in the eurozone. In the second quarter, growth was actually negative in Germany, Europe’s largest economy. There’s a risk that weakness will affect us. Here at home, manufacturing activity has slowed amid trade concerns. Against this background, it’s not surprising that we’ve seen weakness in business investment. It shrank 3 percent in the third quarter. And the bond market has sent some concerning signals lately. The yield on 10-year Treasuries has been very low given the overall strength of the economy and has actually been lower at times than the yield on 2-year Treasuries. As you probably know, such an inversion of the yield curve is historically a good predictor of a -4- recession. But is that what the yield curve is signaling now, or are we just seeing a move toward higher-yielding safe assets at a time when international rates are historically low? Overall, I think it’s safe to say the economy is giving us conflicting signals. The strength of consumption and the labor market might be saying “hold” or even “raise rates,” while the softness of investment, inflation and the bond market might be saying “lower rates.” How have policymakers thought about it? In 2018, the risk seemed to be the economy “overheating.” With interest rates well below “normal” levels, strong GDP growth, fiscal stimulus and a tight labor market, we raised the target rate four times, with many FOMC participants projecting additional rate increases the following year. But in early 2019, political and global turmoil signaled more risk to the downside. The committee decided to pause and take a patient approach, with a much flatter projected rate path. Then, with inflation muted, continued uncertainty and international weakness, we lowered the target rate 75 basis points over the past three meetings. The FOMC’s decision to lower rates doesn’t mean a recession is imminent. But it does reflect the fact that there is a lot of uncertainty about the outlook, particularly with respect to global growth and the impact of trade. So it seems prudent to take out some “insurance,” as Chair Powell said in July. A year ago, FOMC participants were projecting 2020 rates more than 130 basis points higher than the most recent Summary of Economic Projections. That’s powerful support for our economy. -5- The New Environment Now, let’s take a step back from the data and recognize that monetary policy is operating in a new and different environment. What do I mean by that? When I was in school, I learned about both monetary policy and fiscal policy. The key fiscal policy levers were spending and taxation. But today, I think we have to broaden the definition of fiscal policy to incorporate the government’s impact on the climate for business. That includes trade actions and trade uncertainty, regulatory changes and regulatory uncertainty, geopolitical challenges and domestic politics. With the roller coaster I mentioned, it’s been tough for businesses to feel like they’re on solid ground. Economists from Northwestern, Stanford and the University of Chicago have developed an “economic uncertainty index” that gauges the degree of uncertainty in 24 different countries.3 The “global” index hit its all-time high in August. In the third quarter Duke CFO survey, more than half of CFOs said they were less optimistic about the U.S. economy than they had been the previous quarter—double the share of the year before. The climate for business is already a challenge. Tariffs are taxes and—unless businesses shift their supply chains—impose direct costs on target industries. International economies are struggling as they try to adapt to changes in the global trade regime that the United States created after World War II. When financial markets react to the news cycle, as they did earlier this year, you see impacts on consumer spending. And health care regulation has to be affecting health care firms’ investment plans. -6- Uncertainty is having an impact too. It dampens business confidence, which can lead to lower investment, less hiring and potentially even less confidence in pricing. After all, how can you invest when you don’t know the rules? Uncertainty raises the threshold for action.4 Hearkening back to my days as a CFO, I think of it as equivalent to an increase in investment hurdle rates. Firms today are frustrated with political polarization and uncertainty about regulation. They tell me they’re not scaling back yet, but they’re reluctant to double down. For these reasons, I don’t discount the idea that we could talk ourselves into a recession—particularly if the uncertainty begins to affect consumer confidence and spending. Uncertainty also lessens the effectiveness of traditional policy, both fiscal and monetary. For example, the country is running historically large deficits, and Congress passed a significant tax cut in late 2017. Normally, one would imagine both these traditional fiscal policy levers should boost the economy. In early 2018, we did see strong growth and an investment boom. But those numbers dropped quickly as trade concerns came to dominate the headlines and outweighed the impetus from fiscal stimulus. Turning to monetary policy, uncertainty can also dampen the impact we might expect from any policy “stance.” Accommodative monetary policy stimulates the economy. But in the presence of high uncertainty—nearly all of which is generated by forces extraneous to what the FOMC does—we risk not getting the same “bang for the buck.” The stimulus to borrow could be outweighed by perceived risks to future cash flow. -7- We might also view an accommodative monetary policy stance as powerful in shaping financial market valuations. But again, high uncertainty scrambles the signals. Financial markets are being moved by trade these days rather than by our policy stance. Policy Options If the current uncertainty is temporary, then the right course of action is to see through it the way we might see through movements in the more volatile components of inflation. The divergence we see between strong consumption and weaker investment may well be signaling that the uncertainty won’t persist. The recent headway made on trade negotiations may lessen our downside, as might the progress being made in the Brexit negotiations. But if we’re in a more uncertain environment for the long term, we’ll have to recognize that even though we have tools to use, they’re potentially less effective. For that reason, I’m closely monitoring whether the recent “insurance” the FOMC purchased will have its intended effect. More broadly, the Fed is undertaking a review to ask if we have the right monetary policy strategy and tools to achieve our dual mandate, given low inflation and the risk of returning to the zero lower bound in the current environment. A number of topics are on the table, including “makeup” strategies for inflation shortfalls, balance sheet policies, forward guidance and communications strategies. -8- I won’t go into detail about these various options this morning, but I will say that in general I’m hopeful we can develop a portfolio of tools to help us support the economy, as I’m skeptical that any one tool can truly overcome significant fiscal headwinds. That’s why, in my view, it’s even more important to step up on the fiscal side and improve the climate for business. The biggest boost to our economy would come from lessening the uncertainty and lowering the volume. That would build business confidence, build consumer confidence and lead to increased investment, spending and hiring. Look at the market reaction when it seemed like there was a Brexit deal. Originally, leaving the eurozone was viewed as a calamitous choice. Now, markets are so relieved that the rules are clear, they reward the decision. American businesses are creative. Give them the rules—almost any set of rules—and they will make things happen. The Future Where do we go from here? I actually don’t have an answer to that question. But I think we face three meaningful conflicts that I am watching closely. First, U.S. consumer spending is strong, but U.S. investment is weak. The leading indicators are still robust, as I said, but will that remain the case if business investment weakens further? Second, the U.S. economy is strong, but international economies are weak. I heard an economist say that historically, we don’t import recessions—we export them. But will that still be the case in our increasingly globally connected economy? Third, the bond market is pessimistic, but the stock market is still upbeat. Experience says the bond market wins—but is the bond market sending us the same signals it used to when rates are so low? -9- Those are enough questions from me. Now, I’d love to hear yours. 1 Thank you to Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Thomas I. Barkin, “Confidence, Expectations and Implications for Monetary Policy,” Speech at the Rocky Mountain Economic Summit, Victor, Idaho, July 11, 2019. 3 Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, Economic Policy Uncertainty Index. 4 Nicholas Bloom, “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, May 2009, vol. 77, no. 3, pp. 623-685.

-1- Getting People off the Sidelines: The Ultimate Workforce Development Plan Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Danville Pittsylvania Chamber of Commerce Danville, Virginia November 12, 2019 Thank you for inviting me to speak with you today. It’s a pleasure to be here in the Dan River region, and I’m looking forward to a series of discussions about the impressive suite of actions you’ve taken to rebuild your economy. I came to Richmond almost two years ago. In that time, I’ve been very much “on the ground” to learn about the communities in the Fed’s Fifth District, which spans from Maryland to the Carolinas. As I’ve traveled, I’ve seen areas that are thriving and areas that are struggling. I think the Fed has a real opportunity—and responsibility—to make a difference, particularly with respect to labor market outcomes. That’s why I’m excited to learn more about what you’re doing. The focus today is “what’s around the corner” in workforce development. I’ll leave to our distinguished panelists the topics of the jobs of the future and how to train people for those jobs. Instead, I want to talk with you about what has to be “around the corner” if we are to grow our economy—and that’s helping recruit into jobs people who have left the workforce. Maybe they lack the skills they need. Maybe they’re in poor health. Maybe they’re making ends meet through benefits they’re scared of losing. Maybe they’re struggling with addiction. Maybe they’re discouraged about the jobs they’re qualified to do. What can we do to bring these people -2- off the sidelines and back into the game? That would be the ultimate workforce development plan. Before I say more about my perspectives on this, note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System. 1 Who’s on the Sidelines? Let’s start with looking at who these people are. It won’t be news to you that the labor market is tight. The unemployment rate is near a 50-year low, at 3.6 percent. The rate is the same here in Pittsylvania County. Across our country, there are currently 7 million jobs available—and only 5.9 million people looking for work. In fact, there have been more job openings than job seekers since March of last year. It’s the first time we’ve been in this situation in the nearly 20-year history of this data series. But the unemployment rate only tells you about people who are looking for work. More than six times as many people are of what we’d consider the relevant age for work but aren’t looking. So let’s dig into those numbers. According to census data, around 3.5 million prime-age people (that is, people between the ages of 25 and 54) are looking for work and are therefore counted as unemployed. But 22.4 million prime-age people are not working and are not looking for work. When you add it up, we have 25.8 million prime-age people, or 20 percent of that population, who, for some reason, are not working; the rates are about 10 percentage points higher in smaller -3- towns.2 About two-thirds of those not working are women and around half have a high school education or less. People not working also are disproportionately people of color.3 The numbers look different in other countries. For example, if we had the same percentage of prime-age people working as in the United Kingdom, we would have around 5 million more people in the labor force. That would imply 5 percent more growth potential in our economy.4 Not every person out of the labor force wants to be in it, or should be. About 10 percent of this group is in school, gaining skills that will help them succeed in the workforce in the future. Another 35 percent are caring for children or other family members, a personal choice they’ve made—and by the way, a contribution to the economy that our metrics don’t measure.5 But that still leaves more than half of this group, or more than 14 million people. What’s holding them back? Pulling together analyses from multiple economists gives us a hint, recognizing these numbers overlap. Just under half of the remainder (24.4 percent of the total, or 6.3 million) report that they have a health problem or disability that keeps them from working or limits the work they can do. Four million prime-age adults are receiving Social Security Disability Income benefits, and over 2 million receive Supplemental Security Income.6 In addition, there is research suggesting that the increase in opioid prescriptions between 1999 and 2015 drove down the labor force participation rate, particularly for prime-age men.7 -4- There may also be some people who are not counted as working by the official statistics but who are working informally. Boston Fed researchers have estimated that in 2015, 28 percent of “unemployed” workers and 17 percent of those not in the labor force were working in the gig economy, although they typically only worked a few hours per week and earned less than $350 per month.8 What Jobs Are Available? So we know there are millions of people not working—but there are also lots of jobs going unfilled. In every town I visit, I hear stories about restaurants and homebuilders and nursing homes that can’t find workers. Where’s the disconnect? Part of the issue might be that many of the available jobs aren’t that attractive. According to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 63 percent of employment is in occupations that are low skill, meaning they don’t require more than a high school education, and 45 percent is in jobs that pay a median wage of $35,000 or less per year. These jobs, such as food service workers and personal care aides, are predicted to have high growth. We see this in the Dan River area as well. Last year, the majority of job openings in the Dan River region required a high school degree or less and over 60 percent paid less than $13/hour. 9 These jobs often have other shortcomings in addition to low pay, such as unpredictable schedules, difficult working environments and hours that can fail to meet employees’ needs. In addition, the industries in which these low-skill jobs are the most prevalent are the least likely to offer employer-based health insurance. For example, only 35 percent of firms in the retail -5- industry offer health insurance benefits, compared with 57 percent of all firms. It’s even worse for part-time and temporary workers. Only 28 percent of firms offer health insurance to employees who work less than 30 hours per week and, not surprisingly, just 7 percent offer it to temporary workers. Even when employers do offer health insurance, many workers don’t take advantage of it—often because it’s more than they can afford. In 2019, the average premium at firms where at least 35 percent of workers earn $25,000 or less annually was $515 per month for an individual and $1,469 month for a family.10 For a family of four with an annual household income of $50,000, that’s 35 percent of their monthly income. Another shortcoming is that many low-wage jobs aren’t very stable. Industries such as leisure and hospitality, food services and retail trade have high turnover rates. 11 There’s also a question about the long-term stability of these jobs, as automation may displace many low-skill workers in the coming decades. It’s already started—in many fast food restaurants, for example, it’s possible to place your order through a kiosk. My former colleagues at the McKinsey Global Institute predict that by 2030, 38 percent of food service jobs and 24 percent of customer service and sales jobs could be displaced by automation.12 Identifying the Mismatches What would it take to put these on-the-sidelines workers into the available jobs? -6- Part of the story is skill mismatch, as my colleague Mary Daly of the San Francisco Fed recently discussed.13 Twenty-six percent of employment is in higher-skilled jobs, meaning they require a bachelor’s or higher. Employers are finding it difficult to find employees with the relevant talent in fields like technology and nursing. Improving K-12 education, leveraging community colleges, increasing college completion rates and classic workforce training concepts, like those being discussed today, are necessary. We also hear a lot about location mismatch. The McKinsey study I just mentioned also predicted that the most job growth will occur in the nation’s 25 most prosperous cities, while smaller towns are at risk of losing more jobs. It’s easy to say, “Well, people should just move to where the jobs are.” But rising costs of living in big cities, especially for housing, have often more than offset the urban wage premium for low-skill work. So for many nonemployed workers, it may not make sense to leave a hometown that has a relatively low cost of living, not to mention a support network of friends and family, for a low-pay job in a high-cost city. I also want to talk about three other issues that don’t get as much attention: health, incentives and job attractiveness. When it comes to health, I’ve mentioned the role that opioid addiction may play in labor force participation, and I’m intrigued by innovative addiction-to-work programs. But there are many other health issues going on as well. The relationship between unemployment and poor health is well-documented, and prime-age individuals who are not in the labor force are far more likely to report poor or fair health than those who are employed or even unemployed. More than one-third -7- of prime-age men out of the labor force report a disability, compared with 6 percent of prime-age unemployed men and 2.6 percent of prime-age employed men.14 And more than one-third of nonworking, nonelderly Medicaid recipients report living with multiple chronic conditions.15 At the same time, hospitals are closing, especially in rural markets, and health care is becoming ever more expensive. How can we return people to health and to the workforce? There are community groups that recognize that you can’t grow a talented workforce without a healthy population, such as the Health Collaborative here in Danville and Active SWV, a nonprofit building an ecosystem of physical activity in the community. The Health Collaborative has volunteers focusing on healthy eating, active living, access to health care and creating healthy spaces. It currently has more than 90 individuals who represent more than 50 organizations spanning local government, education, health care, business and nonprofit sectors. The key for these local success stories is scaling. Next I want to talk about incentives. Our benefits structure, which provides critical support for people in need, sometimes discourages working. For example, if you aren’t working and are receiving Medicaid, it doesn’t sound very appealing to take a low-wage job that doesn’t offer affordable health insurance and that also makes you or your children ineligible for Medicaid or the Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP). This situation, which we call a “benefits cliff,” is far more likely to occur in states that have not expanded Medicaid. 16 The structure of disability insurance also creates disincentives for work. That’s because you forfeit lifelong benefits if you engage in the workforce—so if you’re on the margin of being able -8- to work and your choice is between an unstable, low-paying job and a stable (albeit also low- paying) benefit, it wouldn’t be surprising if you chose the benefit. Our tax system can also make working relatively unattractive for certain segments of the population. For example, we have “joint taxation,” which means that the system taxes the first dollar earned by the second earner at the same rate as the last dollar earned by the primary earner, pushing the household into a higher tax bracket. Add to this the cost of child care and other work-related expenses, and a family’s monthly take-home pay might be actually higher if the second earner doesn’t work or works informally. In addition, the Earned Income Tax Credit phases out at higher income levels, which could lead someone to conclude that working isn’t economically worth it. Overall, we have a population with health problems, and they have incentive to stay where they are to maintain eligibility for Medicaid, CHIP or disability insurance. Then, they look at the jobs available to them and see unstable jobs, unpredictable hours and low pay. Working doesn’t seem like a very good trade. What can policymakers do to make it a better trade—for the good of the individuals and for the good of our economy as a whole? Fiscal policies are out of the Fed’s purview, and therefore I’m not taking a stand on any particular policy, but the incentive structure warrants re-examination. We do see that Medicaid expansion, for example, which Virginia has already done, changes the incentive equation. -9- Finally, some jobs are going unfilled because they’re viewed as unattractive, for the reasons I’ve discussed. The pay, the working conditions, the unpredictability or the perceived stability can be deterrents. Or, workers’ prior jobs could have had higher pay or higher status, and they don’t want to take a role they view as a step back. Or embedded perceptions could play a role. More than 60 percent of workers in four of the top five occupations with the most projected growth, such as personal care aides, are female. Some men might be choosing not to pursue jobs in those fields. The good news here is that the tightness of the labor market is motivating employers to re- examine the jobs they offer. We see significant wage increases for many entry-level positions; a major bank, for example, recently announced a $20 minimum wage. We’ve talked to a steel company air conditioning its plants to make the environment more comfortable, a furniture company offering hours tailored to primary caregivers and companies being more flexible on teleworking. That’s good news. Many economists believe that if we can get people into the labor force, they are likely to stay in the labor force. Job training and job placement really matter. But in today’s economy, with such a large percentage of the potential workforce not working, I also want to make the case that job design, workforce health and incentives to work matter too. As I said at the beginning, that’s the ultimate in workforce development. Thank you, and now I look forward to your reactions and questions. -10- 1 Thank you to Abigail Burns, Nina Mantilla and Jessie Romero for their assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Prior research we’ve done has found that employment rates are around 10 percentage points lower in smaller towns, based on census data for ages 16-64. 3 Though the majority (approximately 51 percent) of prime-age nonemployed individuals are white, non-Hispanic, people of color are nonemployed at higher rates. For prime-age individuals, we calculate that approximately 25 percent of the black, non-Hispanic population is nonemployed versus only 18 percent of the white, non-Hispanic population. 4 Hours worked varies across countries and is not included in the calculation. 5 We estimate 8,947,983.20, or 34.66 percent of prime-age nonemployed (2019), are stay-at-home parents. 6 SSI provides disability benefits to people with limited work history. 7 Alan B. Krueger, “Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2017, pp. 1-87; Dionissi Aliprantis, Kyle Fee, and Mark E. Schweitzer, “Opioids and the Labor Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper No. 18- 07R, May 15, 2018. 8 Mary A. Burke and Anat Bracha, “How Big is the Gig?” 2018. We note the gig economy is difficult to measure and estimations vary. A recent BLS study compares employment numbers from the CPS with time spent in gainful employment from the American Time Use Survey and found smaller differences than Burke and Bracha. 9 Based on data prepared by Chmura Economics for the Dan River Region Collaborative. 10 Statistics on health insurance from the Kaiser Family Foundation, “Employer Health Benefits, 2019 Annual Survey.” 11 Data from JOLTS via Haver Analytics. Turnover rates: retail trade: 5.2 percent; leisure and hospitality (includes accommodation and food services): 6.7 percent; total private industry: 4.2 percent; financial activities: 2.4 percent. 12 McKinsey Global Institute, “The Future of Work in America,” July 2019, Exhibit 12. 13 Mary C. Daly, “Beyond Fairness: The Value of an Inclusive Economy,” Speech at the Los Angeles World Affairs Council & Town Hall, Los Angeles, California, Oct. 16, 2019. 14 See Tables 4 and 5 in Alan B. Krueger, “Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2017, pp. 1-87. 15 Rachel Garfield, et al., “Understanding the Intersection of Medicaid and Work: What Does the Data Say?” Aug. 8, 2019. 16 In Medicaid expansion states, 2019 income limit is: $17,236/year for an individual or $29,435/year for a family of three. In non-expansion states (16 states) median eligibility limit for a family of three is $8,532/year and childless adults are not eligible (except in Wisconsin). CHIP eligibility: Median income limit for family of three is $55,452/year.

-1- The New Environment for Monetary Policy Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Greensboro Chamber of Commerce Economic Forecast Luncheon Greensboro, North Carolina November 13, 2019 Thank you very much for inviting me to join you this afternoon. Today, I’d like to talk with you about how I interpret current economic data through the lens of monetary policy. Please note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System.1 Economic Outlook Before I talk about the data, let me say a few words about my background and perspective. I joined the Richmond Fed almost two years ago after a 30-year career in consulting at McKinsey, where I had roles including chief financial officer and leading our offices in the South. I’ve spent my professional life helping firms make decisions about hiring, compensation and prices, and I’ve made a lot of those decisions myself. So I hope I’m bringing a different perspective to the FOMC. My colleagues on the committee are some of the most talented macroeconomists, bankers, academics and financial regulators in the country. But as the only committee member coming from management, I approach things differently. So what am I seeing? Overall, I believe the economy remains healthy. GDP growth was 1.9 percent in the third quarter. It has averaged 2.3 percent year to date, which is above the trend of around 2 percent you’d estimate from the sum of population and productivity growth. -2- That growth is being strongly supported by consumers. Households are spending, and that’s important because consumer spending accounts for nearly 70 percent of GDP. Housing demand has rebounded over the past several months, and auto spending has continued to be strong. Both of these are reliable indicators of the strength of consumer mindsets. And even with some recent drops, consumer confidence is near all-time highs. What’s behind that confidence? Primarily, it’s the strength of the labor market. The unemployment rate is near a 50-year low, at just 3.6 percent in October. In fact, there are roughly 1 million more job openings than there are people looking for work; and there have been more jobs than job seekers since March of last year, the first time that’s happened in the 20-year history of this data series. Initial claims for unemployment insurance, a rough measure of layoffs, are as low as they’ve been since the late 1960s in absolute numbers, despite population growth. And wages are increasing while inflation remains muted. In October, wages were up 3 percent over the year before, while inflation has been running around 1.7 percent, just under our 2 percent target. These increases in real wages matter. Although job growth has slowed some, which you’d expect to see as we near trend and markets tighten, we’re still averaging nearly 170,000 new jobs per month this year. That’s above “breakeven”—the Atlanta Fed estimates we need 107,000 jobs per month to maintain current unemployment levels. So, the economy remains sound. -3- There are headwinds, though, mostly driven by uncertainty around trade and politics. Between Brexit, the Middle East, immigration, and the ongoing negotiations with China—to name just a few—it’s been a roller coaster both here and abroad. And we’re seeing international economies struggle. GDP growth has slowed in China and stalled in the eurozone. In the second quarter, growth was actually negative in Germany, Europe’s largest economy. There’s a risk that weakness will affect us. Here at home, manufacturing activity has slowed amid trade concerns. Against this background, it’s not surprising that we’ve seen weakness in business investment. It shrank 3 percent in the third quarter. And the bond market has sent some concerning signals lately. The yield on 10-year Treasuries has been very low given the overall strength of the economy and has actually been lower at times than the yield on 2-year Treasuries. As you probably know, such an inversion of the yield curve is historically a good predictor of a recession. But is that what the yield curve is signaling now, or are we just seeing a move toward higher-yielding safe assets at a time when international rates are historically low? Overall, I think it’s safe to say the economy is giving us conflicting signals. The strength of consumption and the labor market might be saying “hold” or even “raise rates,” while the softness of investment, inflation and the bond market might be saying “lower rates.” How have policymakers thought about it? In 2018, the risk seemed to be the economy “overheating.” With interest rates well below “normal” levels, strong GDP growth, fiscal stimulus and a tight labor market, we raised the target rate four times, with many FOMC participants projecting additional rate increases the -4- following year. But in early 2019, political and global turmoil signaled more risk to the downside. The committee decided to pause and take a patient approach, with a much flatter projected rate path. Then, with inflation muted, continued uncertainty and international weakness, we lowered the target rate 75 basis points over the past three meetings. The FOMC’s decision to lower rates doesn’t mean a recession is imminent. But it does reflect the fact that there is a lot of uncertainty about the outlook, particularly with respect to global growth and the impact of trade. So it seems prudent to take out some “insurance,” as Chair Powell said in July. A year ago, FOMC participants were projecting 2020 rates more than 130 basis points higher than their most recent [SEP] projections. That’s powerful support for our economy. The New Environment Now, let’s take a step back from the data and recognize that monetary policy is operating in a new and different environment. What do I mean by that? When I was in school, I learned about both monetary policy and fiscal policy. The key fiscal policy levers were spending and taxation. But today, I think we have to broaden the definition of fiscal policy to incorporate the climate for business. That includes trade actions and trade uncertainty, regulatory changes and regulatory uncertainty, geopolitical challenges and domestic politics. -5- With the roller coaster I mentioned, it’s been tough for businesses to feel like they’re on solid ground. Economists from Northwestern, Stanford and the University of Chicago have developed an “economic uncertainty index” that gauges the degree of uncertainty in 24 different countries. Their “global” index hit its all-time high in August.2 In the third quarter Duke CFO survey, more than half of CFOs said they were less optimistic about the U.S. economy than they had been the previous quarter. The climate for business is already a challenge. Tariffs are taxes and—unless businesses shift their supply chains—impose direct costs on target industries. International economies are struggling as they try to adapt to changes in the global trade regime that the United States created after World War II. When financial markets react to the news cycle, as they did earlier this year, you see an impact on consumer spending. And health care regulation has to be affecting health care firms’ investment plans. Uncertainty is having an impact too. Uncertainty raises the threshold for action.3 It dampens business confidence, which can lead to lower investment, less hiring and potentially even less confidence in pricing. After all, how can you invest when you don’t know the rules? Hearkening back to my days as a CFO, I think of it as equivalent to an increase in investment hurdle rates. Firms today are frustrated with political polarization and uncertainty about regulation. They tell me they’re not scaling back yet, but they’re reluctant to double down. For these reasons, I don’t discount the idea that we could talk ourselves into a recession—particularly if the uncertainty begins to affect consumer confidence and spending. -6- Uncertainty also lessens the effectiveness of traditional policy, both fiscal and monetary. For example, the country is running historically large deficits, and Congress passed a significant tax cut in late 2017. Normally, one would imagine these traditional fiscal policy levers should boost the economy. In early 2018, we did see strong growth and an investment boom. But those numbers dropped quickly as trade concerns came to dominate the headlines and outweighed the impetus from fiscal stimulus. Turning to monetary policy, uncertainty can also dampen the impact we might expect from any policy “stance.” We typically think that accommodative monetary policy stimulates the economy. But in the presence of high uncertainty—nearly all of which is generated by forces extraneous to what the FOMC does—we risk not getting the same “bang for the buck.” The stimulus could be outweighed by perceived risks to future cash flows. We might also view an accommodative monetary policy stance as powerful in shaping financial market valuations. But again, high uncertainty scrambles the signals. Financial markets are being moved by trade these days rather than by our policy stance. Policy Options If the current uncertainty is temporary, then the right course of action is to see through it the way we might see through movements in the more volatile components of inflation. The divergence we see between strong consumption and weaker investment may well be signaling that the uncertainty won’t persist. The recent headway made on trade negotiations may lessen our downside, as might the progress being made in the Brexit negotiations. -7- But if we’re in a more uncertain environment for the long term, we’ll have to recognize that even though we have tools to use, they’re potentially less effective. For that reason, I’m closely monitoring whether the recent “insurance” the FOMC purchased will have its intended effect. More broadly, the Fed is undertaking a review to ask if we have the right monetary policy strategy and tools to achieve our dual mandate, given low inflation and the risk of returning to the zero lower bound in the current environment. A number of topics are on the table, including “makeup” strategies for inflation shortfalls, balance sheet policies, forward guidance and communications strategies. I won’t go into detail about these various options today, but I will say that in general I’m hopeful we can develop a portfolio of tools to help us support the economy, as I’m skeptical that any one tool can truly overcome significant fiscal headwinds. That’s why, in my view, it’s even more important to step up on the fiscal side and improve the climate for business. The biggest boost to our economy would come from lessening the uncertainty and lowering the volume. That would build business confidence, build consumer confidence and lead to increased investment, spending and hiring. Look at the market reaction when it seemed like there was a Brexit deal. Originally, leaving the eurozone was viewed as a calamitous choice. Now, markets are so relieved that the rules are clear, they reward the decision. American businesses are creative. Give them the rules—almost any set of rules—and they will make things happen. -8- The Future Where do we go from here? I actually don’t have an answer to that question. But I think we face three meaningful conflicts that I am watching closely. First, U.S. consumer spending is strong, but U.S. investment is weak. The leading indicators are still robust, as I said, but will that remain the case if business investment weakens further? Second, the U.S. economy is strong, but international economies are weak. I heard an economist say that historically, we don’t import recessions—we export them. But will that still be the case in our increasingly globally connected economy? Third, the bond market is pessimistic, but the stock market is still upbeat. Experience says to listen to the bond market—but is the bond market sending us the same signals it used to when rates are so low? Those are enough questions from me. Now, I’d love to hear yours. 1 Thank you to Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, Economic Policy Uncertainty Index. 3 Nicholas Bloom, “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” Econometrica, May 2009, vol. 77, no. 3, pp. 623-685
