Comments on “Microprudential Versus Macroprudential Supervision: Functions That Make Sense Only as Part of an Overall Regime for Financial Stability,” by Paul Tucker Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 59th Economic Conference – Macroprudential Monetary Policy Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Boston, MA October 2, 2015 1 Introduction I thank President Rosengren and the Boston Fed for the opportunity to participate in this year’s economic conference. This conference series has been a source of valuable discussions and insights over many years, and I’m happy to note that this year’s conference marks number 59 in the series, a remarkable track record. I’m even happier to say that I, myself, haven’t yet reached that milestone – although it does remain a goal of mine! A discussant’s task is never an easy one. Sometimes it is difficult because of the simple fact that there just isn’t that much in the paper to talk about. Other times it is difficult because the paper is filled with so much interesting material that it inspires a plethora of new thoughts and ideas. In this case, Paul Tucker’s paper definitely falls into the latter camp. If you have not yet had the chance to read the paper, I encourage you to do so. And if you have read the paper, I encourage you to read it again, because more is revealed on each reading. In my brief time this morning, I will be able to touch on only some of the important issues that Paul’s paper addresses. My main point is that the principles of sound monetary policymaking can be productively applied to financial stability policymaking. As always, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Paul was asked to address the larger question of whether the objective functions for microprudential supervision and macroprudential supervision differ, and if so, how any conflicts should be resolved. I agree with his conclusion that the two types of supervision need not be in conflict so long as they are situated within a well-designed financial stability framework, or what Paul calls a regime. I would take this a step further and suggest that micro- and macroprudential supervision should work together. As Paul acknowledges, building such a framework is not trivial. But it is the responsibility of public officials 2 to do so, since the costs imposed on society for failing to do so are very large. The difficulty derives not only from the fact that the global financial system is very complex, which means a lot of intellectual ability needs to be brought to the problem, but also because the framework involves institutions. As underscored by the work of Nobel Prize winner Douglass North and others, institutions matter.1 And those institutions necessarily find themselves having to operate within a political economy that needs to be taken into account. Over the past 50 years, research and practice have increased our understanding of some basic principles that underlie an effective monetary policymaking framework. These include starting with well-articulated and achievable goals, designing features that foster a credible commitment to those goals, and incorporating a mechanism for holding accountable the institution responsible for promoting those goals. In my view, more systematic, less discretionary policymaking, transparency, and clear communication are important features of sound monetary policymaking. I believe that financial stability policymaking can benefit from these same principles and features. Objectives The first principle of effective monetary policymaking is having a well-articulated objective that is achievable with the available tools. Paul starts there too. I particularly like that he articulates the goal of financial stability in terms of the resilience of the financial system. In the U.K., the Financial Services Act 2012 formally established the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) within the Bank of England and charged it to act “to remove or reduce, systemic risks with a view to protecting and enhancing the 1 Douglass C. North, Structure and Change in Economic History, London, U.K.: W.W. Norton, 1981; Douglass C. North, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1990; and Douglass C. North, “Institutions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 5, 1991, pp. 97-112 (https://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/jecper/v5y1991i1p97-112.html). 3 resilience of the U.K. financial system.”2 In contrast, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 doesn’t mention resilience, but U.S. policymakers might want to consider changing our rhetoric from financial stability to financial resilience. “Stability” gives the impression of being static. But the economy and financial markets are dynamic; they will be hit by shocks and they will respond to those shocks. There will be ups and downs. The goal should not be to thwart all volatility in markets, but rather to limit tail risks. We need to be thinking in terms of the resilience of the financial system to those shocks. As Paul says, “The system must be sufficiently resilient to continue providing the core financial services of payments, credit, and insurance in the face of big shocks.” Another way we might think about the objective is that it chooses a maximum tolerable expected loss from a financial crisis, where the expected loss reflects both the probability of a financial crisis and the cost imposed on the rest of the economy when a crisis-sized shock hits the financial system. Different prudential tools will work on one and/or the other of these two components. Let me set aside an important issue that Paul addresses in his paper, namely, who should set the resilience standard. Regardless of where that responsibility lies, it is important that the objective be articulated so that the public and its elected representatives understand that there are tradeoffs. Financial systems are able to provide valuable credit, risk-management, and liquidity services to businesses and households because they comprise institutions designed to take on risk and leverage. Even with an optimally designed financial resilience regime, there could be a tradeoff between the average level of economic growth over the longer run and the desired degree of resilience, because risk-taking and risk management are at the heart of the financial system. Indeed, in the U.K., the Financial Services Act recognizes this potential tradeoff and indicates that the act does not authorize the FPC to act in a way that the committee 2 Section 9C(2) of the U.K.’s Financial Services Act 2012 says: “The responsibility of the Committee in relation to the achievement by the Bank of the Financial Stability Objective relates primarily to the identification of, monitoring of, and taking of action to remove or reduce, system risks with a view to protecting and enhancing the resilience of the UK Financial System.” See http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/21/pdfs/ ukpga_20120021_en.pdf. 4 feels is “likely to have a significant adverse effect on the capacity of the financial sector to contribute to the growth of the U.K. economy in the medium or long term.”3 Too high a resilience standard will thwart risk-taking and innovation, which will undermine longer-run economic growth.4 In setting the standard, we need to come to some common understanding about the amount of growth and prosperity we are willing to give up in order to lower the risk to financial stability. In the U.S., people who are 80 years old have lived through two major financial crises (the Depression and the 2008-2009 financial crisis and Great Recession). Is that too many? Would we rather lower the probability of such an event to one every 1,000 years? What would we be willing to give up to do that? Of course, there may be things we can do to improve the framework that will lower the risk to financial stability without much cost in terms of longer-run growth. If we think of there being a frontier relating the risk to financial stability to the economic return that a well-functioning financial system can provide, then it isn’t hard to imagine that we were operating at a point well off that frontier in the run-up to the crisis, and that improvements in the financial resilience regime could move us onto the frontier without sacrificing growth. However, once we reach that point, we’ll have to make a choice about how much growth we are willing to give up in good times to limit the likelihood of a future financial crisis. Regardless of which institution chooses the standard of resilience, and therefore the tradeoff between economic growth and the level of systemic risk, the standard will need to be well communicated to get 3 Section 9C(4) of the U.K.’s Financial Services Act 2012 (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/21/pdfs/ ukpga_20120021_en.pdf). 4 Quantifying that tradeoff is difficult. Paul cites Romain Rancière, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann, “Systemic Crises and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, February 2008, pp. 359-406 (https://ideas.repec.org/a/tpr/qjecon/v123y2008i1p359-406.html). Using a large group of countries, they find that average growth over 1960-2000 was higher in countries that have experienced occasional financial crises, as measured by the negative skewness of credit growth. They provide a model in which the enforceability of contracts plays an important role in engendering risk-taking and investment, which leads to higher growth. 5 political and public buy-in. That’s going to be a difficult task – if you happen to be someone living during the once-in-a-thousand years event, how comforting is it to know that that was a design choice? Systematic Financial Stability Policymaking and Incentives Now let’s turn to some of the features that should be included in the regime set up to meet the resilience standard. Paul suggests that one of the key components of a well-designed financial stability regime is dynamic macroprudential policy that is applied systematically. I agree that a systematic approach will be beneficial to financial stability policymaking, just as it is to monetary policymaking. The benefit of taking a systematic approach to monetary policy is well established. When monetary policymakers respond in a systematic fashion to incoming information, the public will have a better sense of how policymakers are likely to react to economic developments – whether those developments are anticipated or unanticipated – so their policy expectations will better align with those of policymakers. This alignment helps households, firms, and financial market participants make better saving, borrowing, investment, employment, and transaction decisions, thereby making monetary policy more effective. An additional benefit of a systematic approach is that it provides a mechanism through which policymakers can commit to policies aimed at promoting policy goals over the longer run. That is, being systematic can help alleviate time-inconsistency problems. Note that by systematic policy I do not necessarily mean that monetary policy be set mechanically by a policy rule. Nor do I require the policymaker to be prescient about the shocks that will hit the economy – if these were predictable, they would not be “shocks.” Being systematic about financial stability policy is perhaps even more important than in the case of monetary policy because of the important role played by incentives – those of both private actors and regulators – and asymmetric information. The crisis shined a bright light on significant moral hazard 6 problems that exist in financial markets. A financial stability policymaker that is systematic in how it applies its tools to promote attainment of the resilience standard will likely help tame some of the moral hazard problems. For example, systematically applying the resilience standard across the entire financial services landscape will limit regulatory arbitrage – one of the unintended consequences of regulating just a portion of the financial system. Applying the resilience standard to all parts of the financial system, while allowing the type of supervision to appropriately vary by the nature of the systemic risk associated with each part, is one component of Paul’s financial stability regime. Regulators themselves are also subject to incentive problems. Ed Kane, a professor at Boston College, has written extensively on this subject.5 Misaligned incentives need not stem from regulatory capture, which has received some recent attention. Time-inconsistency problems could lead regulators to favor the short run over the long run. Adherence to a systematic approach in applying financial stability policy tools could serve as a commitment device for regulators to focus on long-run goals, but it’s important to have the right tools in order to align regulatory incentives. An important tool in this regard is financial institution resolution. Although, as Paul points out, an improved resolution method for large, complex financial institutions is not a panacea, in my view it is a large positive step. The lack of a credible resolution method meant that during the crisis, in the face of serious distress at a large financial firm, governments faced a dilemma: either rescue the firm and create future moral hazard problems or let the firm fail and risk causing a cascade of other failures. The fact that policymakers had to make these decisions in the heat of the moment using their best judgment based on limited information didn’t help. Without a credible resolution method, it is reasonable to expect that even well-intentioned policymakers will be biased toward bailouts. A resolution method that can be applied systematically can help alleviate this problem. 5 For one of his early works, see Edward J. Kane, “Accelerating Inflation, Technological Innovation, and the Decreasing Effectiveness of Banking Regulation,” Journal of Finance 36, 1981, pp. 355-367 (https://ideas.repec.org/a/bla/jfinan/v36y1981i2p355-67.html). 7 Transparency, Clear Communication, Independence, and Simplification A second hallmark of effective monetary policymaking is transparency and clear communication. Of course, clear communication is not without challenges. In the late 1980s and 1990s, the public had a pretty good sense of how the FOMC’s policy would respond to economic developments because after the great inflation of the 1970s, the FOMC became more predictable and systematic in how it reacted to changes in economic activity and inflation.6 The Great Recession required the Fed to behave in a way quite distinct from its past behavior, so the public’s understanding about how policymakers are likely to react to incoming economic information needs to be reestablished. In addition to policy effectiveness, transparency in monetary policy is necessary so that the public and elected officials have the ability to hold policymakers accountable for their decisions. The Fed, like many other central banks, has been given independence in setting monetary policy, and this independence has been well documented as yielding more effective policy and better economic outcomes. But accountability must go hand-in-hand with independence. A central bank cannot expect to remain independent from the political process unless it is transparent about the basis for its policy decisions. A parallel can be drawn with financial stability policy. In the aftermath of the financial crisis, the framework and tools of financial stability policy are still being developed. It will take considerable effort on the part of the financial stability policymaker to explain the tools it will be using and the rationale for its policy decisions. This is likely to be even more challenging than it is for monetary policy because the financial system is complex, with various types of institutions and multiple regulators. In addition, regulators are likely to have more private information on which to base their policy decisions, making it more difficult for the public and elected officials to assess whether the decisions are appropriate ones. 6 For a discussion, see John B. Taylor, “Monetary Policy During the Past 30 Years with Lessons for the Next 30 Years,” luncheon address at the Cato Institute’s 30th Annual Monetary Conference on Money, Markets and Government: The Next 30 Years, Washington D.C., November 15, 2012 (http://object.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/serials/files/cato-journal/2013/9/cjv33n3-2.pdf). 8 Here, I am in full agreement with Paul that while there are some arguments for keeping prudential supervisory information private, I think financial stability policymakers should strive for greater transparency and more disclosure. Similarly, they should require more disclosure from financial firms so that creditors and other market participants can exert market discipline. There are good arguments for giving financial stability policymakers a large degree of independence from the political process. If effective monetary policy means taking away the punch bowl just as the party gets going, then effective financial stability policy might mean taking away the punch bowl before the guests have even arrived because the risks to financial stability build up over time and action likely needs to be taken earlier in order to be effective. Contributing to the need for early action is the challenge of having to coordinate policy action across multiple regulatory bodies. If the need for monetary policy to be forward looking is a difficult concept for the public to grasp, the need for financial stability policy to act well before there are clear signs of instability may be even more difficult to explain. In thinking about the design of the financial stability regime, it might behoove policymakers to consider whether it would be better for central banks to keep their monetary policy and financial stability policy discussions separate so as to avoid jeopardizing the independence of monetary policy. Note, however, that in a situation in which financial stability risks are high and growing, the blurring of the line between financial stability goals and monetary policy goals would be high: if we assessed the risks to financial stability to be sufficiently great, achieving our monetary policy goals would be in jeopardy as well. Another aspect of regulatory policy that likely makes it hard to explain and hard to monitor is its complexity. Andrew Haldane and Vasileios Madouros have argued that the complexity of the financial landscape does not call for a complex financial regulatory structure, but just the opposite.7 In my view, a sometimes overlooked lesson from the crisis is that regulatory complexity can complicate supervision, 7 See Andrew G. Haldane and Vasileios Madouros, “The Dog and the Frisbee,” speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Economic Policy Symposium, “The Changing Policy Landscape,” Jackson Hole, WY, August 31, 2012 (http://www.bis.org/review/r120905a.pdf). 9 risk monitoring, compliance, and enforcement. Given the scope and ever-changing nature of the financial system, regulatory complexity is, to a certain extent, unavoidable. But the tradeoffs should be recognized. For example, it is reasonable to require higher levels of capital to be held against higher-risk assets, but a system of risk weights that is overly granular and complex would be counterproductive. In practice, too much complexity would make it harder for regulators to assess compliance and to determine whether institutions were engaging in some practices merely as a way to hide risk and lower their capital requirements. If regulators have made the rules so complex that they cannot assess compliance, then in practice there are no consequences for firms that fail to meet the standards. Complexity also makes it difficult to monitor the monitors. Because the world is very complex, our models are simplifications with many embedded assumptions. A policy that is optimal in one model need not be optimal in another, yet we don’t know which model is the correct representation of the world. Here, we might take another lesson from monetary policy in which a research agenda has documented some of the benefits of policy rules that are robust across various models. Some recent work in economic theory has also shown that simple dynamic contracts can perform approximately as well as optimal contracts, independent of the underlying process for returns.8 Although more work would need to be done, this suggests it is worth exploring whether we would be better off with a much simpler macro- and microprudential supervisory structure that is easier to implement and simpler to govern, one that is approximately right across various models and states of the world even if it is never optimal in any particular model or state. Conclusion In his presidential address to the American Finance Association earlier this year, Luigi Zingales asked an important question: “Does finance benefit society?” He pointed out the dissonance between the view of 8 See Sylvain Chassang, “Calibrated Incentive Contracts,” Econometrica 81, September 2013, pp. 1935-1971 (https://ideas.repec.org/a/ecm/emetrp/v81y2013i5p1935-1971.html). 10 academics, who typically say “yes,” and that of the average American, who is much less certain.9 Luigi argues that academia has an important role to play in ensuring that finance will benefit society. I agree. Academic research can help detect those aspects of financial system design and practices that are beneficial to society and those that are harmful. But major responsibility lies with financial system policymakers, supervisors, and regulators to create a system that is seen by the American public as being beneficial and that truly is. I thank Paul for providing many thoughtful ideas in support of this endeavor. 9 See Luigi Zingales, “Does Finance Benefit Society?” Journal of Finance 70, August 2015, pp. 1327-1363 (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jofi.12295/abstract). He cites the Chicago Booth-Kellogg School Financial Trust Index survey of a representative sample of about 1,000 American households, conducted by Social Science Research Solutions. Forty-eight percent of respondents to the December 2014 survey said that the U.S. financial system hurts the U.S. economy, while only 34 percent said it benefits the U.S. economy.

Long-Run Economic Growth Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland New York University Stern Center for Global Economy and Business New York, NY October 15, 2015 1 Introduction I thank the New York University Stern Center for Global Economy and Business and, in particular, Kim Schoenholtz, the center’s director, for the kind invitation to speak to you this afternoon. The center plays an active role in promoting and supporting faculty research on issues related to global economies, businesses, and policy, and I am honored to be among the center’s list of distinguished speakers. I am also happy to be back at NYU. I have very fond memories of my time here, where, as an adjunct professor, I co-taught the Ph.D. Seminar in Financial Institutions for a couple of years in the late 1990s. The world has certainly changed since then. I met Kim for the first time at a conference held several years ago when signs of problems in the financial markets and banking system were just beginning to emerge. I can’t speak for Kim, but I can certainly say that at that time I did not fully appreciate the extent of the crisis and deep recession to come. Since the crisis, supported by extraordinary monetary policy accommodation, the U.S. economy has made substantial progress. We are at or nearly at full employment, and if output and employment growth continue to evolve as I anticipate, inflation will gradually return to the FOMC’s goal of 2 percent. But as the economy continues to move back toward normal, the question has arisen: what is normal? The financial crisis and Great Recession destroyed a lot of wealth. At the aggregate level, household net worth fell by more than $10 trillion in 2008, and it took more than three years to make that up. The level of real GDP declined by over $600 billion, or about 4 percent, and the recovery has been relatively slow. But are there longer-term repercussions? Is the economy entering a new normal with a substantially lower growth rate? This afternoon I’d like to focus on the important topic of long-run economic growth. I call it important because living standards, as measured by income per person, are inextricably tied to long-run growth. Over time, even small differences in growth can translate into large differences in average income per person. For example, based on Census Bureau projections of population growth, if real GDP were to 2 grow at 2.0 percent per year over the next 20 years, instead of 2.5 percent, the difference in income at the end of that period would amount to about $7,000 per person. As Nobel Laureate Robert Lucas wrote when contemplating the questions raised by cross-country differences in per capita GDP, “Once one starts to think about them, it is hard to think about anything else.”1 In addition to implications for living standards, changes in the long-run potential growth rate of the economy have implications for policy that are worth discussing. Of course, as always, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Some Data: Output Growth, Potential Growth, Productivity Growth Let me start with some data. Over the long term, the U.S. economy has enjoyed solid economic performance. Indeed, as pointed out by growth economists, sustained growth of per capita real GDP of around 2 percent per year has been a hallmark of the U.S. economy over the past 150 years, save for the Great Depression, when real GDP per person fell by about 20 percent. 2 But this longer-run trend obscures some variations over time. From the end of World War II through the end of the 1990s, real GDP increased at an annual rate of 3.5 percent. If we concentrate on recent economic expansions, we see that growth was 4.3 percent over the 1982-1990 expansion and 3.6 percent over the 1991-2001 expansion. In contrast, over the current expansion, growth has been 2.2 percent. The Congressional Budget Office projects that real GDP will grow an average of 2.1 percent per year from 2020 to 2025, at the same pace as its estimate of maximum sustainable or potential growth. This is lower than the CBO’s pre-crisis 1 See page 5 of Robert E. Lucas, Jr., “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics 22, July 1988, pp. 3-42, https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/moneco/v22y1988i1p3-42.html. 2 These figures are from the excellent article by Charles I. Jones, “The Facts of Economic Growth,” Stanford University, April 28, 2015, forthcoming in the Handbook of Macroeconomics . 3 potential growth estimate of 3.1 percent for the 1981-2007 period.3 It is noteworthy that economists have been revising down their estimates of potential growth almost every year since the Great Recession started. For example, in 2008, the CBO estimated that potential growth between 2008 and 2013 would average 2.5 percent, well above its current estimate of 1.5 percent for that same time period. Similarly, over time, FOMC participants have lowered their projections for longer-run growth. The FOMC began releasing these longer-run projections in January 2009. At that time, the central tendency of the participants’ projections of longer-run GDP growth was 2.5 to 2.7 percent. In the projections released last month, the central tendency was down to 1.8 to 2.2 percent. My current estimate of longer run growth is 2.25 percent, a quarter of a percentage point lower than my previous estimate. My revision reflects the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ recent downward revisions to past productivity growth. Indeed, sluggish productivity growth has garnered a lot of attention. Since the start of the recovery, productivity growth has averaged just over 1 percent. 4 But the slowdown actually began before the recent crisis; indeed, productivity growth has averaged only a bit over 1 percent for the past decade. This is down significantly from the 3 percent seen during the tech boom of the mid-1990s through 2005, and the 2.7 percent seen after World War II and through the mid-1970s. The current slow productivity growth is not without precedent: between the mid-1970s and mid-1990s, productivity growth averaged just 1.5 percent. 3 Congressional Budget Office, “An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2015 to 2025,” August 25, 2015 https://www.cbo.gov/publication/50724. 4 The numbers I am citing are labor productivity, as measured by the annual rate of change in real output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector. Multifactor productivity measures the quantity of output that can be produced by a fixed ratio of capital to labor. Changes in labor productivity reflect changes in this multifactor productivity, as well as changes in the ratio of capital per worker. 4 In looking at these numbers, it is important to remember that the productivity statistics are subject to measurement error, and because new technologies are diffusing throughout the economy, that measurement error may be rising. The introduction of new products, the difficulty of constructing quality-adjusted prices for these products, and the rising importance of intangible investment have all complicated the measurement of output and suggest that we may be underestimating the economy’s true rate of productivity growth.5 It is also good to remember that the productivity numbers undergo considerable revision, so that inferring a persistent change in productivity growth is quite difficult. Jacobs and van Norden document that revisions can change measured productivity growth rates by a factor of two or more and large revisions can come even as much as 20 years after release of the initial estimates. 6,7 During the late 1990s, policymakers struggled to understand whether productivity growth was truly picking up, consistent with anecdotal information, even though a pickup wasn’t reflected in the data. This led former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan to comment during the February 1997 FOMC meeting: “The one thing we know about the official data on productivity is that they are wrong.”8 Of course, the considerable work that is being done to estimate and understand productivity developments underscores how important productivity growth is. To understand why slow productivity growth is a concern, we need to turn to some economic growth accounting. 5 Nakamura documents the shift of the U.S. economy from one characterized by mass production and tangible investment to one characterized by new products tailored to individuals and intangible investment, and discusses the difficulties this shift poses for the usual measures of output. See Leonard I. Nakamura, “Intangible Assets and National Income Accounting,” Review of Income and Wealth, Series 56, Special Issue 1, June 2010, pp. S135-S155, https://ideas.repec.org/a/bla/revinw/v56y2010is1ps135-s155.html. 6 See Jan P.A.M. Jacobs and Simon van Norden, “Why Are Initial Estimates of Productivity Growth So Unreliable?” manuscript under revision for the Journal of Macroeconomics, July 15, 2015, http://svannorden.org/about/jvnproductivity_july2015_jmacro/. 7 Anderson and Kliesen document that the revisions to productivity growth primarily reflect revisions to measured output rather than measured employment or aggregate hours. See Richard G. Anderson and Kevin L. Kliesen, “The 1990s Acceleration in Labor Productivity: Causes and Measurement,” Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, May/June 2006, pp. 181-202. 8 This quote appears in Richard G. Anderson and Kevin L. Kliesen, “FOMC Learning and Productivity Growth (1985-2003): A Reading of the Record,” Review, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, March/April 2010, pp. 129- 154. See p. 101 of the transcript of the February 4-5, 1997 FOMC meeting at http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC19970205meeting.pdf. 5 Determinants of Long-Run Economic Growth How much output of goods and services an economy can produce depends on the amount of inputs it has – its capital and labor – and on how productively it can combine those inputs to create output. For the economy to grow, there needs to be an increase in inputs or an increase in productivity, or both. Things that affect both the quantity and quality of its inputs, such as labor force growth, the level of skills in the labor force, infrastructure, and institutional arrangements such as the rule of law and well-developed financial markets, can all impact an economy’s ability to create output. In the elegant and seminal neoclassical growth model developed by Robert Solow and Trevor Swan, a higher savings rate will lead to higher investment and higher income per capita in the long run, but this can’t happen indefinitely; eventually the economy reaches a new steady state.9 Only growth in productivity can lead to sustained increases in output, that is, to long-run economic growth and increasing standards of living. The neoclassical growth model is consistent with many, but not all, of the empirical facts. For example, research concludes that differences in measured inputs explain less than half of the large cross-country differences in GDP per capita, consistent with the model.10 On the other hand, empirically, there is a strong positive correlation between savings rates and growth across countries. The model implies that there would be no correlation, provided countries are in the steady state.11 Partly in response to dissatisfaction with some of the empirical implications of the model and partly to provide a model that explains productivity growth rather than take it as given, Bob Lucas, Paul Romer, 9 Robert M. Solow, “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 70, 1956, pp. 65-94, http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/files/Solow1956.pdf, and Trevor W. Swan, “Economic Growth and Capital Accumulation,” The Economic Record 32, 1956, pp. 334-361, https://ideas.repec.org/a/bla/ecorec/v32y1956i2p334- 361.html. 10 See Charles I. Jones and Paul M. Romer, “The New Kaldor Facts: Ideas, Institutions, Population, and Human Capital,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2, 2010, pp. 224-245, https://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aejmac/v2y2010i1p224-45.html. 11 See N. Gregory Mankiw, “The Growth of Nations,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1995, pp. 275-326, http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/projects/bpea/1995-1/1995a_bpea_mankiw_phelps_romer.pdf. 6 and others developed the endogenous growth model.12 In contrast to the neoclassical model, here the marginal return to capital to the economy overall is not diminishing. The theory emphasizes the important role of investment in human capital to increase the knowledge and skills needed to productively use capital, and investment in research and development, whose returns are not necessarily captured only by the firm doing the investing. New ideas, knowledge, and discoveries spill over into the wider economy, as one idea leads to another and that idea leads to yet another, and so on. When talking about scientific progress and the buildup of knowledge, economists often quote Sir Isaac Newton: “If I have seen further it is by standing on the shoulders of Giants.”13 The important insight from the endogenous growth model is that if human capital increases with the stock of physical capital, then there need not be diminishing returns to capital, or if increases in R&D lead to innovative products and processes, increased productivity can offset any declines in the marginal return to capital. Thus, ongoing growth can be sustained by investments in human capital and new technology. Some economists, like Robert Gordon at Northwestern University, are quite pessimistic about the future growth prospects of the U.S. economy. 14 Others, like Joel Mokyr, also at Northwestern, Barry Eichengreen, at the University of California, Berkeley, and Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee at MIT, are more optimistic.15 The difference in views largely stems from different assessments of the 12 Two early contributions are the Lucas article cited above, and Paul Romer, “Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, October 1986, pp. 1002-1037, http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~promer/IncreasingReturns.pdf. 13 This was written by Newton in a letter to Robert Hooke on February 5, 1676. In their textbook, Macroeconomics (12th Edition, NY: McGraw Hill, 2014, p.83), Rudiger Dornbusch, Stanley Fischer, and Richar d Startz point out that Paul Samuelson included this famous quote in his textbook, Foundations of Economic Analysis, 1970. 14 See Robert J. Gordon, “Secular Stagnation: A Supply-Side View,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 5, May 2015, pp. 54-59, https://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aecrev/v105y2015i5p54-59.html, and Robert J. Gordon, “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 19895, February 2014, https://ideas.repec.org/p/nbr/nberwo/19895.html. 15 See Joel Mokyr, “The Next Age of Invention,” City Journal, Winter 2014, http://www.city- journal.org/2014/24_1_invention.html; Barry Eichengreen, “Secular Stagnation: The Long View,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 5, May 2015, pp. 66-70, https://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aecrev/v105y2015i5p66-70.html; and Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies, NY: W.W. Norton and Company, 2014. 7 prospects for investments in human capital and technology. Human Capital Human capital and technology are intricately linked. For physical capital to be used productively, workers need to have the abilities and knowledge to apply it. Those abilities and knowledge are what we call human capital. For any given type of capital, a more knowledgeable worker is a more productive worker. But changes in technology demand even more highly skilled workers. Investment in human capital may have a positive externality on investment in innovation in that firms are more likely to develop and adopt a new technology if they are more certain they will be able to hire workers with the requisite skills to use the technology. Many studies have documented the importance of investment in human capital to a nation’s economic growth and well-being. 16 The benefits of investing in human capital are also evident at the individual level. Better education is correlated with higher wages and lower levels of unemployment. For example, the current unemployment rate for those with a college degree is 2.5 percent, compared to 5.2 percent for those with a high school diploma, and 7.9 percent for those who didn’t graduate from high school. The gap in wages between those with a college degree and those without, the so-called skill premium, has widened substantially over time, more than doubling since the 1970s. Median hourly wages for those with a bachelor’s degree are now about 80 percent higher than wages for high school graduates.17 And over a lifetime, in present 16 For a discussion of educational attainment and its contributions to economic growth, see J. Bradford DeLong, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence H. Katz, “Sustaining Economic Growth,” in Henry Aaron, ed., Agenda for the Nation (Washington: Brookings Institution, 2003). The importance of education to economic well -being can even be found at the state level. For example, Cleveland Fed researchers found that over a 75 -year period, education levels were consistently one of the most reliable indicators for each state’s per capita income growth. See Paul W. Bauer, Mark E. Schweitzer, and Scott A. Shane, “Knowledge Matters: The Long-Run Determinants of State Income Growth,” Journal of Regional Science 52, 2011, pp. 240-255, and “Altered States: A Perspective on 75 Years of State Income Growth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2005 Annual Report. 17 Jonathan James, “The College Wage Premium,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, August 2012. 8 value terms, a college graduate can expect to earn nearly twice as much as a high school graduate.18,19 Evidence suggests that the rising skill premium is being driven by technological change that has increased the demand for skilled workers relative to unskilled workers. This is consistent with the fact that even industries often viewed as less skill-intensive have increased their demand for skilled labor and that mathematical achievement is a fairly good predictor of future earnings. 20 There are positive externalities from education, which may mean we are under-investing in education from society’s viewpoint. Less-educated workers appear to benefit in the form of higher wages from working in areas populated with more-educated workers. 21 And cities with more highly educated populations experience lower unemployment rates, higher productivity growth, and higher growth in entrepreneurship than what would have been predicted by considering only the educational levels of individuals.22 It is important to note that the statistics I’ve quoted on the skill premium and the social return to education 18 Kartik B. Athreya and Janice Eberly, “The College Premium, College Noncompletion, and Human Capital Investment,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 13-02R, February 2015. 19 Other research shows that the skill premium has grown even more for those with a post -graduate degree, even controlling for changing demographics. Those with a graduate degree now earn about 30 percent more than those with a four-year college degree. See Rob Valletta, “Higher Education, Wages, and Polarization,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, 2015-02, January 12, 2015. 20 Jonathan James, “The Surprising Impact of High School Math on Job Market Outcomes,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, November 2013. 21 Enrico Moretti estimated spillovers from college education by comparing wages for similar individuals who work in cities that differ by the proportion of college graduates in their labor force, being careful to consider unobserved differences in the individuals and the cities. He found that each percentage point increase in the share of college graduates between 1980-1990 was associated with 1.6 percent higher wages of high school graduates and 0.4 percent higher wages of college graduates. See Moretti, “Estimating the Social Return to Higher Education: Evidence from Longitudinal and Repeated Cross-Sectional Data,” Journal of Econometrics 121, 2004, pp. 175-212, http://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeeeconom/v_3a121_3ay_3a2004_3ai_3a1-2_3ap_3a175-212.htm. 22 See Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo A.M. Ponzetto, and Kristina Tobio, “Cities, Skills, and Regional Change,” Regional Studies 48, 2014, pp. 7-43, and the discussion in Lisa Nelson and Francisca Richter, “The Prospects of Non-College Bound Workers in the Fourth District,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland A Look Behind the Numbers, February 2014. 9 are based on people who actually obtain their degrees. Those who are pessimistic about the long-run rate of economic growth are pessimistic about the level of educational attainment we can anticipate in the future. According to Goldin and Katz, educational attainment rose rapidly for people born in the 1876- 1950 period but has slowed since then. For example, each generation born in the first half of the twentieth century had about two more years of education than their parents, while people born in 1975 have only three-quarters of a year more education than their parents. And in the most recent cohorts, education attainment has now flattened out. 23 So, while increasing returns to education over the past 35 years have spurred more people to get their degrees – for example, the percent of the U.S. labor force that is college-educated has more than doubled since the 1970s – in recent years, the pace of increase has slowed. While enrollments in college are near historic highs, non-completion rates are also quite high. According to data from the National Center for Education Statistics, only about 55 percent of students who start college earn bachelor’s degrees within five years. 24 Several factors are likely at play. First, some people aren’t prepared for college when they enter. Research is increasingly pointing to the fact that the foundation has to be laid very early in life – at the pre-school level. 25 Second, college has become increasingly expensive over time. The average cost of tuition and fees at four-year institutions is now over $14,000 a year, and has more than doubled since 23 Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, “Long-Run Changes in the U.S. Wage Structure: Narrowing,Widening, Polarizing,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 2007, pp. 135–165, http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Projects/BPEA/Fall-2007/2007b_bpea_goldin.PDF. 24 See Digest of Education Statistics, table 302.60, for enrollment rates (http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_302.60.asp) and table 326.10, for completion rates (http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_326.10.asp). 25 Research shows that when children fall behind early on, it is often difficult to catch up. See, for example, James Heckman, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev, “Understanding the Mechanisms Through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes,” American Economic Review 103, 2013, pp. 2052- 2086, https://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aecrev/v103y2013i6p2052-86.html, and Douglas Almond and Janet Currie, “Human Capital Development Before Age Five,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4B, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier, North-Holland, 2011, pp. 1315–1486. 10 2000.26 Subsidies for higher education fell during the Great Recession, shifting costs to students. According to data compiled by the New York Fed, more people are borrowing to go to school: The share of 25-year-olds with student debt rose from 27 percent in 2004 to about 45 percent in 2013. And the average debt per borrower has increased from about $15,000 in 2004 to $27,000 in 2014.27 Some students do not have the financial wherewithal to start or to complete their degrees. A third factor affecting enrollment and completion rates is that some people may have a personal preference to enter the workforce after high school rather than to go to college. The proportion of 25- year-olds with college degrees has moved up from 25 to 30 percent over the past 15 years, but that means the U.S. is now ranked twelfth among developed nations. 28 The choice to enter the workforce might really reflect a person’s view that he or she is unprepared to succeed in college or that the return to a college education does not justify the tuition expense or the burden of student loan debt. In other words, while, on average, the return to investing in education is positive, for some individuals it is not, especially if they have to take on high levels of debt. New Technologies What about technological change? There is no doubt that technical innovations such as the steam engine, railroads, electricity, and the automobile led to higher productivity growth, economic growth and, living standards. Those pessimistic about the future don’t expect to get the same type of productivity gains from today’s innovations such as robotics, artificial intelligence, and computers, and believe that technological advances have been slowing since the 1970s. 26 See Digest of Education Statistics, table 330.10, for enrollment rates (https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d13/tables/dt13_330.10.asp). For further discussion, see Loretta J. Mester, “Community Development and Human Capital,” speech at the 2015 Policy Summit on Housing, Human Capital, and Inequality, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Philadelphia, and Richmond, Pittsburgh, PA, June 19, 2015. 27 James McAndrews, “Student Debt and Higher Education Financing: A Public Finance Perspective,” remarks at the National Association of College and University Business Officers, New York, NY, February 5, 2015. 28 Gordon (2015), p. 57. 11 Other observers note that it is very difficult to predict where future technology is going, and they are much more optimistic that the impact of computerization, nanotechnology, genome mapping, and other advances in biology has yet to be fully harnessed.29 I tend to be more in the optimistic camp in that I don’t think we should underestimate the potential for creative innovations. I am saying this as someone who remembers sitting at a computer terminal – not a laptop – typing my dissertation and having to pick up printed drafts in clear plastic bags at the mainframe window at Princeton. Each new important insight – or typo – necessitated another trip to the computer center. Now, I have unlimited ability to express new ideas – or fix typos – at any time of the day or night. The world has certainly changed. Barry Eichengreen offers a useful way to think about the effect of technological innovations on productivity and growth. He distinguishes between two dimensions of technology: the range of applicability and the range of adaptation. 30 A technology that has only a limited range of applicability won’t have a large effect on productivity and growth because it is used only in a narrow range of sectors or activities. A technology that requires a large range of adaptation of other processes in the economy will take longer to have a positive effect on productivity and growth. In fact, the initial impact of such technology could be negative. Eichengreen points to the steam engine as having had an immediate positive effect on output and productivity in textiles because its use was concentrated in that sector and disrupted few other production processes. In contrast, electricity had a broader impact but required considerably more adaptation by others in the economy, including the laying of transmission lines and the reorganization of factories, before its positive effect on productivity was felt. We are already seeing ways in which the diffusion of new technologies is affecting how work is organized. As I already discussed, technological change is a likely driver of the widening skill premium. 29 See Mokyr (2014), and Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014). 30 Eichengreen (2015). 12 Data suggest that since 2000, jobs have become “polarized,” meaning that while high-skill and low-skill occupations have seen job growth, medium-skill occupations have experienced job losses.31,32 These medium-skill jobs are more likely to be the types of jobs that involve routine, non-physical work, the kind of work that can be handled by computers. This shift in the distribution of jobs helps to explain the wider gap in wages for highly skilled vs. lower skilled workers, and the increasing return to gaining the education required to obtain those skills. Economic Policy The transition path to an economy with new technology can be a difficult one. Those with the skills to adapt to the new technology will gain, but others will lose. My optimism that the economy will be able to garner productivity gains from new technologies is dependent on having the right policies and institutions in place to ease the transition. For example, the introduction of robotics in automobile manufacturing has reduced the number and changed the type of workers needed on the plant floor to those with more advanced computer skills to manage the robots. Retraining programs can help those without the requisite skills return to the workforce. College enrollments and completion rates might be increased by programs that help prepare students to enter college – starting with early childhood education – and programs that help ensure that financial support is available to students who have the desire and qualifications to earn a college degree. Student loan programs should be designed to encourage students to choose colleges or other types of educational programs that maximize the return on the student’s investment in human capital. Moreover, the way 31 See Daron Acemoglu and David Autor, “Skills, Tasks, and Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4B, Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Amsterdam: Elsevier-North Holland, 2011, pp. 1043-1171, https://ideas.repec.org/h/eee/labchp/5-12.html. Valletta (2015) provides an accessible explanation of the polarization hypothesis. 32 See Valletta (2015) and Jaison R. Abel and Richard Deitz, “Job Polarization and Rising Inequality in the Nation and the New York-Northern New Jersey Region,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 18, 2012. 13 colleges and other training programs deliver education as well as the type of education they deliver will also likely need to change. Technology is already increasing the on-line component of educational programs, which, if done right, can make training more available. In addition, rather than being vocational programs for the current job market, colleges will need to increasingly focus on equipping students with the ability to adapt, think creatively, handle changing technologies and paradigms, and be comfortable making decisions under uncertainty. On the technology side, an individual firm might not find investment in basic R&D to be profitable, since the firm cannot fully capture the returns. Basic R&D has a public good aspect to it because its benefits can be widely applied throughout various parts of the economy. This suggests a continued and perhaps expanded role for government support of basic R&D to foster higher long-run productivity growth. Of course, at a time when funding is scarce and the needs are plentiful, any educational, training, or R&D program receiving either public or private funding should be subject to rigorous evaluation of its effectiveness to ensure that the social return justifies the expense. Monetary Policy The astute listener will notice that I haven’t talked about monetary policy. That’s because for the most part monetary policy cannot affect the long-run growth rate of the economy. However, it can contribute to the economy’s ability to reach that potential by promoting price stability. Price stability allows markets to work more effectively at allocating resources; it allows households and businesses to focus on productive activities rather than on ways to protect the purchasing power of their money and to make long-term plans and commitments without having to deal with uncertainty about the value of their money. While monetary policy cannot affect the economy’s long-run growth rate, it does need to consider it. The economy’s long-run equilibrium real rate of interest, that is, the level of the policy rate that is consistent 14 with stable prices and maximum employment in the long run, is determined by the long-run rate of the growth of consumption and, therefore, output. A reassessment of the economy’s longer-run equilibrium rate may tell us something about the neutral fed funds rate toward which monetary policy normalization is headed over the longer run, but we need to be cautious about its implications for short-run policy. First, as we’ve discussed, estimates of productivity growth and long-run growth are imprecise and subject to revision. This means there is considerable uncertainty around the neutral fed funds rate as well. And research has shown that over-reliance on mismeasured objects such as output gaps, unemployment gaps, or equilibrium real rates can lead to poor policy decisions that induce undesirable fluctuations in the economy.33 Second, if the neutral fed funds rate is lower than we’ve thought it to be, then that might suggest that the current funds rate is less accommodative than we thought. But, all else equal, it also means that there is less of a gap between current growth and potential growth, so a less accommodative stance would be appropriate. Of course, all else might not be equal; a reassessment of long-run growth might also be met by changes in current spending, which would need to be taken into account. Finally, the implications of any reassessment of the long-run growth rate for current policy need to be put into context both in terms of the size of the reassessment and the difference between the current policy rate and the long-run neutral rate. I recently revised down my assessment of the longer-run nominal fed funds rate to 3.5 percent from 3.75 percent, consistent with my revision of longer-run output growth. Of 33 Athanasios Orphanides has done substantial work in documenting this. See, for example, Athanasios Orphanides and Simon van Norden, “The Reliability of Inflation Forecasts Based on Output Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 37, 2005, pp. 583-601, https://ideas.repec.org/a/mcb/jmoncb/v37y2005i3p583-601.html Athanasios Orphanides and John C. Williams, “Robust Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2007, pp. 1406-1435, https://ideas.repec.org/a/eee/moneco/v54y2007i5p1406-1435.html, and Athanasios Orphanides and John C. Williams, “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 2002, pp. 63-145, http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Projects/BPEA/Fall-2002/2002b_bpea_orphanides.PDF. 15 course, given the error bands around long-run estimates, I admit this is not a statistically significant change. The revision means I expect the neutral fed funds rate to be somewhat lower than it’s been in earlier periods. However, the current funds rate is still well below that rate. Based on my current assessment of the outlook and the risks around the outlook, I believe the economy can handle an increase in the fed funds rate and that it is appropriate for monetary policy to take a step back from the emergency measure of zero interest rates. A small increase in interest rates from zero is not tight monetary policy. Indeed, I anticipate that beyond liftoff, economic developments will likely mean it will be appropriate for monetary policy to remain very accommodative for some time to come, supporting continued expansion and providing some insurance against downside risks, with rates expected to move up only gradually to more normal levels and with the decisions about that path dependent on incoming information on the economy’s performance and risks to that performance. Given the outlook, delaying the start of liftoff for too long risks having to move rates up more aggressively later on, but I see benefits of our being able to take the gradual path. One benefit of the gradual approach is precisely what we have been discussing today: it will allow us to recalibrate policy over time as some of the uncertainties surrounding the underlying economy in the post- crisis world, like the longer-run economic growth rate, are resolved.

Perspectives on the Economy and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The City Club of Cleveland Cleveland, OH November 13, 2015 1 Introduction Chris, thank you for that kind introduction and for your service as chair of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s Board of Directors. And thanks to the City Club for the opportunity to speak today to so many of Cleveland’s business leaders. Since coming to Cleveland last year, I have made it a point to learn more about the city’s many important institutions, and the City Club of Cleveland is certainly a leader among them. It is an honor for me to be included in your list of very distinguished speakers. For more than 100 years, the City Club has fostered the free and open exchange of ideas. It sees value in bringing together people with diverse viewpoints for a civil discussion of a wide variety of topics. The City Club’s commitment to free speech in promoting a well-informed community is praiseworthy public service. Although it might not be apparent, the City Club and the Federal Reserve have several things in common. Like the City Club, the Federal Reserve System is over 100 years old, and it, too, is committed to public service. At meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee, the body within the Fed that is charged with setting monetary policy, my colleagues and I engage in a free and open exchange of views. In our case, the topics covered aren’t as wide ranging as those discussed at the City Club; we focus on the economy and monetary policy. By design, the discussions at our meetings contain a mosaic of economic information and analysis from all parts of the country. I believe this ability to share what are sometimes diverse views on the state of the economy and policy is one of the strengths of the Federal Reserve System. It allows us to work toward a better-informed consensus on monetary policy to promote the Fed’s congressionally mandated goals of price stability and maximum employment. Like the City Club, the Fed sees value in a well-informed public, and we feel an obligation to explain our policy decisions so that the public and its elected representatives can hold us accountable for those decisions. So today, before we move on to the question and answer portion of the program, which is a highlight of any speaking engagement at the City Club, I would like to offer my perspectives on the 2 economy and monetary policy. As I just mentioned, while the Committee comes to a consensus policy decision, there can be a diversity of views around the FOMC table, so I want to note that the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook It may not come as news to you that at its October meeting, the FOMC decided to maintain the target for our policy rate – the federal funds rate – at essentially zero. The Committee reached this decision based on an assessment of both realized and expected progress toward our objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation. To make such an assessment, the Committee looks at a wide range of economic information – the official economic statistical releases and financial market indicators, as well as the information I and other FOMC participants garner by speaking with business contacts in our regions, including members of our Boards of Directors and advisory groups. When the FOMC says its decisions are “data-dependent,” this is really shorthand for this more comprehensive process of parsing economic and financial information, and assessing what it implies about the current state of the economy, the economic outlook, and the risks around that outlook. The FOMC will be doing this same type of analysis at our next meeting in mid-December. We will be looking at all the incoming information between now and then to see if it supports the FOMC’s expectation that the economy will continue to grow at a pace sufficient to generate some further improvement in labor markets and a gradual return of inflation to our target of 2 percent over the medium run. Growth There is no denying that the U.S. economy has come a long way since the darkest days of the global financial crisis and the Great Recession, which officially ended more than six years ago. Supported by extraordinary monetary policy action, economic fundamentals have strengthened, and in the face of 3 various shocks, the economy has been resilient enough to sustain a moderate pace of growth over the past six years. Of course, over this expansion, the pattern of growth has not been smooth. It has varied over time and over sectors, and 2015 was no exception. We began this year with a slowdown in output growth to less than 1 percent at an annual rate. The slowdown mainly reflected temporary factors, including severe winter weather and labor disputes at West Coast ports. As those temporary factors abated, we saw growth rebound sharply to almost 4 percent in the second quarter, only to fall back to 1.5 percent in the third quarter. That slowdown largely reflected a sharp pullback in the rate at which firms were adding to their inventories from an unsustainably strong pace in the first half of the year. A better gauge of growth in demand is final sales adjusted for inflation. These grew at a solid 3.0 percent in the third quarter, suggesting that the economy still has solid underlying momentum. The driver of growth this year has been consumer spending, which makes up about two-thirds of output. And when I say “driver,” you can take that literally. Consumers have been purchasing vehicles, especially light trucks, in very high volumes, higher than before the recession. Consumer spending on other durable goods and services has also been growing at a solid pace. Growth in personal income and continued improvement in household balance sheets have supported this spending. At a national level, house prices have recovered to levels seen before the crisis, adding to the wealth of homeowners, and we’ve seen a gradual pickup in housing activity, including sales and construction. Fewer households are underwater on their mortgages and mortgage delinquencies are down. Although stock prices are little changed, on net, so far this year, the cumulative increase in stock prices since the crisis is significant. Households lost $13 trillion in net worth over the Great Recession, but now thanks to the cumulative increase in stock and house prices, households have recovered that loss and have added another $18 trillion in net worth to their balance sheets. 4 Lower energy prices have also boosted household purchasing power. Oil prices are down about $40 per barrel from a year ago and gasoline is currently running about $2.30 per gallon, 80 cents lower than a year ago. The U.S. Energy Information Administration estimates that the drop in gasoline prices this year has saved the average household about $700, and it is projecting that expenditures on home heating oil will be 25 percent lower this winter than last. While, on net, lower oil prices will be a positive for U.S. economic growth over the medium run, in the near term, the drop in oil prices has been a drag on investment in the domestic energy sector and its suppliers. This is affecting growth in certain regions of the country, including parts of eastern Ohio. Investment in drilling and mining equipment is likely to continue to decline for a few more quarters, but outside of energy-related sectors, business investment in equipment and intellectual property continues to grow moderately. Manufacturing, aside from motor vehicles, has been one of the soft spots in the economy. Lower oil prices have led to a pullback in manufacturing related to the energy sector. The appreciation in the value of the U.S. dollar over the past year has also weighed on firms with international exposure. Dollar appreciation reflects the expectation that economic growth in the U.S. will continue to be stronger than growth abroad. A stronger dollar means better terms of trade for U.S. consumers and businesses, which is a positive for a growing economy in the longer run. But in the near term, slower growth in our trading partners and the dollar appreciation are drags on U.S. export growth, and I expect net exports to be a negative influence on real GDP growth for somewhat longer. The good news is that recent changes in the value of the dollar and oil prices haven’t been as sharp, so I expect both drags to lessen over time and to be outweighed by growth in other sectors, including consumer spending and housing. You may recall that in August there was an episode of significant volatility in financial markets and a tightening in credit conditions: stock prices fell and credit spreads rose. These financial market 5 developments appeared to have been touched off by concerns about the prospects for growth in China and other emerging market economies. Since then, volatility has subsided and equity markets have stabilized. As the FOMC indicated in its October statement, some of the downside risks related to global economic and financial developments have diminished. But the possibility of a sharper-than-anticipated decline in global growth remains a risk to the outlook, and we will continue to monitor for signs of spillovers to the U.S. economy. One question is whether the softening we saw in U.S. growth in the third quarter is signaling a more persistent slowdown in momentum that changes the medium-run outlook, which is the relevant time horizon for monetary policy. My answer is no. The resiliency of the economy through the episode in August, as well as the strength in final sales in the third quarter, suggests to me that there continues to be positive economic momentum. I anticipate that after the weak third quarter, growth will pick up over the rest of this year and next, to an above-trend pace in the 2.5 to 2.75 percent range. I recently revised down my estimate of longer-run growth to 2.25 percent, a quarter of a percentage point lower than my previous estimate. My revision reflects the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ recent downward revisions to past productivity growth. Many factors, including trend labor force participation, structural productivity growth, and technological innovation, affect the nation’s longer-run growth potential, and there is considerable uncertainty around estimates of potential growth. In fact, it is noteworthy that economists have been revising down their estimates of potential growth almost every year since the Great Recession started. For example, in 2008, the Congressional Budget Office estimated that potential growth between 2008 and 2013 would average 2.5 percent, well above its current estimate of 1.5 percent for that same time period. Similarly, over time, FOMC participants have lowered their projections for longer-run growth. The FOMC began releasing these longer-run projections in January 2009. At that time, the central tendency of the participants’ 6 projections of longer-run GDP growth was 2.5 to 2.7 percent. In the projections released in September, the central tendency was down to 1.8 to 2.2 percent. The implication is that even though the economy has been growing at a relatively moderate pace over the expansion, that pace has been sufficient to generate significant cumulative improvements in the labor market. Labor Markets It is good to remember how far we have come. Over the past six years, the unemployment rate has been halved, falling from a high of 10 percent in October 2009 to 5.0 percent this October. It’s down over half of a percentage point since the end of last year. Nonfarm payrolls are now more than 4 million above their previous peak before the Great Recession. More than 2 million jobs have been added this year, and these have been full-time jobs. Last Friday, we learned that following softer gains in August and September, firms added a very robust 271,000 jobs in October. So far this year, payroll gains have averaged a little more than 200,000 jobs per month. As we often say, we shouldn’t read too much into one month’s number given the month-to-month variation in these readings and the fact that there are still revisions to come. That was true of the softer numbers in August and September, but it’s just as true of the outsized gain in October, which I doubt will be repeated in November. It’s better to smooth through the volatility: over the past three months, firms added an average of 187,000 jobs per month. This is somewhat slower than the pace seen earlier in the year, but given the cumulative gains that have been made on the job front and the level of employment growth that is consistent with full employment over the longer run, we should be expecting payroll job growth to slow. Economists currently estimate that monthly payroll growth in the 75,000 to 120,000 range would be enough to keep the unemployment rate constant. This is lower than in the past because labor force participation rates have been trending down with the aging of the population and the increase in college 7 enrollments. But notice that this means that even the softer average monthly gain of 145,000 in August and September is enough to put downward pressure on the unemployment rate. A broad array of other labor market indicators have improved significantly over the past few years, although they are not quite back to pre-recession levels. These measures include the long-term unemployment rate, as well as the unemployment rate that includes discouraged workers and part-time workers who would rather work full-time. Despite the improvement in labor markets, so far we have not seen broad-based acceleration in wages. But signs point to firming. Average hourly earnings growth strengthened in October. We have heard from business contacts in our region that it is becoming increasingly difficult to find qualified workers in specific occupations and industries, including construction, IT, and specialized manufacturing. In fact, our construction contacts report that the primary downside risk they face is a shortage of labor, not potentially higher interest rates. There are similar indications from other parts of the country; firms report having to raise wages to attract and retain workers in these occupations. The recent contract deal at General Motors includes salary increases in the 3 to 4 percent range and higher entry-level wages. As labor markets continue to improve, I expect to see some broader acceleration in compensation. In my view, the totality of evidence suggests that the economy is at or very nearly at the Fed’s mandated monetary policy goal of maximum employment, and with growth resuming at an above-trend pace, I expect to see further improvement. This isn’t to say that there aren’t longer-term challenges facing the labor market. Workforce development is a key issue. As a country, we want to ensure that people can enter and remain productive members of the labor force, to raise our standards of living and to make us more competitive in the global economy. Monetary policy is not the tool for addressing this important issue, but the Federal Reserve, through its role in promoting community development, is certainly committed to helping identify effective policies and best practices for strengthening and increasing access to education and training. In fact, this past June, the Cleveland, Philadelphia, and Richmond Feds hosted 8 a policy summit that brought together practitioners, researchers, and policymakers working on these issues. Regional Growth and Labor Markets As I mentioned, an important role of a Federal Reserve Bank President is gathering information from Main Street to help inform monetary policy. So let me spend a few minutes on economic developments in the Fourth Federal Reserve District, which encompasses all of Ohio, western Pennsylvania, eastern Kentucky, and the northern panhandle of West Virginia. While our region is quite diverse, the path of economic expansion here has been similar to the nation’s. Regional firms with international exposure, such as the steel industry, continue to struggle. Shale gas production levels remain high but growth in drilling activity has slowed considerably. Auto and auto parts manufacturing represents a significant share of manufacturing in Ohio and Kentucky, and the strength we’ve seen in this sector has helped to offset some of the weaker manufacturing segments. Like the nation, our region has also seen considerable improvement in labor markets. In Ohio, the unemployment rate has fallen sharply from a peak of 11 percent in December 2009 to 4.5 percent in September, below the national average. Firms have been adding jobs, but at a slower pace than in the nation. Over the past year, the pace of job growth in Ohio has been only half that of the U.S. as a whole. And while U.S. employment is now 3 percent above its pre-recession peak, employment in Ohio is not quite back to that benchmark. This slower job growth in the state relative to the nation is not a new phenomenon – it’s been happening since the mid-1990s. It partly reflects the slower population growth and older population in Ohio, as well as Ohio’s higher share of jobs in manufacturing, a sector that has been experiencing a long-run decline in employment. Manufacturing accounts for about 15 percent of private-sector jobs in Ohio, compared to about 10 percent in the U.S. Those shares are down about 7 percentage points since the mid-1990s. 9 As the regional economy becomes less reliant on old-style manufacturing, and more reliant on higher- skilled manufacturing and service-sector jobs in fields such as education and health care, it faces the challenge of ensuring that its population can gain the necessary skills to enter and remain productive members of the modern labor force. So workforce development is a challenge here, just as it is for the nation as a whole. Inflation In addition to maximum employment, the other part of the Fed’s dual mandate is price stability. Inflation has been below the Fed’s 2 percent goal for some time. Headline inflation has been running at about a quarter percent so far this year (as measured by the year-over-year percentage change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures). Excluding food and energy prices, which tend to be volatile, so- called core inflation has been running about 1.3 percent. Low inflation partly reflects the transitory effects of the sharp drop in energy prices, as well as the appreciation of the dollar, which makes non- petroleum imports cheaper in the U.S. Incoming data are consistent with the inflation dynamics that the FOMC has been expecting. As changes in oil prices and the value of the dollar have tempered, the downward pressure on inflation has started to wane. Recent readings on underlying inflation, including the core, trimmed mean, and median CPI measures, have moved up. For example, the year-over-year change in the Cleveland Fed’s median CPI measure rose to 2.5 percent in September. There is considerable uncertainty around any inflation forecast, but analysis by Cleveland staff and others suggests that core measures of inflation can improve forecasts of headline inflation at least over some time horizons; in some cases, the improvement is statistically significant. Inflation expectations are an important factor shaping the inflation outlook, and in my view, inflation expectations remain well-anchored. Survey-based measures of inflation expectations of both consumers 10 and professional forecasters have been stable despite the low readings of actual inflation. These survey measures have historically done well at capturing longer-run trends in inflation and they have been shown to help in forecasting inflation.1 Inflation compensation, measured by the spread between yields on Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities, so-called TIPS, has moved down a bit, but analysis suggests that this likely reflects liquidity effects and changes in inflation risk premiums more so than changes in inflation expectations. Cleveland Fed staff analysis also suggests that the fall in inflation compensation may be reflecting the sharp drop in energy prices since last year, which might reverse as movements in oil prices moderate.2 I expect inflation to remain low in the near term, but the firming in the core measures, the stability in inflation expectations, the economy’s expected return to above-trend growth, and continued improvement in labor markets are all factors making me reasonably confident that inflation will gradually return to our 2 percent goal over the medium run. Of course, my economic outlook is dependent on appropriate monetary policy, so let me turn to that now. Monetary Policy It is well accepted that monetary policy needs to be forward looking. Because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, rates will need to begin to move up from their very low level before we have fully reached our goals. The FOMC anticipates that two criteria need to be satisfied before it will be appropriate to raise the federal funds rate: some further improvement in the labor market and reasonable confidence that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. 1 See Jon Faust and Jonathan H. Wright, “Forecasting Inflation,” Handbook of Economic Forecasting, 2A, Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, eds., New York: Elsevier, pp. 3-56, and Todd E. Clark and Taeyoung Doh, “Evaluating Alternative Models of Trend Inflation,” International Journal of Forecasting, 30(3), 2014, pp. 426-448. 2 Randal Verbrugge and Amy Higgins, “Do Energy Prices Drive the Long-Term Inflation Expectations of Households?” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Trends, March 24, 2015. 11 In deciding whether these conditions have been met and whether it is appropriate to raise the target range for the fed funds rate, the FOMC has to balance a number of considerations. My colleagues and I are all committed to promoting the goals of price stability and maximum employment, but we may have different views about realized and anticipated progress toward those goals and about the potential costs and benefits to changes in policy. Given the current stage of the business and policy cycles, I find this diversity neither surprising nor troubling. In September and October, the FOMC’s consensus expectation was that labor market conditions will continue to improve and that inflation will return to target over time, but the Committee decided that it was prudent to await further evidence supporting this expectation before lifting off from zero. My own assessment is that with the economic progress we’ve made and that I expect to continue, the economy can handle an increase in the fed funds rate. In my view, if economic information continues to come in consistent with the outlook, then there will be a strong case that the conditions for liftoff have been met and it would be prudent for monetary policy to take a step back from the emergency measure of zero interest rates. A small increase in interest rates from zero is not tight monetary policy. And while I would expect some reaction in financial markets to the first move in interest rates in over six years, I wouldn’t expect financial conditions to tighten enough to affect the medium-term outlook. More important for macroeconomic performance is the expected path of policy beyond liftoff because expectations about the future path of policy can affect today’s economic decisions. Decisions about the path will depend on incoming information on the economy’s performance, but according to the FOMC’s current assessment of the economic outlook, even after the first rate increase, monetary policy is expected to remain very accommodative for some time to come, with rates expected to move up only gradually to more normal levels. 12 Of course, in the aftermath of the Great Recession there is some uncertainty about what that “normal” level of interest rates is. If the potential growth rate of the economy over the longer run has moved lower, as many economists estimate, that means the longer-run level of the fed funds rate consistent with price stability and maximum employment is also lower than it was in earlier periods. But estimates of long-run growth are imprecise and subject to revision, so this means there is considerable uncertainty around this neutral fed funds rate as well. One benefit of a gradual approach to normalization is that it will allow us to recalibrate policy over time as some of the uncertainties surrounding the longer-term level of interest rates, the economy’s potential growth rate, and the longer-run unemployment rate are resolved. But uncertainty about the longer-run destination is not an argument to delay taking the first step. In fact, in my view, given the economic outlook, starting the process to normalize interest rates will help ensure that we can, indeed, take a gradual approach. Delay risks having to move rates up more steeply in order to promote attainment of our goals over time. Another cost of postponing liftoff too long is the potential for building risks to financial stability stemming from excessive leverage or from investors taking on risks they are ill-equipped to manage in a search for yield. The FOMC continues to carefully monitor financial markets for signs of these types of emerging problems. However, we need to acknowledge that leading up to the financial crisis, some of the vulnerabilities of the financial system were not fully recognized by policymakers. Although we have made significant strides since then, there likely remain some gaps in our ability to assess the risks in every part of the financial system. The longer interest rates are maintained at zero in an economy that is getting back to normal, the higher the potential risk to financial stability. This potential cost is one that needs to be considered when determining appropriate policy. 13 I believe the extraordinary monetary policy actions taken by the FOMC in response to the financial crisis and Great Recession were effective in easing monetary and financial conditions; they kept the Great Recession from turning into another Great Depression. I’d like to ensure that these actions remain a part of the monetary policymakers’ toolkit, available for use if such an unfortunate situation arises again in the future. But, ultimately, how history judges those extraordinary actions will depend on our demonstrating that there is a way out. The time to start that demonstration is quickly approaching. In summary, the economy has made considerable progress over the expansion and my medium-run outlook is for above-trend growth, continued improvement in labor markets, and inflation gradually returning to our 2 percent target over the medium run. If incoming economic information continues to support this forecast, then in my view it will be time to take the first step in the policy normalization process. As I’m sure the learned audience at the City Club knows, Jean-Paul Sartre was a famous French philosopher and author. His play “No Exit” is a celebrated contribution to the existentialist literature; it should not be a guidebook for monetary policymakers.

U.S. Payment System Improvement and the Federal Reserve Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Clearing House Annual Conference New York, NY November 18, 2015 1 Good morning. As the central bank of the United States, the Federal Reserve has a strong interest in fostering a well-functioning payment system. In my brief time this morning, I will answer three broad questions about the collaborative initiatives being led by the Federal Reserve working with private-sector stakeholders. These initiatives are aimed at improving the U.S. payment system’s speed, efficiency, access, and security. As always, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The first question one might ask is, “Why is there a need to improve the U.S. payment system?” There has been a lot of talk of late about the need to improve the infrastructure of the U.S. Mostly this has referred to things like highways, bridges, railroads, aviation, and water treatment, all of which play an important role in fostering economic growth and development. I think we should also consider the U.S. payment system a critical part of the infrastructure of this country. A modern payment system is not a luxury. It is a necessary part of a vibrant economy. The current payment system in the U.S. is meeting the immediate need of moving payments from payer to payee. It is good to remember that the current system is supporting an $18 trillion economy. In 2012, over 120 billion non-cash, non-wire-transfer payments, valued at almost $175 trillion, were made in the U.S.1 There is a long history of payment-system innovation in this country, including the move from paper check to check imaging and electronic presentment, as well as the advent of Internet and mobile banking. Nonetheless, the payments landscape has been rapidly changing over recent years, and the U.S. payment system is at a crossroads. It is a fragmented patchwork of payment vehicles and providers, often lacking interoperability with one another or the ability to combine invoice information with a payment. The complexity of the payment system, involving incumbent providers, new entrants, and end users, 1See “Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System,” Federal Reserve System, January 26, 2015. This paper and other information on the Federal Reserve payments improvement initiative can be found on the website FedPaymentsImprovement.org. 2 makes it harder to coordinate payment innovations. Thus, even as the payment system has grown in complexity, it has not kept up with the evolving expectations and demands of end-user businesses and consumers. Nor has it kept up with developments in other countries that have taken steps to modernize their payment systems. Much of the change in the payment system landscape has been driven by the rapid evolution of technology. Higher-speed computers and mobile devices have enabled the rapid development of e- commerce, which has changed the nature of both retail and business-to-business commerce. Consumers and businesses are demanding faster payments, both domestic payments and cross-border payments. Indeed, maybe the best indication that consumers and businesses want faster payments is that they are willing to pay for speed. According to analysis commissioned by the Federal Reserve, about a third of consumers and three-quarters of businesses are willing to pay a fee for payments that offer faster availability to the payee.2 In addition to meeting customer demand, a modernized payment system could have an added societal benefit of bringing the unbanked and underbanked into the financial mainstream. It could also help low-income households, small businesses, and others who need to closely manage their finances to gain faster access to their funds. Assessing these trends, the Federal Reserve and a diverse set of industry stakeholders have come to agree that the U.S. payment system needs to evolve further and faster to support the changing nature of commerce, keep pace with the global economy, meet the changing needs of end users, and address new and ongoing threats to safety and security. An improved payment system will contribute to public confidence, economic growth, and global competitiveness. 2 See “Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System,” p. 29; and “Research on End-User Demand for Select Payment Attributes: Research Results Summary,” March 2014. 3 Given that we see a need to modernize the payment system, a second question comes to mind: “What approach is the Federal Reserve taking to facilitate the move to a faster, more efficient, ubiquitous, and secure payment system?” Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Board and Reserve Banks published a paper entitled “Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System.”3 This paper communicates our desired outcomes for the payment system and outlines the strategies and tactics that the Federal Reserve is pursuing, in collaboration with stakeholders, to help the country achieve these outcomes. As indicated in the “Strategies” paper, there was a lot of work that preceded the current initiative. In 2002 and in 2012, the Fed undertook gap and opportunity assessments of the payments environment, seeking and receiving considerable input from the public on where the payment system was lagging and where it could be improved.4 That work laid the foundation for the current initiative, which seeks to achieve five outcomes: (1) a payment system that offers a safe and faster electronic solution for making a variety of personal and business payments, which is ubiquitous and available on demand; (2) a payment system that is secure and resilient, and so one in which the public can be highly confident; (3) a payment system that is efficient and offers better value to consumers and businesses; (4) a payment system that offers a more convenient, cost-effective, and timely way to make cross-border payments; and (5) a payment system that has been improved via a collaborative process involving a broad array of payment participants. The collaborative approach the Fed is pursuing follows on from the comprehensive stakeholder engagement we undertook in 2012 to assess the payments landscape. Most of those who commented on the consultative paper that summarized the Fed’s findings strongly supported the Fed’s continuing to serve as a convener of payment-system stakeholders and as a catalyst for collaboration.5 Comprehensive improvement of the system for making payments end-to-end will require a comprehensive approach 3 See “Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System.” 4 See “Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper,” The Federal Reserve Banks, September 10, 2013; and “The Future of Retail Electronic Payments Systems: Industry Interviews and Analysis ,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Staff Study 175, December 2002. 5 See “Payment System Improvement – Public Consultation Paper.” 4 based on collaboration among and actions from a diverse set of payment stakeholders, including traditional and nontraditional payment providers, technology companies, the government, and end users. I should note that the approach the Fed is taking to support and guide these various parties to work together on strategies to improve the payment system differs somewhat from the approach taken in other countries, some of which have officially mandated changes to speed the adoption of more efficient payments. For example, the Faster Payments Service launched in the United Kingdom in 2008 was implemented by the private sector by request of the government.6 The New Payments Platform currently being built in Australia, with expected launch date in mid-2017, was an industry-based solution proposed after the Reserve Bank of Australia, that country’s central bank, undertook a strategic review of payment innovation and published strategic objectives it expected the payment system to meet.7 The Fed does not have the power to mandate a solution, nor could we implement meaningful payment improvement on our own. We recognize that many payment innovations have come from the industry. So the Fed is taking a leadership role as a catalyst to spur a private-sector solution that will align private-sector interests with those of the public. This is consistent with the Fed’s responsibility to foster a well-functioning payment system for the public benefit. We believe our collective and collaborative approach to payment-system improvement will increase the probability of successful outcomes by encouraging ubiquitous access and widespread adoption of new payment-system capabilities. Note that the Fed’s approach does not preempt or compete with other efforts already being undertaken by the industry, one of which is The Clearing House’s multiyear project to build a real-time payment system for all U.S. financial institutions.8 And it does not mean that the Fed will halt efforts to improve the efficiency of the payment services we 6 See Fumiko Hayashi, “Faster Payments in the United States: How Can Private Sector Systems Achieve Public Policy Goals?” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Research Working Paper no. 15-03, June 2015. 7 See “Strategic Review of Innovation in the Payments System: Conclusions,” Reserve Bank of Australia, June 2012; and “RBA Core Criteria for a ‘Fast Payments’ Solution,” Reserve Bank of Australia, November 2012. 8 See “The Clearing House to Undertake a Multi-Year Effort to Design and Develop a Secure, Real-Time Payment System,” The Clearing House press release, October 22, 2014; and “Innovative Real-Time Payment System for the U.S. – VocaLink,” The Clearing House press release, October 26, 2015. 5 ourselves are providing. In fact, we are acting to speed up settlements on our National Settlement Service, promoting greater use of same-day ACH capabilities, and considering other enhancements to our services that will have a positive impact in the near term. This brings me to the third and final question you may be asking yourselves: “What’s been accomplished so far on the payment system improvement initiative?” I am happy to report that since the “Strategies” paper was published earlier this year, there has been considerable progress. First, we have appointed some able leaders of the efforts. Gordon Werkema, who presented at the conference yesterday, is our Payments Strategy Director, overseeing the initiative. We have also established two task forces that will work toward proposed solutions to the goals outlined in the “Strategies” paper: One task force is focused on faster payments and the other on the security of payments. Our Faster Payments Strategy Leader, Sean Rodriguez, chairs the Faster Payments Task Force, and our Payments Security Strategy Leader, Todd Aadland, chairs the Secure Payments Task Force. These three leaders have worked tirelessly to build up wide task-force memberships representing the diverse stakeholders with an interest in the payment system. At last count, the Faster Payments Task Force has 328 members, and the Secure Payments Task Force has 180 members. I would encourage you to take a look at the breadth and depth of the current task-force memberships on our web page FedPaymentsImprovement.org. You’ll see that there are representatives of financial institutions of all sizes, payments networks, trade associations, technology companies, business end users and consumers, and a small number of government officials. You’ll also notice that members of The Clearing House, likely several people in this room, serve on each task force. These task forces have chosen steering committees and have set up a framework for ensuring that task- force decisions and work products have broad support across members; work streams are now underway. The Faster Payments Task Force has completed and gathered public comment on a draft set of criteria that will be used to assess whether proposed alternative approaches will be effective in delivering a safe and, ubiquitous faster-payments capability. These criteria fall into six categories: ubiquity, efficiency, 6 safety, speed, legal considerations, and governance. The criteria are not meant to be a set of minimum requirements. Many of the criteria may involve a tradeoff, for example, speed vs. safety. The criteria are intended to differentiate the effectiveness of solution proposals across many dimensions. The effort is on track to finalize these criteria in coming months. Work is also progressing on defining a process for encouraging the best ideas on faster payments to come forward and for assessing proposals against the effectiveness criteria. The Secure Payments Task Force has also begun its work, focusing not only on the security of the future faster payment system, but also on the security of the current payment system. It has provided input to the Faster Payments Task Force on the effectiveness criteria pertaining to security against which a faster payment solution should be assessed. These include identity management, authentication, and ways to secure sensitive information as it travels through the payment system. Regarding the current payment system, the Secure Payments Task Force is considering better methods to share and analyze fraud and cyber-threat information. Another role of the task force is advising the Fed on ways we could improve security in the payments areas in which we are already involved, including determining priorities for developing and setting payment-security standards in these areas, and identifying issues related to payment-system security and resiliency that would benefit from additional research. Work is currently underway to determine high-priority areas for which work groups will be formed in the next few months. I hope that you can see from this brief overview that in just a short period of time a lot has been accomplished. But we all recognize that there is still much more to do. The Federal Reserve is committed to facilitating these collaborative efforts with payment stakeholders on behalf of the public, because at the end of the day, the promise of a ubiquitous, faster, secure payment system is worth it.
