1 Monetary Policy in the United States: The Risks Associated With Unconventional Policies September 26, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Swedbank Economic Outlook Seminar 2013 In the years since the financial crisis began in 2007, the Federal Reserve and other central banks have taken extraordinary and often unprecedented actions, first in responding as the crisis unfolded, and later in trying to adapt policy to the economic conditions that have prevailed since. These actions have involved extraordinary central bank lending, expanding central bank balance sheets and banking system reserves, broadening the range of assets purchased, and communicating about future policy settings. While such unconventional central bank policies can at times be indispensable in responding to unconventional developments in national and global economies, there are accompanying risks that are important to bear in mind. In reviewing these tools and their related risks, it’s helpful to be clear about what constitutes conventional policy, so I’ll start there. Before I do, however, I also should be clear that the views I express are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of my Federal Reserve System colleagues. 1 Before the financial crisis, the typical central bank conducted monetary policy by controlling a short-term nominal interest rate — usually a rate charged in interbank or other wholesale money market transactions. In the U.S., as in many other countries, this control was accomplished by manipulating the supply of the central bank’s monetary liabilities. Before the crisis, a relatively stable, interest-sensitive demand for reserves by U.S. banks arose from the array of regulations surrounding the use of those balances. Legally required reserves were small, and with no interest earned on reserves, banks sought to economize on excess reserves. Against this incentive to minimize reserve holdings, banks’ demand was supported by the use of reserves in settlement of interbank obligations and by the desire to avoid costly overdrafts. 2 The Fed managed the supply of reserves through purchases and sales of U.S. Treasury securities — or repurchase transactions i n those securities — so that the overnight interest rate in the market for interbank loans of reserves hit the Federal Open Market Committee’s target. The FOMC in turn adjusted its target in response to changes in economic conditions and the 2 economic outlook so as to achieve low and stable inflation in a manner consistent with its congressional mandate (which also includes the pursuit of maximum employment and moderate long-term interest rates). Unconventional Policy In the wake of the financial crisis and the recession that followed, the Fed’s policy has deviated in a number of ways from this conventional, precrisis approach — as have the policies of many other central banks. During the period from late 2007 through 2008, as the crisis was unfolding, the Fed conducted several emergency lending operations that went beyond the scope of previous precedents.3 At first, these loans were not allowed to affect the outstanding amount of Federal Reserve monetary liabilities. This required offsetting sales of U.S. Treasury securities from the Fed’s portfolio in order to drain reserves and avoid driving the interbank interest rate below the Fed’s target. These lending operations changed the composition of the Fed’s asset portfolio without changing the Fed’s monetary liabilities, and thus constituted “credit policy,” not monetary policy.4 Such lending raises important issues related to the independence of central banks and their role in the financial system.5 I have spoken at length about these issues on other occasions, but they are not my focus today.6 As the economy weakened in the fall of 2008, the Fed drove the interbank interest rate to near zero. As a general matter, unconventional monetary policy is associated with the extended period of time since then, during which the Fed’s interest rate target has been essentially as low as it can go — in other words, at the “zero lower bound.” The ability of banks and other members of the public to hold currency constrains the ability of the central bank to enforce a nominal interest target much less than zero. But in an exceptionally weak economy, the appropriate real rate of interest may be negative. A central bank that has credibility for low and stable inflation — so that inflation expectations are reasonably well anchored — will have difficulty making the real interest rate more than a little bit negative. One possible strategy at the zero lower bound is to seek a lower real interest rate by engineering an increase in expected inflation, above the rate the central bank would otherwise target. By departing from its inflation target for a time, a central bank may be able to support economic growth by lowering the real interest rate, despite not being able to reduce the nominal interest rate below zero. Central banks operating at the zero lower bound have generally avoided this approach, and for good reason, in my view. In the United States, for example, the process of achieving credibility for low inflation was difficult and costly, taking the better part of two decades. This experience suggests that engineering medium-term variations in inflation expectations would be quite difficult to implement and would set precedents that pose longer-run risks to the central bank’s credibility. Forward Guidance Setting aside strategies aimed at changing expected inflation, the Fed and other central banks at the zero lower bound have focused their efforts on longer-term interest rates. They have tried to bolster interest-sensitive sectors by reducing long rates to lower levels. Two broad strategies have been employed to attempt to reduce long-term rates: One provides “forward guidance” to 3 affect the public’s beliefs about the future path of policy, including short-term rates, and the other relies on direct purchases of longer-term assets. The Fed has deployed a number of approaches to communicating about its intentions and expectations for the path of short-term rates in recent years. The FOMC began by including qualitative language in its policy statements characterizing the time period over which it expected exceptionally low interest rates to be appropriate: At first it was “for some time” (December 2008 and January 2009), and then “an extended period” (March 2009 through June 2011). In August 2011, the Committee sharpened its guidance by specifying the time before which an increase in the federal funds rate seemed unlikely — and then moving this date further into the future several times. Finally, in December 2012, the Committee replaced this date-based forward guidance with a threshold for the unemployment rate, saying that “the exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer- term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.” This form of forward guidance remains in place today. These communication efforts have been generally aimed at easing financial conditions by pushing back the dates at which market participants believe short-term rates are likely to rise. Such communications by the central bank, however, inevitably face a conundrum. Forward guidance is effective when it alters the public’s perception of the central bank’s pattern of behavior in response to incoming data ― in essence, the central bank’s “reaction function.” But there’s always the possibility that the public will interpret the forward guidance in terms of the future evolution of the economic conditions to which the central bank reacts. The public might reason that, under its existing pattern of behavior, the central bank expects low rates to be warranted for a longer period because they expect the economy to be weaker. In this case, forward guidance could have the paradoxical effect of reducing current economic activity, by reducing expectations about the level of future economic activity. 7 It may be difficult to craft forward guidance in a way that definitively separates these two interpretations. The FOMC’s use of numerical thresholds is in part an attempt to clarify that forward guidance about short-term interest rates is about the Committee’s reaction function, not its economic outlook. Ideally, a central bank can make clear that its communications concern its future reactions to incoming economic data. Forward guidance regarding central bank reaction patterns often takes the form of criteria for particular decisions, as in the case of the FOMC’s thresholds for raising interest rates or the conditions under which the open-ended asset purchase program will likely be wound down. Designing such conditional guidance involves trade-offs, however. Credibility requires consistency, over time, between a central bank’s statements and its actual subsequent actions. A central bank’s statements will have greater immediate effect on the public’s expectations the more they are seen as limiting the central bank’s future choices. Yet there are likely to be circumstances, ex post, in which the central bank feels constrained by past statements. Yielding to the temptation to implicitly renege by reworking decision criteria or citing unforeseen economic developments may have short-term appeal, but widely perceived discrepancies 4 between actual and foreshadowed behavior will inevitably erode the faith people place in future central bank statements. So central banks face an ex ante trade-off, as well, between the short-run value of exercising discretion and the ability to communicate effectively and credibly in the future. Asset Purchases The other unconventional method of influencing longer-term interest rates has been the purchase of long-term assets. The Fed has conducted four major rounds of asset purchases since 2009, including the so-called Maturity Extension Program in which purchases of longer-term Treasury securities were financed by the sale of shorter-term Treasury securities. The other programs were financed by creating bank reserves and involved purchases of Treasury securities, as well as securities issued by the housing-related government sponsored enterprises ― so-called “agency MBS.” Large-scale asset purchases are motivated by a desire to have an influence on longer-term interest rates, above and beyond the influence of the public’s beliefs about the path of short-term rates. That is, they are designed to act directly on the term premium — that part of a long -term rate that is not explained by expected future short rates. By reducing rates in this way, asset purchases are intended to stimulate economic activity by encouraging interest-sensitive components of spending by businesses and households. The ability of central bank asset purchases to directly lower the term premium presumes some sorts of friction in financial markets. Otherwise, any decline in rates would create an arbitrage opportunity, and markets would undo the effects of central bank purchases. One type of friction that is often invoked to motivate asset purchases is “market segmentation” — the idea that certain investors have a special attraction for holding certain assets. If, in addition, the ability of other traders to arbitrage various market segments is limited by wealth or credit constraints, then differences in risk-adjusted expected returns could emerge and persist. I don’t find this theoretical foundation for the efficacy of central bank asset purchases to be particularly compelling. In modern financial markets, many distinct market segments — for instance, Treasury securities of different maturities — are l inked by an array of derivative contracts. An investor with a pure preference for, say, a 10-year bond, should be able to closely approximate their desired stream of payments with swaps linked to other securities. The breadth and variety of such contracts make it hard to believe that the degree of segmentation is enough for asset purchases to generate significant interest rate effects. I also have found the empirical evidence on the effects of asset purchases hard to interpret. Some of the evidence, using event study analysis of the effects on long-term rates of announcements about purchase programs, is ill-suited to discerning the kind of persistent effect on rates that would be needed to influence economic decisions. During the short windows over which effects are measured, asset price movements can be dominated by transitory market liquidity effects. Other studies draw on changes in the net supply of U.S. Treasury securities of varying maturities using data from the years before the crisis, and hence before the Fed undertook a purposeful program of asset purchases. Finally, when an effect on rates is detected, it’s often difficult to 5 distinguish direct effects on term premia from effects due to changing expectations of future short rates. Beyond the interest rate effects of asset purchases, the effect on real economic activity is even harder to detect. One approach has been to combine an estimated interest rate effect with estimates from previous work on the effects of long-term interest rates on economic activity. 8 Another, more integrated approach is to use rudimentary macro models incorporating the segmented markets ideas mentioned above.9 Efforts along these lines have found relatively small macro effects of large asset purchases. On balance, my reading of the evidence suggests that the direct economic effects of the Fed’s asset purchases have been minimal. This does not mean, however, that asset purchases can have no effect when the central bank’s interest target is at its zero lower bound. Asset purchases increase reserves, after all, and thus in principle could induce rapid money growth and rising inflation pressures. Now, however, reserve balances are less than half of the liquidity buffer of the banking system, so at this point the reserve expansion has not forced inflationary adjustments in bank’s balance sheets. It’s also the case that market participants thus far do not appear to expect such inflationary consequences. In principle, one can think of asset purchases and forward guidance as distinct policy tools. But it has proven difficult to treat them as such, because announcements about asset purchases at times seem to also have had an effect on the public’s beliefs about future interest rate policy. Perhaps this should be expected. Both asset purchases and interest rate settings reflect the central bank’s reading of economic prospects. A change in one policy will inevitably be attributed to some extent to a change in the central bank’s views on economic conditions, which will in turn be informative about the likely path of the other policy instrument. An example of the difficulty in separating the two instruments could be seen earlier this year when the prospects of winding down the Fed’s asset purchase program appeared to reduce the expected time period over which interest rates were expected to remain near zero. Thus it’s unreasonable to expect communications about near-term asset programs to have no effect on interest rate expectations, unless one believes that the Fed is viewed as having no special expertise in assessing economic conditions. Exit Risks While I have doubts about whether the effects of the Fed’s asset purchases in the current environment have been large, I do believe those purchases entail some risks. In particular, I see two areas for concern. First, our current unconventional policies may make it more likely that we act too slowly when it’s time to raise rates, and may make such a delay more costly. And second, our large purchases and ongoing holdings of MBS open the door to additional political difficulties for the Fed. Even in times of conventional monetary policy, there is a risk that short-term interest rates are not adjusted appropriately, in the sense that later information reveals that rates were too low or too high in relation to the central bank’s objectives. This risk is an inevitable consequence of our imperfect information about the economy. Under normal conditions, the central bank’s credibility for its longer-term inflation objectives helps ensure that the consequences of such 6 policy misses are small, as long as they are corrected before too long. My concern is that the combination of forward guidance and a very large balance sheet has raised the likelihood of policy mistakes going forward, and also has raised the cost of such mistakes, should they occur. The forward guidance in recent FOMC statements reads, in part, that “highly accommodative . . . policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after . . . the economic recovery strengthens.” This wording can reasonably be interpreted as promising or foreshadowing a lower level of short-term interest rates than our usual policy would dictate. Of course, there is a rationale for such commitments in the work of Gauti Eggertsson, Michael Woodford and others, but that work typically does not incorporate the possibility of policy mistakes. If there is any content to the just-quoted FOMC statement, then surely it indicates a willingness to tolerate a greater risk of keeping rates too low for too long. If that outcome does occur, then the large quantity of excess reserves ― $2.2 trillion as of last week ― would allow the banking system to expand quite rapidly, compared to conventional times, when excess reserves were typically less than $2 billion. The quantity of net new deposits the banking system is capable of creating at any one time (absent Fed accommodation through reserve expansion) is limited by the quantity of excess reserves, after all, and a rapid expansion in bank lending, and thus banking system deposits, would tend to generate inflationary pressures. 10 The Fed could, of course, respond to those pressures by raising the interest rate it pays on excess reserves. What’s more, the FOMC’s forward guidance about interest rates includes inflation trip wires (or “knockouts”), and I believe that the Committee sincerely intends to prevent inflation from persistently exceeding its 2 percent target. But the uncharted nature of the territory we will be in — with very large reserve balances and forward guidance that specifies necessary but not sufficient conditions for raising rates — inevitably raises both the odds of a timing error and the potential magnitude of the consequences. The need for vigilance regarding the emergence of these risks suggests that we pay more attention to monetary and bank credit aggregates than we typically do in more conventional times. Risks to Independence In addition to expanding the size of its balance sheet, the Fed has altered the composition of its asset portfolio through substantial purchases of mortgage-backed securities. The Federal Reserve held $1.4 trillion of agency MBS and debt as of September 18, 2013, or 38 percent of total assets. Central bank purchases of unconventional securities have the capacity to generate political risks because they can be seen as altering the allocation and pricing of credit. I’ve mentioned my skepticism about the size of the price effects of asset purchases. Nonetheless, the Fed’s purchases of agency MBS are clearly intended to reduce their relative yields and lower the retail cost of housing credit. If these purchases actually succeed in lowering the cost of housing credit, then the cost of credit to other borrowers will be higher than it otherwise would have been had the central bank instead purchased only Treasury debt. When a central bank uses its independent balance sheet to choose among private sector assets, it invites special pleading from interest groups and risks entanglement in distributional politics. Similar political risks face a central bank, such as the European Central Bank, allocating investments across multiple sovereign debt issuers. 7 Political pressure to channel credit to favored sectors is not without precedent in the United States. Congress gave the Fed authority to buy the debt of U.S. agencies such as the housing government-sponsored enterprises in 1966 in response to the “credit crunch” that year that reduced flows to housing finance.11 At first, the FOMC limited its activities in agency securities to short-term repurchase agreements, but Congress pressed the Fed to conduct outright purchases, at times explicitly threatening legislation to mandate purchases and reduce the Fed’s statutory independence. In 1971, the FOMC relented and began outright purchases of the debt of the housing government-sponsored enterprises.12 (By 1981, purchases had stopped, and the Fed’s holdings ran off gradually over the 1980s and 1990s. Outright purchases of agency securities were not conducted again until early 2009.) How central banks manage the political risks associated with forays into credit policy may prove pivotal for the evolution of central banking in advanced economies. 13 A central bank’s core responsibility revolves around its liabilities ― that is, the monetary assets it uniquely supplies. Being organized as distinct, off-budget intermediaries, however, requires them to hold assets, and just what assets the central bank should hold has been something of a conundrum.14 Central bank operational independence has been critical to effective monetary policy under the fiat money standard that has prevailed in the decades since the demise of the gold standard and the Great Inflation of the 1970s. That independence has enabled central banks to generally resist pressures to provide short-term stimulus that in the past led to bad inflation dynamics. Of the risks associated with unconventional monetary policies, those associated with central bank holdings of unconventional asset classes may be the most consequential. Violating the implied truce under which central banks avoid credit policy has the capacity to perturb the delicate governance equilibrium supporting the independent conduct of monetary policy. History provides numerous examples of compromised central bank independence leading to calamitous monetary policy. Conclusion More broadly, the variety of ways in which central banks have ventured into unconventional realms has given rise to a broader set of challenges. Taken as a whole, these unconventional policy measures have elevated the public profile of central banks and spotlighted the breadth of their statutory authorities. To the extent that the public has been surprised in recent years by the degree of autonomy central banks enjoy and concerned about the efficacy or fairness of their policies, the legitimacy of existing central bank governance arrangements is bound to be called into question. This, I believe, is the most critical challenge that central banks will face in the years ahead. 1 I am grateful to John Weinberg, Alex Wolman, Andreas Hornstein, Robert Hetzel, and Huberto Ennis for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 See Huberto M. Ennis and Todd Keister, “Understanding Monetary Policy Implementation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Summer 2008, vol. 94, no. 3 pp. 235-263. 3 See http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst.htm for detailed information on the Board of Governors’ website on all of the Fed’s emergency lending facilities. 8 4 Marvin Goodfriend and Robert G. King, “Financial Deregulation, Monetary Policy, and Central Banking,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, May/June 1988, vol. 74, no. 3, pp. 3- 22. 5 Marvin Goodfriend, “Why We Need an ‘Accord’ for Federal Reserve Credit Policy: A Note,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Winter 2001, vol. 87, no. 1, pp. 23-32; and Marvin Goodfriend and Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Limited Commitment and Central Bank Lending,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Fall 1999, vol. 85, no. 4, pp. 1-27. 6 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Ending ‘Too Big to Fail’ Is Going to Be Hard Work,” Speech at Global Society of Fellows Conference, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA, April 9, 2013; and “Understanding the Interventionist Impulse of the Modern Central Bank,” Speech at Cato Institute 29th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, D.C., November 16, 2011. 7 Michael Woodford, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,” Paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 31, 2012. 8 Hess Chung, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams, “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, February 2012, vol. 44, Issue Supplement s1, pp. 47-82. 9 An example is Han Chen, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero, “The Macroeconomic Effects of Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs,” Economic Journal, November 2012, vol. 122, no. 564, pp. F289-F315. 10 Huberto M. Ennis and Alexander L. Wolman, “Excess Reserves and the New Challenges for Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief No. 10-03, March 2010. 11 When the Fed raised interest rates to counter inflation pressures, the Regulation Q ceilings on deposit interest rates became binding and resulted in sudden disintermediation of the thrift industry, which dominated mortgage finance. See Robert L. Hetzel. “The Monetary Policy of the Federal Reserve: A History,” Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008, pp. 132-136; and Raymond E. Owens and Stacey L. Schreft, “Identifying Credit Crunches,” Contemporary Economic Policy, April 1995, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 63-76. 12 Purchases subsequently expanded to include the debt of other agencies, including the Washington, D.C., transit authority. When New York City came close to default, Congress pressured the Fed for emergency loans and asked why the Fed could support Washington but not New York. See Allan H. Meltzer. “A History of the Federal Reserve,” Volume 2, Book 2, 1970-1986, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009, pp. 900, 993. 13 Marvin Goodfriend, “The Elusive Promise of Independent Central Banking,” Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies, November 2012, vol. 30, pp. 39-54. 14 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “A Look Back at the History of the Federal Reserve,” Speech at Christopher Newport University, Newport News, VA, August 29, 2013.

1 Human Capital Investment as a Major Financial Decision October 4, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Council for Economic Education’s 52nd Annual Conference Baltimore, Md. Thank you for the privilege of speaking with you today. The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, like the other 11 regional Reserve Banks around the country, has a rich financial education program for teachers and students at all levels. At first, it might not be obvious why the Federal Reserve is interested in financial education. In the news and in textbooks, the role of the Fed is to conduct monetary policy in order to fulfill our dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment. But as we’ve seen during the recovery from the Great Recession, there are significant limits to the power of monetary policy to affect the real economy. Federal Reserve policy actions cannot necessarily counteract the effects of fiscal policy uncertainty, declining productivity growth or structural changes in the labor market — all of which now appear to be playing a role to some degree. Recent events have sent us a clear message related to the employment part of our mandate. The Great Recession had a substantial impact on the labor market experiences of many Americans. But as I will spell out today, skill level made a large difference in the ability of individuals to weather the recession and its aftermath. The opportunities available to current and future cohorts of young Americans thus seem inextricably tied to the skills they acquire. As a result, there are potentially enormous payoffs to bolstering economic and financial literacy on the critical issue of young people’s investments in their own human capital. By providing people better information and enabling them to make better choices, we can have an effect on a range of personal and social outcomes, from employment and standards of living to economic mobility and inequality. Today, I’d like to talk to you about the principles that motivate the Richmond Fed’s approach to financial education and how those principles relate to what we have learned from a large body of empirical and theoretical research on human capital accumulation. They suggest that our current focus on helping students decide how to pay for college — which presumes that college is necessarily the right choice for everyone and that success is guaranteed — might be misplaced. Instead, a better focus might be educating students about both the risks and rewards of college so they can understand whether it is the right choice for them and how to enhance their prospects of success. Before I begin, I should note that these are my own opinions and not those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.1 Economic Principles of Financial Education 2 A moment ago, I referred to helping people make better choices, but I use the word “better” cautiously. Some financial education efforts, while well-intentioned, presume that consumers are prone to making financial mistakes — and, moreover, that certain decisions, such as taking out an adjustable-rate mortgage or a short-term high-interest loan, are always mistakes. From an economist’s perspective, however, it’s extremely hard for outside observers to determine when a consumer has made a mistake — although it’s easy for observers to conclude that they would have chosen differently for themselves. But choices should depend on the preferences and constraints of the consumer who is making the decision, not on the limited information and beliefs of the observer. In general, prescriptive, one-size-fits-all approaches to financial decision- making may be unproductive. For a consumer who plans to sell a home in a few years, for example, an adjustable-rate mortgage might be an advantageous option when compared to the fixed-rate loan with a higher interest rate that might be preferred by those planning to remain in their home for a longer time. Consumers would benefit, however, from high-quality information that helps them determine the best choice for their particular circumstances, particularly for major financial decisions. This is where I believe we have the greatest opportunity to make a difference. A major financial decision, in my view, has four salient characteristics. First, the consequences are significant. Attending college, for example, has large financial implications; future earnings are uncertain, and many students and parents need to take out sizeable student loans. Second, that significance is compounded by the fact that the decision is irreversible and illiquid. While you might forget the particulars of some of your classes, once you’ve paid your tuition, you can’t decide to unlearn your knowledge and exchange it for some other good. Third, a major financial decision happens infrequently. College is generally an investment that you make only once, which limits the opportunities you have to learn from experience. Finally, it’s complex. Figuring out how much to spend on college requires you to make estimates about the returns to your investment 30 years or more in the future. With these characteristics in mind, the Richmond Fed recently launched a new website, majorfinancialdecisions.org, which provides information on buying versus renting a home, planning for retirement and financing college. Each of these decisions is significant, long-lasting, infrequent and complex, so financial education is likely to be especially valuable to the consumer. 2 Today, I want to focus on the last of those decisions, or more precisely, on the even bigger question that precedes the decision about how to finance college: Is college necessarily the right investment for every student? College Is a Wise Investment During the 2010–2011 school year, the published price for a year of tuition, room and board at a four-year college averaged about $16,000 at public schools and about $33,000 at private schools. Overall, college costs have increased 35 percent in real terms since just a decade earlier. Most students pay less than the sticker price through a combination of student aid and tax benefits, but the numbers still are quite daunting. 3 The well-publicized increase in tuition rates does not appear to have deterred many people from attending: Enrollment increased 37 percent between 2000 and 2010. Only part of that increase is due to population growth; the number of 18- to 24-year-olds enrolled in college increased 34 percent during that period, compared to just 13 percent growth in that population group overall. The increase in enrollment has been accompanied by a dramatic rise in student loan debt, to almost $1 trillion, about triple the level in 2004. In part, this is because the number of borrowers has increased, as you might expect given the increase in enrollment, but the amount borrowed also has risen considerably. Between 2005 and 2012, average debt per borrower increased 56 percent, from $16,000 to $25,000. On average, this investment pays off well. The median income for a college-educated worker is $48,000, compared to $27,000 for a worker with a high school diploma. Over a lifetime, the median worker with a bachelor’s degree can expect to earn $2.3 million, based on 2009 earnings data, compared to just $1.3 million earned by the median worker with a high school diploma. 3 Workers with college degrees also fare better during economic downturns. Following the Great Recession, for example, the unemployment rate for college-educated workers peaked at 5.1 percent, compared to 11 percent for non-college-educated workers. As of August, the unemployment rate for workers with a high school diploma was more than double that of workers with a bachelor’s degree or higher — 7.6 percent compared to 3.5 percent. And even though many recent college graduates appear underemployed, they’re still earning more than their non-college-educated co-workers in the same positions.4 But Is College a Wise Investment for Everyone? The data I just described are averages, and for the average enrollee, college certainly appears to be a prudent investment. But averages, as we all know, can obscure meaningful nuances. First, earnings data are collected from students who complete college; a student who has not yet enrolled may not realize the same return on investment, perhaps because that particular student differs in some way from the average attendee. But there may well be an important difference between the premium earned by the average student and the premium earned by the marginal student. Indeed, some research suggests that as much as half of the college premium is due to “selection,” not necessarily the degree itself, meaning that students who choose to enroll in and complete college are inherently different in some way from those who do not, and those differences account for about half of the disparity in their earnings. 5 There also is wide variation in earnings across majors and occupations. For example, the median income for a worker with a bachelor’s degree in counseling psychology is $29,000, little more than the median income of a high school graduate, as opposed to $120,000 for the recipient of a degree in petroleum engineering.6 Perhaps the most crucial caveat, however, is that the returns to college depend on finishing college. There is relatively little benefit, at least in terms of earnings, for students who attend for a year or two but do not graduate. Median weekly earnings for a worker with some college but no degree are about 15 percent higher than the earnings of a high school graduate, compared to about 80 percent higher for a worker with a bachelor’s degree. 4 We are not talking about a small number of students: Government data show that only a little more than half of students who matriculate at a four-year college complete a bachelor’s degree within six years.7 The completion rates are considerably lower for African-American and Hispanic students, for students from poor families and for students who are the first members of their families to attend college. Dropping out of college is expensive: The average debt burden among all college dropouts is more than $7,000; among only those dropouts who borrowed, it’s more than $14,000. One intuitively appealing explanation for the high college dropout rate is that students and their families are credit constrained, and thus unable to continue to finance a college education. Most research, however, suggests that credit constraints are not a significant factor in the dropout decision. Part of the explanation might be the rise in the number of nontraditional students who are balancing work and family responsibilities and thus find it more challenging to complete a degree. But much of the explanation appears to lie in the fact that many of the students who enroll in college do not have an accurate assessment of their own readiness for college. Students who enroll presumably believe that the benefits of college attendance are likely to exceed the costs. But as I have discussed, the net economic gain from attending just a year or two of college appears to be quite small — which suggests that something must happen in college to students’ beliefs about their likelihood of succeeding. Survey evidence has demonstrated that this is in fact the case. 8 When asked, entering college students are highly optimistic about their grades, and they say that they intend to complete a bachelor’s degree within four years. But as they take classes and exams, they revise their assessments of their future performances, and these updated beliefs then play a large role in the dropout decision. These surveys also show that students from poor families are more likely to drop out, and drop out sooner, than students from wealthier families. Equipping Students to Make Good Education Decisions What do these facts about the high rate of college noncompletion have to do with economic education? As I mentioned at the beginning of this talk, many involved in financial education, the Richmond Fed included, have focused their efforts on informing students about the costs of state versus private school or explaining the many types of federal and private loans that are available. But I would encourage financial education practitioners to give thought to just where the provision of information can yield the greatest marginal benefit. The research I’ve touched upon here suggests that might be before the decision to attend college is made. The decision to invest in human capital is fraught with uncertainty as it is. This suggests that prospective college students would benefit from realistic appraisals of their odds of success, as well as a better appreciation of how good preparation for college can improve those odds. Many students and families also could benefit from information about options they could pursue after high school other than enrolling in a four-year college. Community colleges, for example, are a venue where students can learn more about their interests and aptitudes and practice the skills that are required for success at a four-year school, all the while preserving their option to continue onward toward a four-year degree. And for some students, pursuing a bachelor’s degree might never be their preferred path. These students would be well served by learning about other 5 post-secondary educational options that could improve their labor market outcomes relative to only completing high school or dropping out of college. For example, a growing number of high schools and community colleges are partnering with businesses to offer vocational training and apprenticeship programs that equip students with specialized training, such as skills especially useful in advanced manufacturing.9 These skills are in high demand by employers — and may be less vulnerable to automation or offshoring than many traditional white-collar jobs. In addition, the flipside of the dropout problem is the failure of relatively high-achieving students to apply to college. At first glance, these students might appear myopic or impatient, unwilling to wait for the returns on their investments; in economic terms, they would be described as having very high discount rates. But that assumes that these students have accurate information on which to base their calculations. In fact, many students, particularly low-income students, overestimate the costs of college and underestimate their opportunities for financial aid. 10 Students might also face social norms that cause them to undervalue the future payoffs or their likelihoods of success. In these cases, what looks like impatience might simply be a lack of information, as demonstrated by several recent studies. In one study, researchers found that sending targeted information to low-income, high-achieving students, at a cost of only $6 per student, increased their matriculation rates at selective colleges. 11 Another study focused on high school seniors in New Hampshire who had 10th-grade test scores similar to the scores of college enrollees but were at risk of not applying to college.12 It found that providing them with mentors and assistance with application forms and tests significantly increased women’s college enrollment, although not men’s, and that so far, these students are as likely to remain in college as other high school students in the state. This research suggests that information can play an important role in changing the beliefs of students who erroneously think that they’re not college material. Early Intervention As I have discussed, the low rate of college completion appears to stem from the fact that many students are not well prepared for college. One option for improving college completion rates and job prospects for potential dropouts is to provide them with accurate information about the costs and benefits of a variety of post-secondary education options. But it’s not enough to ask what we can do when a student is 16 or 18 or 20 years old. Instead, it’s worth asking why some students — too many s tudents — are poor ly prepared in the first place. Numerous researchers and policymakers are currently debating what reforms to our education system might have the greatest impact on student achievement. But one area where I believe we have very strong evidence for the benefits of reform is in early childhood education. There is consensus now that the foundation for academic and labor market success is laid very early in life, even in infancy. That’s because the early mastery of basic emotional, social and other noncognitive skills makes it easier to learn more complex skills throughout life. As a result, children who fall behind early on have difficulty catching up: Gaps in cognitive skills are present as early as age four and tend to persist into adulthood. But intervening early can yield large returns; many researchers have found that the return on a dollar invested in human capital is 6 highest when the investment occurs at age 3, and children who receive high-quality early education fare much better on a variety of socioeconomic measures. Research also shows, however, that poor and minority children are much less likely to have access to such early education programs and are much more likely to fall behind. Greater investment in early interventions thus could help ensure that future choices about how much to invest in a student’s human capital aren’t limited by family background, and that more people have the opportunity to achieve their potential.13 Conclusion To sum up, then, the most critical economic decisions people face over their lifetime concern investments in their human capital. Financial education has traditionally promoted college enrollment by providing prospective students with information on financing options. But success in college is by no means automatic, and the benefits of attending — but not completing — college are relatively low. I have advocated that financial educators shift toward informing students about the value of college preparedness and the value of alternatives to a traditional four-year college degree, such as community colleges and vocational and apprenticeship programs. In addition, making sure students are well aware of the magnitude of the return to successful college completion would reduce the odds of well-qualified students forgoing college attendance. And finally, I was unable to resist the opportunity to put in a plug for early childhood intervention, where research has demonstrated the value of targeted, high-quality programs. In closing, it’s useful to keep in mind the stakes involved in the quality of decision-making on human capital investments. The breathtaking gains in living standards that have been achieved over the last three centuries depended crucially on investments in physical capital. But accompanying improvements in workforce skills, broadly defined, were clearly critical as well. The accumulation of knowledge over time is also essential to the process of uncovering and deploying technological innovations that are essential to economic growth. And when we look at disparities in economic outcomes across our populace, differences in human capital accumulation loom quite large. Financial education aimed at improving the ability of students and families to make sound human capital investment decisions can help us be sure that people are prepared to make the best use of their talents and opportunities. As educators, you are on the front line in influencing and preparing our youth. So I would urge you to view your mission as absolutely essential to the continued vitality of economic growth. 1 I would like to thank Jessie Romero, Kartik Athreya, and Urvi Neelakantan for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Financial Education in the Wake of the Crisis,” Speech at the Council for Economic Education’s Annual Conference, Washington, D.C., October 8, 2009. 3 Anthony P. Carnevale, Stephen J. Rose, and Ban Cheah, “The College Payoff: Education, Occupations, Lifetime Earnings,” Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce, August 5, 2011. 4 Carnevale, Rose, and Cheah (2011). 5 Lutz Hendricks and Oksana Leukhina, “The Return to College: Selection Bias and Dropout Risk,” Manuscript, July 23, 2013. 7 6 Anthony P. Carnevale, Jeff Strohl, and Michelle Melton, “What’s It Worth? The Economic Value of College Majors,” Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce, May 24, 2011. 7 Graduation rates are calculated according to where students started as full-time, first-time students. Transfer students and students who return to college after an absence are not included. 8 See Ali K. Ozdagli and Nicholas Trachter, “On the Distribution of College Dropouts: Household Wealth and Uninsurable Idiosyncratic Risk,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper no. 11-8, July 19, 2011; and Todd Stinebrickner and Ralph Stinebrickner, “Learning about Academic Ability and the College Dropout Decision,” Journal of Labor Economics, October 2012, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 707-748. 9 Betty Joyce Nash, “Journey to Work,” Region Focus, Fourth Quarter 2012, pp. 17-19, 38. 10 Laura J. Horn, Xianglei Chen, and Chris Chapman, “Getting Ready to Pay for College: What Students and Their Parents Know about the Cost of College Tuition and What They Are Doing to Find Out,” National Center for Education Statistics Report no. 2003-30, September 30, 2003; and Eric Grodsky and Melanie T. Jones, “Real and Imagined Barriers to College Entry: Perceptions of Cost,” Social Science Research, June 2007, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 745-766. 11 Caroline M. Hoxby and Sarah Turner, “Informing Students about Their College Options: A Proposal for Broadening the Expanding College Opportunities Project,” Hamilton Project Discussion Paper, June 2013. 12 Scott E. Carrell and Bruce Sacerdote, “Late Interventions Matter Too: The Case of College Coaching New Hampshire,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 19031, May 2013. 13 Kartik Athreya and Jessie Romero, “Land of Opportunity? Economic Mobility in the United States,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 2012 Annual Report, pp. 4-23.

Toward Orderly Resolution October 18, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Federal Reserve 2013 Resolution Conference Washington, D.C. Welcome to the Federal Reserve 2013 Resolution Conference. This gathering is sponsored jointly by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. Our objective is to stimulate constructive dialogue among knowledgeable professionals and the practitioners involved in constructing and assessing resolution plans. This is a critically important element of our collective response to the financial crisis. Title I of the Dodd-Frank Act requires that certain large U.S. financial institutions submit resolution plans to the Federal Reserve and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. As most of you know, a resolution plan describes a firm’s strategy for liquidation or reorganization under the U.S. bankruptcy code, without extraordinary government assistance, in the event of material financial distress or failure. The heart of the plan is the specification of the actions the firm would take to facilitate rapid and orderly resolution and prevent adverse effects of failure, including the firm’s strategy for maintaining the operations of and funding for its critical operations and material entities. Separate from Title I, Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act provides for the FDIC to take a firm into receivership if there is a determination that, among other things, the firm’s failure under the U.S. bankruptcy code would have serious adverse effects on “financial stability.” One difference between Title II and the bankruptcy code is that Title II gives the FDIC the ability to borrow funds from the U.S. Treasury to make payments to creditors of the failed firm or to guarantee the liabilities of the failed firm. 1 The funds are to be repaid from recoveries on the assets of the failed firm or from assessments against the largest, most complex financial companies. Clearly, the Dodd-Frank Act envisions bankruptcy without government support as the first and most preferable option in the case of a failing financial institution, and for good reason, in my opinion. If Title I resolution comes to be expected as the norm, the incentives of market participants will be much better aligned with our public policy goal of a financial system that effectively allocates capital and risks. Large financial firms will prefer to be less leveraged and less reliant on short-term funding. Institutions and markets would, accordingly, be more resilient in response to financial stress. Policymakers could then credibly commit to avoiding rescues, which would reinforce appropriate incentives. In short, robust Title I resolution planning is a strong complement to the array of ongoing enhancements to prudential supervision that are aimed at reducing the likelihood of failure. A critical success factor for resolution plans is that, in the event of financial distress, policymakers will view them as making bankruptcy preferable to alternative approaches, such as Title II, in which government funding protects some creditors, the prospect of which blunts incentives. Title I stipulates that the Federal Reserve and the FDIC can jointly determine that a plan is “not credible,” meaning that it would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the bankruptcy code. In this case, the firm would be required to submit a revised plan to address identified deficiencies, including altering business operations or corporate structure. If the Fed and the FDIC jointly determine that the revised plan does not remedy identified deficiencies, they can mandate tighter capital, leverage or liquidity requirements, or restrict the growth, activities or operations of the firm. In essence, regulators can order changes in the structure and operations of a firm to make it resolvable in bankruptcy without government assistance. A veritable army of professionals has been devoting considerable time and effort to crafting and evaluating Title I resolution plans. Many of you have enlisted in this army, although some of you may have been drafted. The initial wave of firms has provided two rounds of submissions already. Another wave of firms submitted plans midyear, and a third wave is slated to submit plans at year-end. Substantial work remains to be done, however, and substantial issues remain to be sorted out before regulators and policymakers can convince market participants of the credibility of these plans. Ensuring that the relevant portion of the financial sector is covered by robust and credible resolution plans can seem like a daunting task. The critical feature to keep in mind, however, is that resolution planning in some sense reverses the usual bankruptcy planning exercise. Instead of asking how to take a given financial institution through bankruptcy, Title I asks us to work backward from bankruptcy resolution and determine what the institution needs to look like in order for that bankruptcy to be orderly. It invites us to not take any aspect of the structure and financing of a large financial institution as fixed. This perspective casts a new light on financial firm characteristics ― such as short-term funding strategies ― that might appear to pose impediments to orderly resolution without government support. Credibility may require altering the funding profile of the firm so that debtor-in- possession financing needs in bankruptcy are manageable without public sector funds. Resolution planning will require a great deal of hard work. But I see no other way to ensure that policymakers have confidence in unassisted bankruptcy and that investors are convinced that unassisted bankruptcy is the norm, both of which strike me as necessary to solving the “too big to fail” problem. Resolution planning provides a framework for identifying the actions we need to take now to ensure that the next financial crisis is handled appropriately, in a way that is fair to taxpayers and establishes the right incentives. While I expect we will hear diverse perspectives today on many key issues, I am sure we all share that goal. To that end, I am very much looking forward to our discussions today. 1 For a comparison of the Orderly Liquidation Authority provisions with the U.S. bankruptcy process, see Sabrina R. Pellerin and John R. Walter, “Orderly Liquidation Authority as an Alternative to Bankruptcy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, First Quarter 2012, vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 1-31.

1 Global Interdependence and Central Banking November 1, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Global Interdependence Center Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Thank you very much. Because of my deep respect for the ideals and mission of the Global Interdependence Center, I am honored and humbled to receive the Global Citizen Award. Like virtually all economists, the considerable benefits of the open international exchange of goods, services, ideas and people are to me self-evident. So the mission of the GIC ― “to improve cooperation and understanding among nations, with the goal of reducing international conflicts and improving worldwide living standards” ― is one that I support with enthusiasm. I have my own historic link to the GIC as well. From 1977 to 1979, and then again in 1980, I worked at Wharton Econometric Forecasting Associates ― better known as “WEFA” ― under Professor Lawrence Klein, who passed away just a fortnight ago. Professor Klein, besides being a Nobel laureate and an econometric pioneer, was an early GIC leader and most recently its vice chair emeritus. I knew him as a dedicated researcher with an utterly amazing command of macroeconomic facts. I recall seeing him walk to a podium with a small scrap of paper on which he had jotted three or four numbers from that day’s statistical releases and talk authoritatively for an hour straight about the economic outlook for each of the major industrial countries. But I also knew him as a soft-spoken and humble man. For example, when I knew him at WEFA he drove a Dodge Dart. There is a deeper connection as well, though, which I would like to explore with you today. Global interdependence is essential to understanding the institution at which I have made my career, the Federal Reserve. When the Federal Reserve Act was signed, 100 years ago this December 23, the continued operation of the classical gold standard was presumed, and our institution was designed around the need to sustain it. Less well-known is the extent to which competition for the business of international trade finance played a role in the passage of the Federal Reserve Act and some of the most noteworthy institutional features of the Fed as well. And during pivotal episodes in the history of the Fed, international monetary considerations played a decisive role in shaping decisions and events. More recently, the U.S. financial crisis of 2007–08 and the events leading up to it cannot be understood completely without an appreciation of financial institutions and economic policy abroad. So I think it’s fair to say that one can’t tell the full story of the Federal Reserve without an international perspective. I also can’t tell the story without the usual Fed disclaimer, namely, that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. 2 The Gold Standard The international dimensions of central banking have long been recognized by specialists, but they get less attention in popular media coverage than they deserve. At the founding of the Fed, the international considerations were two-fold. 1 First was the fact that when the Fed was founded, the U.S. adhered to the gold standard. The governments of participating countries stood ready to convert their (paper) currency into gold at a fixed rate. Under this system, the long-run stability of the purchasing power of money would be assured as long as the U.S. and other countries adhered to the “rules of the game.” These rules required that countries allow gold flows arising out of balance of payments gaps to have the appropriate equilibrating effects on domestic economic conditions. The Fed was envisioned as operating within and facilitating adherence to the gold standard. While price stability was an important goal of the founders of the Fed, one to which they expected the Fed to contribute, their focus in founding the Fed was something else entirely. It was to solve “the currency problem.” This is an unfamiliar term to modern ears, so it deserves a bit of explanation. Before the founding of the Fed, paper currency was supplied by national banks, but was subject to a collateral requirement that dated back to the Civil War; banks’ note issues had to be backed by holdings of U.S. government bonds. The aggregate supply of notes was widely described as “inelastic,” because expanding a bank’s note issue was often costly and cumbersome. At times, the public demand for notes rose as the public sought to convert bank deposits into paper currency or gold. This typically occurred during the autumn harvest season and the holiday shopping season, as well as during so-called banking panics, when bank customers sought to pull deposits out of banks. The inelasticity of the physical supply of bank notes meant that other adjustments had to take place instead. Interest rates tended to be higher in the fall and winter, for example, and tended to spike during panics when the banking system scrambled for currency. Significant inflows of gold from abroad occurred at such times as well. Imperfections in the U.S. banking system caused domestic money demand shocks to be transmitted throughout international financial markets. Another adaptation to the regulatory constraints on note supply was payment suspensions. Banks would at times prevent depositors from withdrawing their entire account. At times, all the banks in a clearinghouse would suspend withdrawals but allow transfers between clearinghouse banks. Suspensions were a disruptive and dysfunctional feature of the pre-Fed banking system. Thus the preamble of the Federal Reserve Act lists as one of its purposes “to furnish an elastic currency.” The ultimate objective can be thought of as keeping the defective legislative framework around U.S. banking from damaging domestic and international markets. International Considerations at the Founding of the Fed There were broader international considerations at work in the founding of the Fed than simply the operation of the gold standard, however. Following the Panic of 1907, an influential group of New York bankers was instrumental in the campaign for the creation of a central bank in the 3 U.S.2 This group included Benjamin Strong, an associate of J.P. Morgan and later the first head of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and Paul Warburg, the German-born financier at Kuhn Loeb. They broadly shared an “internationalist” view that America had emerged as a world power and should play an expanded international diplomatic and economic role.3 Creating a central bank was integral to promoting the U.S. role in the world economy. Europe, for this group, provided the natural institutional models for a central bank. Many of these bankers were very familiar with the central banks of Europe, particularly Warburg, whose family was active in finance there. In a number of European countries, the central bank issued their own notes and accepted deposits from banks, which enabled them to rapidly expand or contract the supply of notes in response to fluctuations in demand. Liabilities were at least partly backed by holdings of gold, either in the form of coins or bullion. The Federal Reserve Act included a 40 percent gold cover requirement so that the Reserve Banks’ money supply would tend to expand or contract with the movement of gold into and out of the country, as required by the rules of the gold standard. While these New York bankers were eager to solve the “currency problem,” a second critical motivation for the founding of the Fed was a desire for New York to supplant London as a center of trade finance. One provision of the Act allowed national banks for the first time to issue “bankers’ acceptances” ― a type of commercial paper (three- to six-months maturity) that arose out of the financing of international trade flows. Typically these were the short-term obligations of an importer that were endorsed by the importer’s bank. The bank could then “discount” or sell the obligation to third parties. Prior to the Federal Reserve Act, banks in the U.S. generally were not allowed to endorse such obligations, so markets in such instruments were virtually nonexistent. Importers in the U.S. typically issued such bills through a European bank, even when the import was from Latin America and did not involve Europe. 4 Creating a New York market in bankers’ acceptances helped promote U.S. trade with the rest of the world, and bring a lucrative business to the New York banks. European central banks at the time, such as the Bank of England, bought or lent against such instruments, a process called “rediscounting.” That provided a backstop of support that was thought essential to the liquidity of a market for acceptances. Indeed, according to Warburg: “The central bank system and the discount system cannot be separated; they are absolutely interdependent.”5 Another purpose of the Federal Reserve Act, therefore, was “to afford means of rediscounting commercial paper.” The Reserve Banks were authorized to rediscount a variety of commercial paper, as long as it wasn’t backed by stocks or bonds. They were also authorized to make outright purchases of bankers’ acceptances. World War I did a great deal to reorder the international financial system. But among those changes was a significant shift in the bankers’ acceptance market to New York City. By the 1920s, thanks in part to the active encouragement and support of the New York Fed under Strong, the New York acceptance market had grown significantly. 4 Critical Episodes in Fed History The demise of the gold standard played a pivotal role at the beginning of the Great Depression, arguably the most critical episode in the Fed’s history. Strong had passed away, and without him, policymakers struggled with conflicting signals from domestic stabilization needs and gold standard precepts, which impeded interest rate reductions that might have stemmed the fall in the money supply and the catastrophic deflation that raised real rates.6 Barry Eichengreen, a leading scholar of the interwar international monetary arrangements, argues that the gold standard broke down because its success required credibility and cooperation, both of which were in short supply as the 1920s wore on, because of domestic political developments.7 Countries left the gold standard in succession as they found its defense intolerably costly. The result was misdirected Fed policy that contributed to declines of nearly 30 percent in the money supply and the overall price level from 1929 to 1933. This resulted in a broad shock to borrowers’ ability to repay, which weakened many banks and led depositors to withdraw their funds. The resulting runs led to waves of bank failures, which further exacerbated the contraction. While current research suggests that other aspects of government policy also may have played significant roles in the depth and length of the Great Depression, monetary instability was clearly consequential and clearly the fault of the Federal Reserve. As a Fed governor in 2002, current Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke famously acknowledged and apologized for the Fed’s role in the Great Depression. 8 International considerations also played a role in what is arguably the second most critical episode in the Fed’s history: the Great Inflation that occurred from the late 1960s through the early 1980s. International monetary arrangements were reconstructed at the end of World War II under the Bretton Woods gold-exchange system. Currency values were fixed relative to gold, but with intermittent discretionary changes in parities. Tension again arose between domestic adjustment and defending a given parity. Political pressures on the Federal Reserve in the late 1960s and early 1970s impeded actions that would have prevented the rise in inflation. 9 Rather than make the requisite adjustments in the exchange value of the dollar, in 1971, the Nixon administration simply abandoned convertibility of the dollar into gold. Bretton Woods collapsed soon thereafter. Central banks around the globe were forced to adapt to a world of fiat monies, in which price stability rests ultimately on the credibility of government commitments to keeping inflation low. Tough actions were required to bring inflation back under control, but important lessons were learned. In particular, a measure of central bank independence proved invaluable in the fight against inflation. Institutional arrangements that helped insulate the central bank’s setting of the policy rate from partisan electoral pressures while clarifying accountability for macroeconomic performance, allowed the central bank to focus on longer-run objectives. 5 The Recent Crisis The recent crisis has given rise to serious questions about central bank independence, however. What’s important for stabilizing inflation is the central bank’s ability to independently control its monetary liabilities. But that independence comes with discretion over the central bank’s asset portfolio as well. Unless prevented by legal restrictions, the central bank’s balance sheet can be used to fund lending interventions. Such intervention constitutes fiscal policy, in the sense that, holding the central bank’s liabilities constant, funding comes from the sale of securities, such as government debt, to the public. To the extent that lending operations are viewed as rescuing the creditors of large financial institutions, the central bank risks becoming embroiled in distributional political disputes. And to the extent that expectations of such rescue operations distort incentives and encourage fragile financing arrangements, the central bank can be accused of having contributed to the “too big to fail” problem. The dilemma posed by a central bank’s asset portfolio plays out differently in different settings. The European Central Bank, for example, can face the politically awkward situation of having to weigh in on the relative value of the sovereign debt of different euro member states. International considerations were critical in the crisis of 2007–08. The first special lending program introduced by the Federal Reserve ― the Term Auction Facility ― was dominated by foreign financial institutions. The TAF, introduced in December 2007, auctioned term credit from the Reserve Banks’ discount windows. Foreign institutions held large dollar-denominated positions in illiquid assets, such as mortgage-backed securities, that they had trouble funding. Banks in the U.S. had access to borrowing from the Federal Home Loan Banks and made major use of that source of funds when credit risk premiums rose in the third quarter of 2007. More broadly, the subprime mortgage risk that was at the heart of the crisis was held disproportionately by foreign investors and foreign financial institutions, along with Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the U.S. housing intermediaries. The foreign financial institutions involved were arguably affected by the incentive distortions that accompany perceived public sector support. Incompletely contained moral hazard in one country can infect and distort financial markets around the globe. For some time, central banks have been heavily involved in the international negotiations aimed at leveling the regulatory playing field across countries. Post- crisis efforts to construct more robust and sustainable financial regulatory regimes have been mediated through several international forums that bring together central banks as well as the relevant national regulators. Finding a balanced approach to financial stability will be challenging. Conclusion This has been a brief “helicopter tour” of a century of U.S. central banking, one that’s covered too much territory to be able to examine any of the terrain in depth. I’ve tried to highlight the ways in which international considerations were not just another part of the story, but were integral to the entire narrative. I hope it illustrates the ways in which awareness of global interdependence is essential for understanding the 100 year history of the Federal Reserve. 6 1 For a companion account focusing on the reasons behind the founding of the Fed, see Jeffrey M. Lacker, “A Look Back at the History of the Federal Reserve,” Speech at Christopher Newport University, Newport News, VA, August 29, 2013. 2 See J. Lawrence Broz, “The International Origins of the Federal Reserve System,” Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997. 3 See Priscilla Roberts, “Quis Custodiet Ipsos Custodes? The Federal Reserve System’s Founding Fathers and Allied Finances in the First World War,” Business History Review, Winter 1998, vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 585-620; Roberts, “Benjamin Strong, the Federal Reserve, and Limits to Interwar American Nationalism, Part I: Intellectual Profile of a Central Banker,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Spring 2000, vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 61-76; and Roberts, “Benjamin Strong, the Federal Reserve, and Limits to Interwar American Nationalism, Part II: Strong and the Federal Reserve System in the 1920s,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Spring 2000, vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 77-98. 4 See Paul M. Warburg, “The Discount System in Europe,” National Monetary Commission, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1910. 5 Warburg, 1910, p. 31. 6 See Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz, “A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960,” Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1963; and Barry Eichengreen, “Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939,” New York: Oxford University Press, 1992. 7 Eichengreen, 1992. 8 Ben S. Bernanke, “On Milton Friedman’s Ninetieth Birthday,” Remarks at the Conference to Honor Milton Friedman, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, November 8, 2002. 9 See Robert L. Hetzel, “The Monetary Policy of the Federal Reserve: A History,” New York: Cambridge University Press, 2008.

1 Starting Early in Workforce Development November 5, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Charlotte, N.C. Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be here in Charlotte. I’ve enjoyed seeing firsthand some exciting new technologies and businesses in the area and meeting with the people who do the hard work of preparing the next generation to participate in those industries. That preparation is the focus of my talk today. I’ll begin by reviewing some current facts about the labor market and the implications of those facts for economic inequality and mobility. I’ll then share some observations on our nation’s current system of workforce development. In particular, I’d like to suggest that workforce development programs targeted toward young people have the potential to affect not only individual employment outcomes, but also broader issues such as economic mobility and inequality. But first I must note that my opinions are my own and may not reflect the opinions of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.1 Skills, Inequality and Mobility As I’m sure you are all well aware, the U.S. labor market has been weak for quite some time, with the national unemployment rate still above 7 percent and more than 4 million people out of work for more than six months. Here in North Carolina, the unemployment rate is 8.7 percent — well above the national average. What is striking, though, is that the view of the labor market differs depending on workers’ levels of education: Nationally, the unemployment rate for workers with only a high school degree is 7.6 percent, compared with just 3.7 percent for workers with a college degree. Following the Great Recession, the unemployment rate for non- college-educated workers peaked at 11 percent, more than double the peak rate of 5.1 percent for workers with at least a bachelor’s degree. To put this number in perspective, consider that the highest unemployment rate suffered by college-educated Americans in the recent recession is similar to the lowest unemployment rates for the overall population seen in the past four decades. In addition to being relatively insulated from the swings of the business cycle, college-educated workers earn significantly more than workers with less education. The median income for a college-educated worker is $48,000, compared with $27,000 for a worker with a high school diploma. Over a lifetime, the median worker with a bachelor’s degree can expect to earn $2.3 million, based on 2009 earnings data, compared with just $1.3 million earned by the median worker with a high school diploma. 2 This difference is known as the “college premium,” and it’s 2 increased significantly over the past 30 years. Growth in the premium has slowed over the past few years, but the large gap now appears to be an enduring feature of the U.S. labor market. Over the same period, the United States also has experienced a significant decline in manufacturing employment, a result of globalization and of changes in technology that have reduced the need for manufacturing workers. In 1980, more than 20 percent of Americans were employed in manufacturing, compared with less than 9 percent today. North Carolina was hit especially hard by declines in U.S. textile and furniture manufacturing, although the state, and the Charlotte region in particular, is now experiencing a resurgence in advanced manufacturing. Unlike the manufacturing jobs of the past, however, these new jobs require greater skills and significant postsecondary education. Other sectors that have traditionally employed workers without substantial formal education, such as construction, also are upgrading their skill requirements. We recently heard from a homebuilder who said that he won’t hire a worker who doesn’t have good math skills. Many people are concerned about the effects of the large skill premium, especially those who see it not only as an indicator that some skills are scarce, but also as a nagging reminder of the decline in high-paying opportunities for those unable to acquire the needed skills. This viewpoint is supported by recent data on economic inequality and economic mobility, which show that inequality has increased in recent years, while mobility has decreased. The rich are increasingly likely to remain rich, and the poor are increasingly likely to remain poor. Many factors contribute to inequality and the persistence of that inequality both within and across generations. But the disparity in outcomes between those who have acquired skills, often in the form of college education, and those who have not likely plays a large role. The children of college graduates are much more likely to attend and graduate from college themselves, and this fact might have its roots in differences that manifest themselves very early in life. There is a large and persuasive body of evidence that the foundation for academic and labor market success is laid very early in life, even in infancy. That’s because the early mastery of basic emotional, social and other noncognitive skills appears to make it easier to learn more complex skills throughout life. As a result, children who fall behind early on have difficulty catching up: Gaps in cognitive skills are present as early as age 4 and tend to persist into adulthood. Research also shows, unfortunately, that poor and minority children — who are less likely to have college-educated parents — are much less likely to have access to high-quality early education programs. 3 Workforce Development What do these facts have to do with workforce development? I will suggest that they should influence our understanding of why certain workforce development programs might or might not succeed, and what outcomes we can reasonably expect. They also suggest that the greatest potential may lie in workforce development programs that are targeted toward young people. Two decades ago, workforce development was chiefly concerned with the competitiveness of American workers relative to workers in other countries. 4 More recently, the focus has shifted to addressing earnings inequality in the long run and assisting workers who have been affected by 3 separations in the short run. As many of you well know, the most recent piece of federal legislation addressing workforce development is the Workforce Investment Act of 1998. Included in this Act was an effort to consolidate numerous different programs into “one-stop” employment centers and to give more control back to states and localities by creating workforce investment boards composed of local business, education and labor leaders. Currently, about one-third of the nation’s public spending on workforce development flows through these boards. The boards direct three-quarters of their funds toward adults, including displaced workers, and one-quarter toward low-income youth who face specific barriers to employment, such as being a parent, a high school dropout or a juvenile offender. In addition to the programs funded through the Workforce Investment Act, there are dozens of other workforce development programs administered by multiple federal agencies. These programs primarily provide training to low-skill adult workers. Relatively little is known about their effectiveness, however; a review by the Government Accountability Office found that only five of 47 programs had conducted an impact study to determine whether or not measured employment outcomes could actually be attributed to the program. The studies that were conducted were inconclusive, and the positive results were generally small and short-term. 5 A number of academic studies also cast doubt on the effectiveness of job training programs, finding that the effects on employment and job retention are modest at best.6 Evidence also is mixed regarding programs funded through the Workforce Investment Act. Recent research has found that adults who receive general assistance with job search and placement are more likely to become and remain employed. But the same is not true for displaced workers who receive more job-specific training; in fact, several studies have found that such workers might actually be less likely to become employed, perhaps because they stop looking for a job while undergoing training. 7 These results are not necessarily a reflection of the programs’ quality or of the hard work of the people running them. Here in North Carolina, we’re witnessing some important changes to the organization and operation of workforce development boards. One of the most significant is an increased focus on employer engagement to ensure that local boards are providing training for skills that are in high demand. Local boards also will conduct more worker assessment to help people determine which jobs and training programs will best fit their natural aptitude. Here in Charlotte, the local workforce investment board Charlotte Works has already put many of these changes in place. But there may be a larger issue underlying the modest results of many traditional workforce development programs: These programs might simply be reaching some people too late. As I’ve discussed, early skill acquisition is crucial to laying the foundation for later skill acquisition. It’s also the case that the earlier an investment in human capital is made, the longer the worker will have to realize the returns on that investment. Many of our current programs may intervene too late for workers to make large investments in their human capital and have adequate time to recoup that investment. Of course, I’m not suggesting that older workers cannot or should not learn new skills, or that an adult who dropped out of high school cannot go on to earn a college degree later in life. But broadly speaking, there may be workforce development strategies that could be more effective in assisting the majority of workers. 4 Getting an Early Start As I mentioned, about one-quarter of Workforce Investment Act funds are directed toward programs that serve young people facing considerable challenges. Traditionally, the goal has been remediation: to help the participants achieve basic literacy or minimum credentials, such as a GED. As with adult programs, the results of these youth programs have been mixed at best. But we are now seeing a shift toward providing not just remediation, but also knowledge and inspiration about different career opportunities. Local workforce investment boards are touring labs and manufacturing facilities, arranging for young people to participate with first responders in disaster preparedness drills, and sponsoring robotics competitions. The private sector also is reaching out to young people, for example by partnering with high schools such as Charlotte’s Olympic High School to offer advanced manufacturing internships and apprenticeships. These programs also show young people that there are a variety of paths they can follow after high school. Given the rising college premium and the relative insulation from economic shocks provided by a college degree, it’s understandable that many policymakers have focused on increasing college enrollment. But when promoting college as a pathway, we must acknowledge a sobering reality: Currently, only a little more than half of students who matriculate at a four- year college complete a bachelor’s degree within six years. 8 What’s worse, there is relatively little benefit, at least in terms of earnings, for students who attend for a year or two but do not graduate. Median weekly earnings for a worker with some college but no degree are about 15 percent higher than the earnings of a high school graduate, compared with about 80 percent higher for a worker with a bachelor’s degree. And dropping out of college can be expensive: The average debt burden among all college dropouts is more than $7,000; among only those dropouts who borrowed, it’s more than $14,000. Many students and families could benefit from better information about the level of preparation required to succeed in college, as well as about options they could pursue after high school other than enrolling in a four-year college. Community colleges, for example, are a venue where students can learn more about their interests and aptitudes and practice the skills that are required for success at a four-year school, all the while preserving their option to continue on toward a four-year degree. And for some students, pursuing a bachelor’s degree might never be their preferred path. These students would be well served by learning about other postsecondary education options that could improve their labor market outcomes relative to only completing high school or dropping out of college. Recent research suggests that people vary in the returns they’re likely to earn from formal education versus learning on the job, and some are likely to earn higher returns from working than from, say, a bachelor’s degree. 9 For these workers, it is exciting to see the growing number of high schools and community colleges that are partnering with businesses to offer vocational training and apprenticeship programs that equip students with specialized skills, such as those especially useful in advanced manufacturing. 10 Charlotte has been a national leader in this area with the Apprenticeship 2000 program, a partnership between local businesses and Central Piedmont Community College. I had the pleasure of seeing that program in practice at Siemens Energy yesterday. Providing students with more information about such programs also might reduce the high school dropout rate. Nationally, more than 20 percent of high school students do not graduate in four years, and many of those students never graduate at all. That measure climbs to more than 5 40 percent in some large urban school districts.* Given that dropping out of high school has been described as an “economic death sentence,”11 these numbers are unacceptably high. Some researchers have suggested that the focus of most high schools on college preparation, to the exclusion of other options, is a factor in the dropout rate. If the only reason to graduate from high school is to enroll in college, then students who do not wish to attend college, or perceive large barriers to doing so, might not see much value in graduating. For these students, learning about viable career and educational alternatives could improve their appreciation of the value of finishing high school. Conclusion To sum up, I’ve noted that college graduates earn significantly more than people who have not graduated from college, and they also tend to fare better during economic downturns. Over the same period that the college premium has been growing, manufacturing employment, which used to provide relatively high-paying jobs for workers without college degrees, has declined significantly. I’ve also talked about the possibility that some traditional workforce development programs are reaching workers too late to make large investments in their human capital. But we are now seeing a tremendous amount of energy devoted to programs targeting young people, both in the private sector and at some workforce investment boards. These programs have the potential to significantly improve educational and job prospects for students who might otherwise have dropped out of high school, or enrolled in but failed to complete college. But we are not concerned with high school or college completion rates simply because of the implications for the production of goods and services. Instead, our concern stems from what these numbers indicate about the well-being of the people underlying those statistics and their ability to achieve a secure economic future for themselves and, perhaps more importantly, for their children. When we look at disparities in economic outcomes across our society, it is clear that differences in human capital accumulation play a large role — and human capital accumulation begins very early in life. Doing our utmost to help the next generation of workers make the best use of their talents and opportunities will lay the groundwork for their children to achieve their full potential, and for the United States to achieve a more inclusive prosperity. *An earlier version of this speech cited the 8 percent “status dropout rate,” which is the percent of 16- through 24- year-olds who are not enrolled in school and have not earned a high school diploma or a GED. The text has been corrected to reflect the percentage of students who do not graduate from high school within four years, according to the National Center for Education Statistics. 1 I am grateful to Jessie Romero, Urvi Neelakantan, and Kartik Athreya for assistance in preparing this speech. 2 Anthony P. Carnevale, Stephen J. Rose, and Ban Cheah, “The College Payoff: Education, Occupations, Lifetime Earnings,” Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce, August 5, 2011. 6 3 Kartik Athreya and Jessie Romero, “Land of Opportunity? Economic Mobility in the United States,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 2012 Annual Report, pp. 4-23. 4 For example, see Lisa M. Lynch, “Training and the Private Sector: International Comparisons,” Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994. 5 United States Government Accountability Office, “Multiple Employment and Training Programs,” Report to Congressional Requesters, January 2011. 6 Pierre Cahuc and André Zylberberg, “Labor Market Policies,” in Labor Economics, Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2004. 7 Frederik Andersson et al., “Does Federally Funded Job Training Work? Nonexperimental Estimate of WIA Training Impacts Using Longitudinal Data on Workers and Firms,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 19446, September 2013. 8 Graduation rates are calculated according to where students started as full-time, first-time students. Transfer students and students who return to college after an absence are not included. 9 Christian Belzil, Jorgen Hansen, and Kingfei Liu, “Dynamic Skill Accumulation, Comparative Advantages, Compulsory Schooling, and Earnings,” IZA Discussion Paper no. 6167, November 2011. 10 Betty Joyce Nash, “Journey to Work,” Region Focus, Fourth Quarter 2012, pp. 17-19, 38. 11 Julie Berry Cullen, Steven D. Levitt, Erin Robertson, and Sally Sadoff, “What Can Be Done to Improve Struggling High Schools?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2013, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 133-152.

1 Economic Outlook, November 2013 November 21, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Asheboro SCORE Asheboro, North Carolina It's a pleasure to be with you today to discuss the economic outlook. It's a special pleasure to visit with my old friend, Jim Culberson. Those of you who know Jim, and I suspect that's right many of you, probably know him best as an outstanding local banker, and as the former chairman of the American Bankers Association in Washington, the foremost trade organization in the banking industry. Jim also served on the board of directors of our Charlotte branch, and he then went on to serve on the board of our head office in Richmond. We at the Richmond Fed greatly appreciate his service to the country in these roles. And I can assure you that public service was Jim's constant focus, because he took very seriously the proposition that the purpose of the banking system is to meet public needs. So thank you, Jim, for your service, and thank you for inviting me down to Asheboro. I will be talking today about the outlook for the economy, but before I do, I should make clear that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to any other person in the Federal Reserve System. 1 Let's start with a little background. For several years now, ever since the Great Recession of 2008 and 2009, most forecasts of overall economic activity have followed a common script. They essentially say that while growth has been modest recently, the economy is likely to pick up speed in the next couple of quarters when the headwinds that have been temporarily restraining growth diminish. My own forecasts have followed this script (at least until earlier this year), as have those of a broad range of forecasters who are polled for a publication known as the Blue Chip survey. Despite these optimistic forecasts, the reality has been more modest. Real GDP — our broadest measure of overall economic activity — grew by 2.0 percent in 2011, 2.0 percent in 2012, and it looks like GDP growth this year will again be 2.0 percent. And yet, if you look at the latest compilation, you see that many forecasters are doing it again. The latest Blue Chip projection, for example, is for 2.8 percent growth in real GDP next year. As you may have guessed, I will share a different view in my remarks today. A growing number of economists have taken on board the disappointing forecasting record of the last few years and have come to believe that growth is more likely than not to remain low in the next few years. In fact, some have become quite pessimistic about U.S. growth prospects and have gone so far as to use the word “stagnation.” Personally, I don't think that's warranted. We are certainly living in a period in which improvements in standards of living are harder to come by. Yet new economic opportunities do keep emerging, and innovations are being implemented, although at a more temperate pace than in the past. Even though my near-term forecast is closer to 2 percent than to 2 2.8, I also see room for optimism regarding our fundamental prospects. So don't count me among the stagnationists. A little more background: Before the Great Recession, we came to enjoy a period known as the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2007, real GDP grew at an average annual rate of 3.3 percent. Over that 24-year period, we experienced only two short, shallow recessions that together lasted only five quarters. Real personal income kept pace with GDP, also growing at a 3.3 percent annual rate. And consumer spending advanced even more rapidly than income, growing at a 3.6 percent annual rate. Part of the reason consumer spending was able to grow more rapidly than income over that period was the rise in household wealth. Stock prices, bond prices and housing prices all increased significantly during the Great Moderation. Another reason for the divergence was the increase in credit availability for most consumers. For example, the ratio of credit card debt to personal income rose from 2.4 percent in 1983 to 8.0 percent in 2007.* During the Great Recession, GDP fell by 4.3 percent over a six-quarter interval, but other indicators document even greater hardship. Payroll employment fell by 8.7 million jobs in the recession and its immediate aftermath. The unemployment rate, which was below 5 percent in 2007, rose to 10 percent in October 2009. Real personal income fell by 3.1 percent from December 2007 to July 2009. The value of household holdings of stocks and mutual fund shares fell by $5 trillion, and the value of household equity in real estate fell by $3.9 trillion. The scale and scope of loss of income and wealth experienced by American consumers was far greater than anything seen in the previous 20 years. Given that experience, lenders are bound to re-evaluate the riskiness associated with extending credit to a typical household. Indeed, consumers themselves appear to be re-evaluating the riskiness associated with indebtedness, no doubt reflecting a sense that their income and asset returns may be substantially riskier than they had come to believe during the Great Moderation. Under these conditions, it's no surprise that credit is no longer available on the same terms. And it's no surprise that consumers have been paying off debt and building up savings in order to restore some sense of balance to their household finances. These developments have led consumers to be somewhat cautious in their spending behavior. Over the last three years, real consumer spending has increased at an annual rate of 2.2 percent. Given the traumatic events in past few years, it strikes me as quite likely that consumer caution is not a temporary headwind and is likely to be very persistent. Businesses also appear to be quite cautious about their investment and hiring plans. A widely followed index of small business optimism averaged just over 100 during the Great Moderation and fell sharply during the recession. Since then it has only partially recovered and was 91.6 last month. Interestingly, when asked about the single most important problem they face, the most frequent answer in the latest survey was “government regulations and red tape.” This result accords with reports that I have been hearing from business contacts for several years now. There appears to have been a substantial increase in the pace of regulatory change, which in itself seems to be limiting investment and hiring. Moreover, it appears that there is also greater 3 uncertainty about the exact requirements of current regulations and the likely impacts of new regulations that are coming along. That uncertainty provides an additional reason for firms to postpone expansion plans. Adding to the uncertainty is the ongoing fiscal drama in Washington. Even with last January's tax increases and with the sequester holding down federal spending, the deficit was about 4 percent of GDP for the 2013 fiscal year. That level is unsustainably high over the long run. Moreover, if you take into account the rising costs of medical entitlements and Social Security, it's clear that current federal budget plans are unsustainable over the long run. So at some point we can expect some combination of a lower trajectory of federal spending than is given by current law, or higher taxes. In the meantime, businesses and households are unsure about how their tax liabilities will evolve over time, and firms doing business with the federal government are uncertain about their prospects as well. Although it's hard to quantify, I believe this budget uncertainty is weighing on business hiring and investment decisions. So far I've mentioned consumer spending and business investment, which together account for about four-fifths of the economy. Residential investment is one area in which we have seen strong growth. Last year, real residential investment increased by more than 15 percent, and so far this year it has increased almost 14 percent at an annual rate. Despite that, however, housing market indicators, such as housing starts and new home sales, remain well below levels that might be considered normal, so there seems to be room for residential investment to continue to grow. But since this is only 3 percent of GDP, it has only a marginal effect on the overall outlook. Government spending has been weak recently, and my guess is that it will make little, if any, contribution to GDP growth next year. And that leaves net exports, which for various reasons are also likely to make little contribution to GDP growth next year. Adding up all these categories of spending yields a forecast for GDP growth next year of just a little above 2 percent — not much different from what we've seen for the last three years. That's my forecast for next year, but I believe it's important to look at the longer-run trend as well. To do that, it's useful to do a little economic arithmetic — I promise this will be relatively painless. Real GDP is the total output of goods and services in the economy. We can break down real GDP growth into two components. One is growth in the number of workers. The other is growth in the amount of output per worker, also known as productivity. Real GDP growth is just the sum of productivity growth and the growth in the number of workers. It turns out that both of these components have slowed since the Great Moderation. Starting first with productivity: From 1983 to 2000, productivity grew at a 1.8 percent annual rate. But toward the end of the Great Moderation, productivity growth slowed and over the last three years, productivity has increased at a very modest 0.9 percent annual rate. There are two ways to look at this, of course. The first is pessimistic — productivity growth is half of what it was during the Great Moderation. The second perspective — the glas s-half-full story — is that productivity growth is continuing. This is important because productivity growth ultimately drives the growth in real wages and incomes. 4 Looking ahead, forecasting trends in productivity growth is exceedingly difficult. Having said that, it's hard to see why productivity growth would improve dramatically; there's no sign of a major surge of technical innovation in the pipeline, significant educational improvement or substantial deregulation — the kind of developments that would lead to major efficiency gains. By the same token, it's hard to see why productivity growth would fall any further. The most likely outcome, in my view, is more of the same, and thus my outlook is that productivity growth will be about 1 percent for a considerable period. Employment growth also has slowed since the Great Moderation. From 1983 to 2000, employment increased at a 1.8 percent annual rate (as estimated in the survey of households). Over the last four years, employment growth has been 0.9 percent per year — so employment growth has fallen by half. An imminent acceleration in employment does not seem likely to me. Population growth is now only 0.8 percent per year. Moreover, much of that growth is in older workers who are near traditional retirement benchmarks. The so-called “prime working age population” — those aged 25 to 54 — is barely growing at all. My longer -run view is that the growth rate of employment is likely to equal the growth rate of population, which is 0.8 percent per year. In the short run, it is possible that employment growth will be above 0.8 percent as we continue to recover from the recession. But we should also recognize some impediments to rapid employment growth. When the Affordable Care Act is fully implemented, it is likely to add to the cost of hiring an additional worker for many businesses, and firms are still trying to figure out just how costly that will be. Also, I've been struck by the large number of accounts I've heard recently about firms having difficulty finding workers with the appropriate skills, in many cases constraining production. To summarize then, I think that in the short run, we are likely to see real GDP growth of 2 percent, or perhaps a bit higher. Over the longer run, we are likely to see growth average a bit below 2 percent. Before I wrap things up, I'd like to make some brief observations on inflation and monetary policy. First, it's important to recognize that inflation has been well-behaved over the last 20 years. Since 1993, inflation has averaged 1.92 percent, which is remarkably close to the Federal Open Market Committee's goal of 2 percent. Second, we've seen some fluctuations in inflation over that time period, but they have all proven to be transitory. For example, inflation averaged 2.8 percent over the three years ending in December 2007. I mention this because many people have noticed that over the last 12 months inflation has only averaged 0.9 percent. My sense is that inflation will move back toward 2 percent over the next year or two, in part because measures of expected inflation remain well contained. This is not a certainty, however, and I believe the FOMC will want to watch this closely. And that brings us to monetary policy, which has been particularly challenging of late. As you may recall, the Fed reduced its target for the federal funds rate to essentially zero at the end of 2008. Given the state of the economy, that was the appropriate response of monetary policy. But that brings us face to face with what economists refer to as the zero lower bound. This refers to the fact that it's generally not practical to reduce interest rates below zero. At times, we might 5 wish we could, though, because the interest rate that is relevant for most economic decisions is the real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rate — the nominal interest rate minus the expected rate of inflation. We should be clear that an interest rate near zero does not mean the Fed is paralyzed. By purchasing assets, we can increase the supply of monetary assets to the banking system, which in some circumstances can have a stimulative effect. The Fed has purchased significant quantities of assets since the end of 2008. The size of our balance sheet has gone from $2.2 trillion to around $3.9 trillion, and it continues to increase by about $85 billion per month. The key issue, in my view, is the extent to which the benefits of further monetary stimulus are likely to outweigh the costs. Economic growth trends currently appear to be driven mainly by population growth and productivity growth, in which case monetary stimulus will only have limited and transitory effects. But further stimulus does increase the size of our balance sheet and correspondingly increases the risks associated with the “exit process” when it becomes time to withdraw stimulus. This is why I have not been in favor of the current asset purchase program. In conclusion, I'd like to return to the theme with which I began. Yes, 2 percent growth is disappointing relative to our experience during the period of the Great Moderation, and yes, growth may continue at a rate that is slower than in the past. But productivity is rising, incomes are growing, and innovation is occurring. Our institutions of higher learning are worldwide leaders in research and education, and they continue to attract exceptional students from abroad. Our markets remain flexible and resilient. The public policy problems we face may be difficult, but they are certainly not insoluble. Consequently, when I take a broad view, I am fundamentally optimistic about our future. *An earlier version of this speech incorrectly stated the ratio of credit card debt to personal income in 2007 as 5.5 percent. The text has been updated as of February 6, 2014 with the correct number, 8.0 percent. 1 I would like to thank Roy Webb for assistance in preparing these remarks.

1 Statement Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law of the Committee on the Judiciary December 3, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond The Committee on the Judiciary Rayburn House Office Building Washington, D.C. Good morning. I am honored to speak to the Subcommittee about the bankruptcy code and financial institution insolvency. In my remarks, I will discuss why I believe it’s so important to improve our bankruptcy code to make it feasible to resolve failing financial firms in bankruptcy. At the outset, I should say that my comments today are my own views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or my colleagues at other Federal Reserve Banks. My views have been informed by both my experience leading the Fifth Federal Reserve District over the last seven years and as a research economist studying banking policy for the prior 25 years. The events of 2008 provided evidence, in my view, of glaring deficiencies in the way financial institution distress and insolvency are handled, particularly at large institutions. 1 The problem ― widely known as “too big to fail” ― consists of two mutually reinforcing expectations. First, many financial institution creditors feel protected by an implicit government commitment of support should the institution face financial distress. This belief dampens creditors’ attention to risk and makes debt financing artificially cheap for borrowing firms, leading to excessive leverage. Moreover, it leads to overuse of types of borrowing — such as short-term wholesale funding — that are more fragile and more likely to prompt the need for such protection. Second, policymakers may well worry that if a large financial firm with a high reliance on short-term funding were to file for bankruptcy under the U.S. bankruptcy code, it would result in undesirable effects on counterparties, financial markets and economic activity. This expectation induces policymakers to intervene in ways that allow short-term creditors to escape losses, such as through central bank lending or public sector capital injections. This reinforces creditors’ expectations of support and firms’ incentives to grow large and rely on short-term funding, resulting in more financial fragility and more rescues. Expectations of creditor rescues have increased over the last four decades through the gradual accretion of precedents. Research at the Richmond Fed has estimated that one-third of the financial sector’s liabilities are perceived to benefit from implicit protection, based on actual government actions and policy statements. 2 Adding implicit protection to explicit protection 2 programs such as deposit insurance, we found that 57 percent of financial sector liabilities were expected to benefit from government guarantees as of the end of 2011. This figure was about 45 percent at the end of 1999. In response to the experience of 2008, Title I of the Dodd-Frank Act laid out a planning process for the resolution of failed financial institutions. A resolution plan, or “living will,” is a description of a firm’s strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under the U.S. bankruptcy code, without government assistance, in the event of material financial distress or failure. Among other things, it spells out the firm’s organizational structure, key management information systems, critical operations and a mapping of the relationship between core business lines and legal entities. The heart of the plan is the specification of the actions the firm would take to facilitate rapid and orderly resolution and prevent adverse effects of failure, including the firm’s strategy to maintain critical operations and funding. 3 The Federal Reserve and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation can jointly determine that a plan is “not credible” or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the bankruptcy code, in which case the firm would be required to submit a revised plan to address identified deficiencies. A resubmission could include plans to change the business operations and corporate structure in order to eliminate deficiencies. If the Fed and the FDIC jointly determine that the revised plan does not remedy identified deficiencies, they can require more capital, increase liquidity requirements or restrict the growth, activities or operations of the firm. In essence, regulators can order changes in the structure and operations of a firm to make it resolvable in bankruptcy without government assistance. If there is a determination that, among other things, the firm’s failure under the U.S. bankruptcy code would have serious adverse effects on “U.S. financial stability,” Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act gives the FDIC the ability, with the agreement of other financial regulators, to take a firm into receivership. One difference between a Title II receivership and the bankruptcy code is that Title II gives the FDIC the ability to borrow funds from the U.S. Treasury (specifically, the Orderly Liquidation Fund at the Treasury) to make payments to creditors of the failed firm or to guarantee the liabilities of the failed firm. 4 The funds are to be repaid from recoveries on the assets of the failed firm or from assessments against the largest, most complex financial companies. While the FDIC is to pay creditors no less than they would have received in a liquidation of the firm, the Act provides the FDIC with broad discretion to treat similarly situated creditors differently. 5 This can encourage short-term creditors to believe they would benefit from such treatment and therefore continue to pay insufficient attention to risk and invest in fragile funding arrangements. Given widespread expectations of support for financially distressed institutions in orderly liquidations, regulators will likely feel forced to provide support to these short-term creditors to avoid the turbulence of disappointing expectations. This would replicate the two mutually reinforcing expectations that define “too big to fail.” Clearly, the Dodd-Frank Act envisions bankruptcy without government support as the first and most preferable option in the case of a failing financial institution, and for good reason, in my view. If resolution in bankruptcy without the expectation of implicit government guarantees 3 comes to be expected as the norm, the incentives of market participants would be better aligned with our public policy goal of a financial system that effectively allocates capital and risks. Large financial firms themselves would want to be less leveraged and less reliant on unstable short- term funding. Institutions and markets would, accordingly, be more resilient in response to financial stress, and policymakers could credibly commit to forgo the creditor rescues that do so much damage to incentives. The alternative to robust plans for resolution in bankruptcy is to institutionalize the capacity to provide public sector rescues for financial firm creditors outside of bankruptcy, through Title II. This would be a far less desirable path, I believe. Trying to correct these incentive distortions through the regulation of firm size, structure and capital is likely to fall short. This path thus would fundamentally undermine the incentives of financial institutions and their creditors to plan effectively for Title I resolution. And it would continue to tilt financial innovation toward bypassing regulatory constraints and relying on the fragile short-term funding methods that are most likely to elicit government protection. The result would be ever-increasing regulatory costs and repeated bouts of financial instability. Reducing the probability that a large financial firm becomes financially distressed ― through enhanced standards for capital and liquidity, for example ― is useful, but will never be enough. The path toward a stable financial system requires that policymakers have confidence in the unassisted failure of financial firms under the U.S bankruptcy code and that investors are thereby convinced that unassisted bankruptcy is the norm. This is why I believe it is vitally important to ensure our bankruptcy laws are well crafted to apply to large financial institutions. In evaluating alternative approaches to insolvency and bankruptcy provisions, it would be a mistake to assume that the behaviors of financial firms and their creditors will remain unchanged. For example, I have stressed that the heavy reliance of large financial institutions on wholesale funding markets evolved under the growing expectation of public sector rescues, and is likely to depend sensitively on that expectation. In the absence of that expectation, firms and their creditors would have strong incentives to reduce reliance on fragile short-term funding. This is relevant to the frequently heard claim that the large “liquidity needs” of failing financial institutions is a stumbling block to resolving such firms in bankruptcy. The U.S. bankruptcy code allows the bankrupt firm to obtain, subject to court approval, “debtor-in-possession,” or DIP, financing that is generally senior to pre-existing creditors. Such financing can be useful to fund ongoing operations — for exampl e, to pay off certain creditors, such as vendors, rather than retain them in bankruptcy proceedings. Other creditors often find it advantageous to approve DIP funding, despite the dilution of their own claims, because it ensures the continuation of ongoing operations. The point is that if repayment of short-term obligations in bankruptcy depends on large amounts of DIP financing that would be difficult for a financial institution to obtain, one would expect to see less reliance on short-term credit (at least as long as government-provided DIP financing was not expected to fill the gap). Moreover, an inability to fund necessary operations in bankruptcy is likely to compromise the credibility of a Title I resolution plan. In this case, regulators would be warranted to require less reliance on short-term funding in the first place. 4 The FDIC’s authority to lend to distressed institutions under its Orderly Liquidation Authority amounts to government-provided DIP financing. The beneficial feature of privately provided DIP financing is the presumption that, because it’s provided by market participants and approved by creditors and the court, it’s fairly priced and thus unsubsidized and does not unduly disadvantage any particular class of creditors. Indeed, this is why unassisted bankruptcy is so critical to ending “too big to fail” and why firms were instructed not to assume extraordinary government support in their submitted resolution plans. Public sector support can be underpriced and distortionary, and can reallocate returns between creditor classes outside the procedural safeguards of bankruptcy. Discretionary government provision of DIP financing would undermine the integrity and purpose of the bankruptcy code. Some recent proposals to address the “too big to fail” problem would make structural changes to financial firms ― imposing quantitative limits on their size or prohibiting certain risky activities. I am open to the notion that such restrictions may ultimately be necessary to achieve a more stable financial system, but I do not believe we have a strong basis yet for determining exactly what activity and size limits should be adopted. The living will process, however, should provide an objective basis for decisions about how the structure, financing or activities of large financial firms need to be altered in order to assure orderly unassisted resolution. In addition, the process of writing credible living wills should illuminate efforts to identify ways in which the bankruptcy code could be improved to make the resolution of financial firms more orderly. 6 Robust and credible resolution plans will position us to wind down the Orderly Liquidation Authority and other financing mechanisms, such as the Federal Reserve’s remaining 13(3) powers to lend in “unusual and exigent circumstances.” By allowing creditors to escape losses, such lending distorts incentives and exacerbates moral hazard. Eliminating the ability to provide ad hoc support to firms in financial distress would cement our commitment to orderly unassisted resolutions in bankruptcy, thereby contributing to a more stable and competitive playing field. 1 The inherent problems have been widely noted by economists going back decades before the crisis. See John H. Kareken and Neil Wallace, “Deposit Insurance and Bank Regulation: A Partial Equilibrium Exposition,” Journal of Business, July 1978, vol. 51, pp. 413-38; John H. Kareken, “Deposit Insurance Reform or Deregulation Is the Cart, Not the Horse,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Spring 1983, vol. 7, no. 2; Douglas Diamond and Philip Dybvig, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance and Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy, June 1983, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 401-19; Marvin Goodfriend and Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Limited Commitment and Central Bank Lending,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Fall 1999, vol. 85, no. 4, pp. 1-27; Gary Stern and Ron Feldman, “Too Big To Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts,” Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2004. See also Huberto M. Ennis and Todd Keister, “On the Fundamental Reasons for Bank Fragility,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, First Quarter 2010, vol. 96, no. 1, pp. 33-58; Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, First Quarter 2010, A Special Issue on the Diamond -Dybvig Model and Its Implications for Banking and Monetary Policy. 2 The Richmond Fed’s estimates of the size of the federal financial safety net are available at https://www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/special_reports/safety_net. 3 For more on resolution planning, see Jeffrey Lacker, “Ending ‘Too Big To Fail’ Is Going to Be Hard Work,” Speech at the University of Richmond, Richmond, Va., April 9, 2013. The Federal Reserve’s Regulation QQ governing resolution planning can be found at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2011-11-01/pdf/2011-27377.pdf. 5 4 For a comparison of the Orderly Liquidation Authority provisions with the U.S. bankruptcy process, see Sabrina R. Pellerin and John R. Walter, “Orderly Liquidation Authority as an Alternative to Bankruptcy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, First Quarter 2012, vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 1-31. 5 See Pellerin and Walter, pp. 16-19. 6 See Kenneth E. Scott and John B. Taylor (eds.), “Bankruptcy Not Bailout: A Special Chapter 14,” Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 2012.
