" and demonstrated by the attached data. These tracts are defined as tracts in the top 10 percent of the national distribution of long-term vacancy rates, where the long-term vacancy rate is the fraction of residential addresses that have been vacant for longer than two years. More details on the methodology can be found in the Background on Analysis section. "Housing Boom" "Low Demand" "Traditional Suburban" Defining Characteristics Large fraction of housing units built post-2000 High median income* High median house value* Large fraction of residents with at least a college degree Large fraction of Asian residents* Large fraction of older housing stock (built before 1949) Low median income High poverty rate High unemployment rate Large fraction of residents with less than a high school degree Large fraction of black, non-Hispanic residents Low density of housing units per square mile High fractions of owner-occupied and single-family housing High fraction of white, non-Hispanic residents Examples of metropolitan areas with a large number of tracts in this category Denver, CO Portland, OR Orlando, FL Las Vegas, NV Phoenix, AZ Detroit, MI Cleveland, OH Baltimore, MD Pittsburgh, PA St. Louis, MO Charleston, WV Oklahoma City, OK Des Moines, IA Peoria, IL Tulsa, OK Number and percentage of all high-vacancy census tracts in this category 512 tracts nationally 26 percent of all high-vacancy tracts 726 tracts nationally 37 percent of all high-vacancy tracts 700 tracts nationally 36 percent of all high-vacancy tracts Note: Most of the defining characteristics are true both in comparison to all census tracts in the U.S. and to other high long-term vacancy tracts. * Characteristics with an asterisk are only true when compared to other high long-term vacancy tracts. See Table 2 in the Background on Analysis section for details. Background on Analysis The analysis of long-term vacancy by neighborhood is based on data collected by the U.S. Postal Service (USPS). The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) processes the data and makes statistics by census tract available to researchers at government and non-profit institutions. Details can be found at www.huduser.org/portal/datasets/usps.html . The first step is to identify census tracts with a large fraction of long-term vacant housing units. Because an address could appear to be vacant if it is seasonally occupied, we drop census tracts with a share of seasonal housing units greater than 10 percent (data on seasonal housing units by census tract are from the 2006-10 American Community Survey). 1 Then, we calculate the fraction of all residential addresses in each tract that have been vacant for two years or more; we call this the "long-term vacancy rate." 2 We identify tracts in the top decile of the national distribution as those with a high long-term vacancy rate. To create a typology of these high-vacancy tracts, we merge in data on tract characteristics from the 2006-10 American Community Survey and estimate a factor model. Factor analysis is designed to combine a set of variables in a way that summarizes common elements. The analysis identifies three factors that account for a meaningful fraction of the variance of the characteristics in the model. 3 Table 1 reports the census tract characteristics used in the model and weights that each factor places on each characteristic. Using these weights, we predict the value of each factor for each census tract. Then, we assign each tract to a category based on its largest predicted factor. Table 2 reports the average value of each characteristic for tracts that are assigned to each of the three types. Table 1 Factor Weights Factor 1 = "Housing Boom" Factor 2 = "Low Demand" Factor 3 = "Traditional Suburb" Distance from MSA center 0.148 -0.143 0.106 Housing units per square mile 0.148 0.299 -0.499 Fraction owner-occupied 0.106 -0.457 0.734 Fraction single-family 0.019 -0.102 0.780 Fraction built 2005 or later 0.262 -0.014 0.068 Fraction built 2000 to 2004 0.252 -0.113 0.100 Fraction built 1950 to 1969 -0.101 0.164 -0.029 Fraction built 1949 or earlier -0.178 0.326 -0.106 Median household income 0.698 -0.377 0.438 Median house value 0.838 -0.106 -0.034 Poverty rate -0.365 0.632 -0.424 Unemployment rate -0.267 0.676 -0.178 Fraction with less than a high-school degree -0.490 0.381 -0.212 Fraction with a college degree or more 0.783 -0.222 -0.048 Fraction black, non-Hispanic -0.240 0.764 -0.221 Fraction Hispanic -0.067 -0.171 -0.151 Fraction Asian 0.394 -0.050 -0.256 Eigenvalue 5.45 1.78 1.19 Note: The table shows the factor loadings from a factor analysis that includes all census tracts with a long-term vacancy rate in the top decile of the national distribution. The long-term vacancy rate is the fraction of residential addresses that have been vacant for at least two years. All characteristics except distance are from the 2006-10 American Community Survey. Distance is calculated using the Pythagorean theorem where the inputs are the latitude and longitude of the centroid of the census tract and the latitude and longitude of the centroid of the metropolitan area. Table 2 Average Value of Tract Characteristics by Typology (2011) Factor 1 = "Housing Boom" Factor 2 = "Low Demand" Factor 3 = "Traditional Suburb" Other Tracts (long-term vacancy rate not high) Distance from MSA center 0.32 0.21 0.28 0.28 Housing units per square mile 1,782 2,421 149 2,671 Fraction owner-occupied 0.60 0.44 0.80 0.64 Fraction single-family 0.60 0.61 0.77 0.68 Fraction built 2005 or later 0.07 0.03 0.04 0.03 Fraction built 2000 to 2004 0.11 0.04 0.07 0.06 Fraction built 1950 to 1969 0.19 0.25 0.19 0.28 Fraction built 1949 or earlier 0.18 0.46 0.26 0.26 Median household income $56,975 $23,741 $46,525 $56,143 Median house value $251,477 $77,711 $109,684 $245,675 Poverty rate 14.9 39.4 13.9 14.9 Unemployment rate 7.5 21.0 7.6 8.5 Fraction with less than a high-school degree 0.12 0.29 0.18 0.16 Fraction with a college degree or more 0.33 0.09 0.15 0.28 Fraction black, non-Hispanic 0.10 0.73 0.06 0.14 Fraction Hispanic 0.15 0.08 0.11 0.16 Fraction Asian 0.05 0.01 0.01 0.05 Number of tracts 565 792 1112 44318 Note: Tracts in the highest decile of long-term vacancy are assigned to the category ( i.e. , factor 1, factor 2, or factor 3) for which the predicted factor is highest. The long-term vacancy rate is the fraction of residential addresses that have been vacant for at least two years. All characteristics except distance are from the 2006-10 American Community Survey. Distance is calculated using the Pythagorean theorem where the inputs are the latitude and longitude of the centroid of the census tract and the latitude and longitude of the centroid of the metropolitan area. 1. We also drop all census tracts in Tennessee because the data on length of vacancy for that state are not accurate. Return to text 2. In the USPS data, residential addresses are divided into three types: occupied, vacant, and "no-stat." An address is considered vacant if the resident has not collected their mail for at least 90 days. An address is considered "no-stat" if it is a rural route address vacant for 90 days or longer, if it is under construction and not yet occupied, or if the postal carrier considers it not likely to be active for some time. Because many abandoned and uninhabitable housing units may fall in this last category, the analysis includes addresses that have been categorized as "no-stat" for at least two years in the measure of long-term vacancy. Results are similar if these addresses are excluded. Return to text 3. Specifically, each of these factors has an eigenvalue greater than one. Return to text Accessible Verison Last Update: October 05, 2012 Back to Top

When I think about community banks, I usually envision a bank, thrift, or credit union that serves customers in one or more well-defined local markets and that is engaged in a traditional community banking model--making a variety of loans and funding itself primarily with local core deposits. At the Federal Reserve, we generally define our community bank portfolio as those institutions with $10 billion or less in total assets, which is the definition I will use in this discussion. In evaluating the effect of regulation on community banks, I divide the potential burden into three categories: (1) additional operational costs associated with compliance; (2)restrictions on fees, interest rates, or other forms of revenue; and (3) unintentional barriers to offering a service that are a result of regulatory complexity. Each of these effects is of some concern, but to me the most disturbing is the third category. If the effect of a regulation is to make a traditional banking service so complicated or expensive that significant numbers of community banks believe they can no longer offer that service, it should raise red flags and spur policymakers to reassess whether the potential benefits of the regulation outweigh the potential loss of community banks' participation in that part of the market. Unfortunately, my discussions with community bankers lead me to believe that we might be approaching that point with residential mortgage lending regulation. I have thought a lot about how we have come to this point. I think it is because both the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) and its implementing regulations attempt to avoid a repeat of the lending abuses that were identified in the crisis by using characteristics that were common in subprime lending as proxies for identification of problematic loans. While this is an understandable approach given the abuses in subprime lending, it fails to recognize that many of these same characteristics, such as higher interest rates or balloon payments, also are key aspects of traditional community bank portfolio lending. But, as I will discuss later, these features in community bank lending do not appear to have resulted in nearly the level of borrower stress that was prevalent in subprime loans. Community banks have long been a source of loans that, for a variety of reasons, do not fit the parameters of conforming government-sponsored enterprise loans or eligibility for government-guaranteed programs. Community banks typically hold these loans on their own balance sheets. They use higher interest rates to compensate for the lack of liquidity in these loans or to cover higher processing costs because community banks lack economies of scale, and they use balloon payments as a simple way to limit their interest-rate risk. To the extent that regulations require additional operational procedures for such loans that are prohibitively expensive, raise the liability associated with making them, or create capital requirements that are out of proportion to the riskiness of the loans, community banks could be closed out of these products altogether. How concerned should we be if community banks start pulling out of mortgage lending? To answer this, I think it is important to answer three more fundamental questions. First, how important is community bank lending to the overall mortgage market? Second, how important is mortgage lending to the community banking model? And third, are there any indications that community bank lending poses the same risks as the subprime lending that shared many of the same characteristics? How important is community bank lending to the overall mortgage market? One of the advantages of working at the Federal Reserve is having access to what I believe is one of the finest research staffs anywhere. Because of the Federal Reserve's role in the economy and financial stability, we have teams of top-notch economists and financial analysts to help policymakers reach the best possible understanding of economic and financial trends. But they are equally valuable in assessing the effects of regulatory policy. So I asked Federal Reserve staff to examine available data to try to come up with answers to my questions about mortgage lending and community banks. I would like to share with you the answers they uncovered. Analysis of annual data on home lending reported pursuant to the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) provides insight into the role of community banks in the mortgage market. 8 As you may know, HMDA requires banking institutions, credit unions, and mortgage companies with offices in metropolitan areas to report details about the applications they receive and the loans they extend each year. 9 To investigate the role of community banks in the home lending market and to foster a more detailed understanding of mortgage lending within the broad group of community banks, our staff sorted lending institutions in HMDA into three asset size categories: smaller community banks with assets under $500 million, larger community banks with assets between $500 million and $10 billion, and large banks with assets of more than $10 billion. For the analysis, all affiliated entities were combined and treated as a single organization. The HMDA data indicate that community banks account for a significant fraction of total home loan originations each year. Smaller community banks account for about 5 percent of the originations annually and larger community banks an additional 13 percent. 10 Credit unions, which are nearly all small, now account for an additional 7percent of home loan originations. Thus, taken together, community banks and credit unions accounted for one-quarter of the new origination market in 2011. This is up from a combined market share of nearly 16 percent in 2004. Over the same time period, the share of loans originated by non-banks dropped from nearly one-third of all originations in 2004 to slightly more than one-quarter in 2011. The HMDA data further indicate that large banks accounted for about one-half of all originations in 2004 and about the same share in 2011. 11 Therefore, as overall originations have declined, originations by small banks have not fallen as much as those of large banks or non-banks. And, as a reminder, these data do not include loan originations by institutions that operate exclusively in rural areas that, if included, would presumably increase the share originated by community institutions. Furthermore, these smaller institutions have been able to hold their own in the marketplace even as their numbers were diminished over the past few years by a number of bank closures and acquisitions by larger banking organizations. 12 Looking more closely at the HMDA data provides considerably more information about the nature of home lending undertaken by institutions and the extent to which loans are held in portfolio or sold. Compared to larger banks, community banks have notably larger shares of home purchase loans than loans for other purposes, such as refinancing or home improvement tend to originate proportionately more conventional loans than loans backed by government guarantees extend larger shares of their total home-purchase loans to low- or moderate-income individuals or borrowers in low- or moderate-income neighborhoods, lending that is the focus of the Community Reinvestment Act requirements to help serve the credit needs of local communities hold the loans they originate in portfolio and retain the credit risk, rather than transfer the risk by selling those loans to other market participants, such as Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, or others 13 The HMDA data also indicate that a larger share of the conventional loans extended by smaller lenders carry higher prices. 14 The data do not provide much insight into why the pricing patterns differ across lender size groups, but it may be that the types of loans originated by smaller lenders tend to be nonconforming or out of the ordinary in other ways and consequently carry higher prices to compensate for the lower liquidity or somewhat higher credit and interest-rate risk. Although the HMDA data provide us with an opportunity to learn quite a bit about the home lending activities of community banks and other lending institutions, the data have some important limitations, particularly since they only cover urban institutions and are available only through 2011. Other sources of data we can use to monitor the home lending activities of banking institutions are the Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, or Call Reports, filed quarterly by all banking institutions, and the FR Y-9C reports filed by bank holding companies (BHCs). 15 Data from Call Reports and FR Y-9C filings show a pattern in originations for sale that is similar to the shares of overall originations revealed by the HMDA data. In the first quarter of 2007, small BHCs accounted for less than 10 percent of mortgage loan sales by bank holding companies. However, by the second quarter of 2012, these institutions had almost doubled their share, accounting for nearly 20 percent of sales. And, indeed, the net income from selling mortgage loans is attracting some new entrants. The number of banks reporting any income from sales, securitization, or servicing of mortgage loans has shown a substantial increase since 2007, with much of the entry occurring as the recession ended in the first half of 2009. Recent quarters have seen the entry of about 30 additional banks. But since the new entrants are all small, it will take a lot of them to make up for any pullback from the larger banking organizations. Taken together, these data demonstrate that while the community bank share of the mortgage market is not large, it is significant. Thus, I would conclude from this evidence that the additional capacity provided by smaller lenders is important, especially at the margin, and could contribute to lowering mortgage rates and loosening lending standards. How important is mortgage lending to the community banking model? The same data that were used to examine the role of community banks in the mortgage market can also be used to analyze the importance of mortgage products to community banks. Overall, community banks accounted for approximately one-fifth of closed-end, first-lien mortgages retained in portfolio by all banks as of June 2012. Mortgage lending appears to be just as important to community banks as it is to larger banks, as both tend to devote about one-quarter of their on-balance-sheet loan portfolios to home loans. Moreover, the share of first-lien mortgages as a percent of loans held in portfolio has increased substantially since 2008 at institutions with less than $10 billion in assets. Call Report data suggest that only a small fraction of community banks engage in the origination of mortgages for sale, securitization, or mortgage servicing. Since the financial crisis, however, measures of profitability at banks with such activities have significantly exceeded those at community banks not engaged in these business lines. Comparing community banks that reported any income from sales, securitization, and servicing of mortgages in the second quarter of 2012 to those without such income reveals that those with such income had a 34 basis point advantage in terms of return on assets, that is, 1.26 percent compared to 0.92 percent. The differences in return on equity were similarly significant -- 11.14 percent compared to 8.61 percent. With net interest margins compressing and regulatory costs increasing, many community banks are struggling right now to generate income. As I said earlier, the addition of mortgage origination capacity and competition would seem likely to reduce rates and ease conditions for borrowers. And the recent entry of new banks into the market indicates that barriers to entry are not prohibitive. So it seems to me that appropriate policy should encourage community banks to expand their mortgage lending rather than discourage them from doing so. Are there any indications that community bank lending poses the same risks as subprime lending that shared many of the same characteristics? I think I have made a reasonable case that community banks are important to the mortgage market and that mortgage lending can be, in turn, an important source of profits for community banks. None of this matters, however, if this lending poses a risk to the health of the institutions or to the consumers who are their customers. Community bankers argue that they never engaged in the sort of lending practices that led to the financial crisis. And I think that in most cases, the evidence supports their claims. However, as I mentioned earlier, data from the HMDA and Call Reports indicate that community bank lending does share some characteristics with subprime lending. For example, community banks appear to charge higher rates on their mortgage loans. And the maturity data in the Call Reports are consistent with variable-rate lending or balloon maturities on community banks' mortgage loans. But looking for signs of stress in the performance of the loans reveals a stark difference between mortgage loans held by community banks and subprime loans. Over the last several years as mortgage delinquencies reached record levels, the serious delinquency rate of mortgages held by community banks did not go much over 4 percent, far lower than the serious delinquency rates that climbed to almost 22 percent for subprime, fixed-rate loans and more than 46 percent for subprime, variable-rate loans. In fact, over the last several years, on average, mortgages held by community banks outperformed even fixed-rate, prime loans, the best performing mortgage category. I think this statistic by itself is a strong testament to the responsible lending practices of community banks. Balancing Regulatory Costs and Benefits Community bankers tell us repeatedly that they didn't engage in the problem lending that led to the recent crisis and shouldn't be punished with expensive regulation. I think the data I have presented here support the first claim that their lending didn't cause the problem. But crafting regulations to address the real problems that occurred in subprime lending without creating punitive burdens on community banks may prove to be quite difficult. In addition to the capital proposals that I discussed earlier, community banks will be affected by a number of provisions in the Dodd-Frank Act, such as those covering escrow accounts for higher-priced mortgages, 16 loan officer compensation, and appraisal requirements. Within the escrow requirements, the Dodd-Frank Act did provide for an exemption for banks in rural or underserved areas, but I think broader exemptions for community banks should be considered. The definitions of qualified mortgages (QMs) and qualified residential mortgages (QRMs) could have a profound effect on the mortgage terms offered and the underwriting conditions for all banks. To the extent that these definitions constrain community bankers from using their experience with the cash flows from a small business customer or their knowledge of local real estate markets to customize a loan for an "irregular" situation, such loans may not be made. I do not mean to suggest that community banks are the only ones making good loans or that there weren't any problems in small banks. But I do believe that the contribution of community banks to mortgage lending abuses was proportionately small and that problematic practices in smaller banks can be addressed through on-site supervision. And I also believe that many community banks simply do not have the resources to appropriately comply with all of the pending regulatory changes pertaining to mortgage lending. Thus, the cost of solving the problem falls disproportionately on them. Conclusion: A Separate Set of Rules for Mortgage Loans Held by Community Banks In mortgage lending, crafting a regulatory approach that is effective in preventing abuse but that leaves room for traditional community bank lending is challenging. And designing appropriate exemptions is no easier. I have presented evidence today indicating that community banks are important to the mortgage market, that they are able to relieve some capacity constraints at the margin, that mortgage lending is important to their balance sheets and their profitability in the aggregate, and that they are a source of responsible lending. Their lending is likely most important in the market for non-standard properties or borrowers. Having confirmed these conditions, I am convinced that the best course for policymakers would be to abandon efforts for a one-size-fits-all approach to mortgage lending. Balancing the cost of regulation that is prescriptive with respect to underwriting, loan structure, and operating procedures against the lack of evidence that balance sheet lending by community banks created significant problems, I think an argument can be made that it is appropriate to establish a separate, simpler regulatory structure to cover such lending. Such a regime should still establish appropriate safeguards to protect consumers, but it should do so in a way that recognizes the characteristics of community bank lending, perhaps by focusing on appropriate disclosures and relying on regular on-site supervision to test for appropriate underwriting and loan structuring. I originally requested this information to help me understand the implications of mortgage risk weightings in the capital proposal. But as I investigated the data, I realized that the regulatory burden surrounding mortgages extends beyond the capital rules and that addressing the problem will take more than a tweak here or an exemption there. I think it will require a different approach. The regulators cannot, on their own, craft a new approach to regulating mortgage lending by community banks. However, I hope that this data will be useful to bankers and policymakers as they discuss more broadly the establishment of a regulatory regime that preserves the important role of community banks in mortgage lending. 1. See 77 FR 52791, 77 FR 52888, and 77 FR 52978. See also Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2012). " Federal Reserve Board invites comment on three proposed rules intended to help ensure banks maintain strong capital positions ," press release, June 7. Return to text 2. For more information, see the Board's public website . Return to text 3. See Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2012). " Agencies Provide Guidance on Regulatory Capital Rukemakings ," press release, November 9. Return to text 4. See " Statement by Governor Elizabeth A. Duke ," attachment to Federal Reserve press release (June 7, 2012). Return to text 5. See The Federal Reserve System (2012), " The Regulatory Capital Proposals: Frequently Asked Questions ," Community Banking Connections (Third Quarter). Return to text 6. See Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2012), " Federal Reserve Board extends comment period on three proposed capital rules rulemakings until October 22, 2012 ," press release, August 8. Return to text 7. See Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2012), " Agencies release a regulatory capital estimation tool to assist in assessing the potential effects of recently proposed regulatory capital rules ," press release, September 24. Return to text 8. For more information refer to Robert B. Avery, Kenneth P. Brevoort, Neil Bhutta, and Glenn B. Canner (2012), " The Mortgage Market in 2011: Highlights from the Data Reported under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bulletin , vol. 98 (September 18). Return to text 9. The data include information about the types and purposes of the loans; the disposition of applications; information about the borrowers, such as their incomes; and information about the location of the properties securing loans. Although HMDA's coverage does not extend to lending institutions with offices exclusively in rural areas, its coverage of the home lending market is considerable, including more than 7,600 institutions and nearly 12 million applications in 2011. Return to text 10. Estimates are based on the number of first-lien mortgage originations related to one- to four-family dwellings as reported under HMDA. Return to text 11. Some industry sources suggest that the mortgage market is getting more concentrated at the top. The share of mortgage-related activity of large banks is greater if market share estimates are based on both the number of loan originations and loan purchases. Return to text 12. From year-end 2007 to June 2012, the number of banks with assets under $10 billion declined 15 percent from 7,188 to 6,110. Return to text 13. In 2011, 56 percent of the conventional home-purchase loans by small community banks and about 40 percent of those originated by larger community banks were held in portfolio as compared to 30 percent for the largest banks. For this analysis only, loans originated in the first three quarters of 2011 were considered because of the delay between origination and loan sale. The analysis assumes loans sold to affiliates are held in portfolio. Return to text 14. Under HMDA, lenders report the spread between the "average prime offer rate" (APOR) and the annual percentage rate (APR) on a loan if the difference (or "spread") exceeds 1.5 percentage points for first-lien loans or 3.5 percentage points for junior lien loans of a similar type (for example, a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage). The APOR, which is published weekly by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC), is an estimate of the APR on loans being offered to high-quality prime borrowers based on the contract interest rates and discount points reported by Freddie Mac in its Primary Mortgage Market Survey. Return to text 15. For Call Report data, refer to www2.fdic.gov/Call_TFR_Rpts . For FR Y-9C data, refer to www.ffiec.gov/nicpubweb/nicweb/nichome.aspx . Return to text 16. An escrow account generally is any account that a servicer establishes or controls on behalf of a borrower to collect and pay taxes, insurance premiums, or other charges with respect to a mortgage loan. Return to text Last Update: November 09, 2012 Back to Top
