Communicating a Systematic Monetary Policy Society of American Business Editors and Writers Fall Conference City University of New York (CUNY) Graduate School of Journalism New York, NY October 10, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Communicating a Systematic Monetary Policy Society of American Business Editors and Writers Fall Conference City University of New York (CUNY) Graduate School of Journalism New York, NY October 10, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights  President Plosser discusses how effective communications and a systematic, rule-like monetary policy lead to better economic outcomes.  President Plosser believes the appropriate way to make policy systematic, or rule-like, is to base policy decisions on economic conditions. He thinks policymakers should describe the reaction function that determines how the current and future policy rates will be set depending on economic data. Monetary policy should be data dependent, not date dependent.  President Plosser also believes the Fed should think of forward guidance as part of a systematic approach to decision-making and not an independent policy tool that attempts to bend expectations. As monetary policy becomes normalized, the Fed has the opportunity to ensure the public understands that forward guidance is an integrated part of a systematic approach to policy. Introduction Thank you. As you may know, this is the centennial year for the Federal Reserve. On December 23, 1913, President Woodrow Wilson signed into law the act that created the Federal Reserve System, and on November 16, 1914, the 12 Reserve Banks officially opened their doors as independently chartered banks. Oversight was assigned to a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. That decentralized structure is one of our great strengths, but it requires that I begin by reminding you that the views I express this morning are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 2 Since this is a professional society of business editors and writers, I thought I would discuss the benefits of clear communications as part of a systematic, rule-like approach to setting monetary policy. During the past eight years, I have spoken and written frequently about ways to improve the framework we use for making monetary policy decisions. In my view, the monetary policy framework is most effective when the central bank: • Commits to a set of clearly articulated objectives that can be feasibly achieved by monetary policy; • Conducts monetary policy in a systematic or rule-like manner; • Communicates its policies and actions to the public in a clear and transparent way; and • Protects its independence by maintaining a clear separation of monetary policy from fiscal policy. These four principles are interrelated, and, as you will see, communication is a key ingredient for a sound policy framework. To its credit, the Federal Reserve has sought to strengthen its communications and its monetary policy framework in recent years. I have described the process as like a journey, with each step contributing to a more informed public and a more transparent central bank. While we have made strides over the past several decades, I also recognize that the journey in recent years has taken us into unchartered territory. Extraordinary actions by the Fed in response to the Great Recession have presented unique communications challenges, which have made clarity more difficult. Yet, I believe we have nonetheless made progress. The Journey Thus Far Just consider how far we have come. It was once taken for granted that the central bank was supposed to be secretive and mysterious. The guiding principle was simple: The less said about monetary policy, the better. Indeed, it was not until 1994 that the FOMC began to announce 3 policy changes made at its meetings. Before then, the markets were left to infer the policy action from the Fed’s behavior in the market.1 Since then, the FOMC has issued statements at each meeting, which include a vote tally, along with the views of dissenters. The FOMC now expedites the release of the minutes, publishing them three weeks after each meeting. It also reports the economic projections of Committee participants four times a year. These meetings are followed by press conferences with the chair of the FOMC. In 2012, the FOMC issued a statement clarifying our longer-run goals and strategy, including an explicit 2 percent target for inflation. And the economic projections now include information about the policy path assumptions of participants. These last two initiatives were based on the recommendations of a subcommittee on communications led by then Vice Chair Yellen, which included President Evans of Chicago, former Governor Raskin, and myself. This summer, Chair Yellen asked Vice Chair Fischer to lead a new subcommittee on communications, with Governor Powell, President Williams of San Francisco, and President Mester of Cleveland, to continue to find ways to improve communications. Clearly Articulating Objectives Let’s consider how communications support each of the four principles of sound central banking, beginning with clearly articulating the objectives of monetary policy. But before doing so, it is useful to spell out exactly what the FOMC is supposed to do. The Federal Reserve Act specifies the Fed “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy's long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are stable, many have interpreted these goals as a dual mandate to manage fluctuations in employment in the short run while preserving price stability in the long run. 1 See the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, “Timeline to Transparency,” www.philadelphiafed.org/about-the- fed/transparency/ (accessed October 9, 2014). 4 However, most economists are dubious of the ability of monetary policy to predictably and precisely control employment in the short run, and there is a strong consensus that monetary policy cannot determine employment in the long run. As the FOMC noted in its statement on longer-run goals adopted in 2012, the maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors, such as changing demographics, which affect the structure and dynamics of the labor m arket. In my view, excessive focus on short-run control of employment weakens the credibility and effe ctiveness of the Fed in achieving its price stability objective. We learned this lesson most dramatically during the 1970s when, despite the extensive efforts to reduce unemployment, the Fed essentially failed, and the nation experienced a prolonged period of high unemployment and high inflation. The economy paid the price in the form of a deep recession, as the Fed sought to restore the credibility of its commitment to price stability. When establishing the longer-term goals and objectives for any organization, and particularly one that serves the public, it is important that the goals be achievable. Assigning unachievable goals to organizations is a recipe for failure. For the Fed, it could mean a loss of public confidence. I fear that the public has come to expect too much from its central bank and too much from monetary policy, in particular. We need to heed the words of Nobel Prize winner, Milton Friedman. In his 1967 presidential address to the American Economic Association, he said, “we are in danger of assigning to monetary policy a larger role than it can perform, in danger of asking it to accomplish tasks that it cannot achieve, and as a result, in danger of preventing it from making the contribution that it is capable of making.”2 In my view, the dual mandate has contributed to a view that monetary policy can accomplish far more than it is, perhaps, capable of achieving. Even though the FOMC’s 2012 statement of 2 See Milton Friedman, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 58:1 (March 1968), pp. 1–17. 5 objectives acknowledged that it is inappropriate to set a fixed goal for employment and that maximum employment is influenced by many factors, the FOMC’s recent policy statements have increasingly given the impression that it wants to achieve an employment goal as quickly as possible through aggressive monetary accommodation. I believe that assigning multiple objectives for the central bank opens the door to highly discretionary policies, which can be justified by shifting the focus or rationale for action from goal to goal. That is why I have argued that Congress ought to redefine the Fed’s monetary policy goals to focus solely, or at least primarily, on price stability. I base this on two facts: Monetary policy has a very limited ability to influence real variables, such as employment. And, in a regime with fiat currency, only the central bank can ensure price stability. Indeed, it is the one goal that the central bank can achieve over the longer run. Setting clear, achievable objectives is part of the framework. Asking policymakers to pursue those objectives in a systematic, rule-like approach is the second key principle. The Benefits of Systematic Monetary Policy So, what do I mean by a systematic approach to policy? Quite simply, I mean conducting policy in a more rule-like manner. It is difficult for policymakers to choose a systematic rule-like approach that would tie their hands and thus limit their discretionary ability. Yet, economists have long been aware of the benefits of rule-like behavior. Dating as far back as 1936, Henry Simons discussed how rule-like behavior is preferable to pure discretion.3 More recently, Finn Kydland and Ed Prescott in their Nobel Prize-winning work showed that a credible commitment by policymakers to behave in a systematic rule-like manner leads to better outcomes than discretion. 4 Since then, numerous papers using a variety of models have investigated the benefits of rule-like behavior in monetary policy and found that there are indeed significant 3 Henry C. Simons, “Rules Versus Authorities in Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 44:1 (February 1936). 4 Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (June 1977), pp. 473–491. 6 benefits. One of the reasons that rules work better than discretion is that they are transparent and therefore allow for simpler and more effective communication of policy decisions. Moreover, a large body of research over the last 40 years has emphasized the important role expectations play in determining economic outcomes. That means more effective communication of the decision-making process leads to more accurate expectations. When policy is set systematically, the public and financial market participants can form more accurate expectations about policy. Policy is then less of a source of instability or uncertainty. The appropriate way to make policy systematic, or rule-like, is to base policy decisions on observable economic conditions. That is, policymakers should describe the reaction function that determines how the current and future policy rate will be set depending on economic data. I want to emphasize that a reaction function does not mean a timetable or a threshold for action. Monetary policy should be data dependent, not date dependent. And the use of that data must recognize that policymakers are no more certain about future economic conditions than anyone else is. Thus, the future path of policy will always be highly uncertain. However, a reaction function should explain how the policy rate will be determined in the future as a function of economic conditions. I also want to clear up some confusion about whether a reaction function is somehow mechanical. The science of monetary policy has not reached the point where we can specify a single optimal rule for setting policy and turn decision-making over to a computer. Judgment is still required. Because we do not know the true model of the economy, I would suggest the FOMC begin by considering and reporting on a set of robust policy rules designed to have good results in a variety of models and across various stages of the business cycle. Such robust rules recognize that data are measured imprecisely and are subject to revision. By considering such robust rules, the FOMC might be able to move toward a consensus on a 7 qualitative description of its reaction function as an important first step. For example, we would not have to specify the precise mathematical rule but would provide assessments of key variables and then communicate our policy decisions in terms of changes in these key variables. If policy were changed, then we would explain that change in terms of how the variables in our response function changed. If we choose a consistent set of variables and systematically use them to describe our policy choices, then the public will form more accurate judgments about the likely course of policy. That will reduce uncertainty, promote stability, and lead to greater transparency. Increasing Transparency As I mentioned at the outset, communications has been the subject of considerable discussion in recent years. It took on heightened importance as the FOMC responded to the financial crisis and recession. Since December 2008, the federal funds rate target has been near zero. Since the nominal federal funds rate cannot go below zero, we had to develop alternative policy tools in an effort to provide further accommodation to support the recovery, such as the large-scale asset purchase program. We also had to figure out how and what to communicate about these new tools. The asset purchase program has had many dimensions, such as the overall volume of purchases, the pace of purchases, the kind of assets targeted for purchase, and the criteria for starting and stopping the purchases. Policymakers have tried to fine-tune the program along each dimension while assessing the tradeoffs among them and the tradeoffs with other policy tools, such as the traditional funds rate decision. With so many moving parts to our policy framework, it is not surprising that communication is very complicated and challenging. The task was further complicated because one of the unconventional measures employed by the FOMC was so-called forward guidance. Forward guidance is the central banker’s term for communications about the future path of policy. One way to think of forward guidance is that it is just another step toward increased transparency and effective communication of monetary policy. However, another rationale for forward guidance is that it is a way of increasing accommodation in a period when the policy rate is at or near the zero lower bound. Some 8 models suggest that when you are at the zero lower bound, it can be desirable, or optimal, to indicate that future policy rates will be kept “lower for longer” than might otherwise be the case. In this approach, such a commitment would tend to raise inflation expectations and lower long-term nominal rates, thereby inducing households and businesses to spend more today. This approach asks more of forward guidance than just articulating a reaction function. It takes more credibility and commitment because it requires policymakers to directly influence and manage the public’s beliefs about the future policy path in ways that are different from how they may have behaved in the past. As I have indicated in previous speeches, this approach to forward guidance can backfire if the policy is misunderstood. 5 For example, if the public hears that the policy rate will be lower for longer, it may interpret this news as policymakers saying that they expect the economy to be weaker for longer. If the message is interpreted in that way, then the forward guidance will not succeed and may even weaken current spending. I believe we should think of forward guidance as part of systematic approach to decision- making and not an independent policy tool that attempts to bend expectations. As monetary policy becomes normalized, we have the opportunity to ensure the public understands that forward guidance is an integrated part of a systematic approach to policy. So, what additional steps can we take to increase transparency? I think that the FOMC could improve communication and transparency by preparing a more comprehensive monetary policy report on a regular basis, perhaps quarterly. Currently, the Chair testifies before Congress twice a year and submits an accompanying written report. In addition, the Chair holds press briefings four times a year when participants present their economic projections. I think there is an opportunity to combine these efforts into a more comprehensive report on monetary policy as many other countries do. The report would offer an opportunity to 5 See Charles I. Plosser, “Forward Guidance,” speech to the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research’s (SIEPR) Associates Meeting, February 12, 2013, Stanford, CA. 9 reinforce the underlying policy framework and how it relates to current and expected economic conditions. Ideally, this report would incorporate a discussion of robust systematic rules I referred to a moment ago. Such a discussion would provide the opportunity to inform the public about the expected future path of policy conditioned on how the economy evolves. Publishing a monetary policy report with an assessment of the likely near-term path of policy rates, in conjunction with its economic forecast, would also provide added discipline for policymakers to stick to a systematic, rule-like approach. Providing information about how that path is likely to evolve forces policymakers to think more deeply and systematically about policy. Communication about that path, in turn, gives the public a much deeper understanding of the analytical approach that guides monetary policy. While I am discussing transparency, I also want to touch on another misconception. Some commentators express the view that dissent causes dissonance and therefore confuses the communications. In fact, letting the public know about our debates and differing views is more transparent than hiding behind false consensus. Monetary policymaking is conducted by committee, and divergent views can and often do exist. While this can be clumsy at times, such governance mechanisms have great strength in preventing institutions from lapsing into groupthink by ensuring that various views are heard in an environment that promotes better decisions and outcomes, and they help to preserve the central bank’s independence and accountability. Open dialogue and diversity of views leads to better policy decisions and is the primary means by which new ideas are gradually incorporated into our monetary policy framework. Thus, I believe diversity of thought is a sign of thoughtful progress. I have often quoted the famous American journalist Walter Lippmann who said, “Where all men think alike, no one thinks very much.” I think it is healthy for the American public to know that we debate some of the same issues that those outside the Fed debate. Hiding such debate behind a unanimous vote does 10 nothing to promote true transparency. Preserving Independence Finally, I believe that the fundamental concept of a decentralized central bank has great merit, in part, because it helps to preserve the independence and maintain the public trust in the institution. Independence is essential if a central bank is to play its fundamental role in preserving the purchasing power of a fiat currency. History is replete with examples of governments using the power to print money as a substitute for making tough fiscal choices, and the results are almost always d isastrous. Central bank independence is a fundamental tenet of sound central banking and leads to better economic outcomes. But independence must be accompanied by accountability. And accountability is more easily achieved when there is transparency. The public can best hold a central bank accountable when its goals are clearly stated and achievable. Transparent and clear communications of monetary policy goals and a decision-making framework help ensure accountability and preserve central bank independence. Transparency can also enhance a central bank’s credibility. A central bank that is transparent will be less willing to make promises it cannot keep. When policy pronouncements are more credible, policy is more effective. Transparency can also make it easier to explain changes in policy without damaging the central bank’s credibility. Conclusion To summarize, the FOMC is on a journey to improve communications and the transparency of its monetary policy decision-making process. The benefits of transparency are now accepted by policymakers across the globe. Transparency not only improves the effectiveness of monetary policy, it also improves the central bank’s credibility and accountability with the public. The FOMC’s recent moves to publish guidelines on its longer-run goals and policy strategy and the policy assumptions that underlie FOMC projections are great strides toward this goal. 11 However, more can be done. In particular, I believe the FOMC should continue to work toward increasing the public understanding of how policy will react systematically to changes in economic conditions. I believe the FOMC should move forward to describe a reaction function and then communicate our actions and decisions in terms of this reaction function. A detailed monetary policy report could be a useful vehicle for such enhanced communication. Because systematic policy is easily communicated to the public, it will improve the transparency and predictability of monetary policy, which reduces policy surprises. Businesses and consumers are more informed about the course of monetary policy because they understand how policymakers are likely to react to changing economic circumstances even if they are not certain what those economic conditions might be. Equally important in my view is that greater clarity about policymakers’ reaction function strengthens accountability. Thus, systematic policy, communicated transparently, strengthens accountability and serves to preserve the central bank’s independence.

The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Lehigh Valley Partnership and Lehigh Valley Economic Development Corporation Allentown, PA October 16, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Economic Breakfast Lehigh Valley Partnership and Lehigh Valley Economic Development Corporation October 16, 2014 Allentown, PA Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser gives his views on the regional and national economy and discusses why he remains optimistic about the economic prospects ahead. • President Plosser shares some thoughts about the stance of monetary policy. He also explains why he departed from the majority view at the July and September Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings. • While he is not suggesting that rates should necessarily be increased now, President Plosser believes that the FOMC’s forward guidance should be adjusted to reflect economic realities and to give the Fed the flexibility to respond sooner and more gradually to the evolution of the economy. Introduction I want to thank Scott Fainor, the Lehigh Valley Partnership, and the Lehigh Valley Economic Development Corporation for sponsoring this breakfast. One month from today, on November 16, 2014, we will mark the 100th anniversary of the date when the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, each independently chartered by Congress, first opened their doors to begin serving our nation’s economy. That opening day in Philadelphia and in the other 11 cities was the outcome of the Federal Reserve Act, which was signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on December 23, 1913. Wilson is credited with engineering a compromise that created our nation’s decentralized central bank. To balance economic and geographic interests, Congress created a Federal Reserve System of regional Reserve Banks with oversight provided by 2 a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. This decentralized structure is one of our great strengths and mirrors the federalist framework of the nation. However, it requires that I begin by reminding you that the views I express this morning are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Since we are so close to this centennial milestone, I thought I would begin with a little background about how the Fed works and how we are structured before I offer some thoughts on the economic outlook and monetary policy. Exactly what are these nearly 100-year-old institutions? The Reserve Banks perform several roles. They distribute currency, act as a bankers’ bank, and serve as the bank for the U.S. Treasury. They also play a critical role in supervising many banks and bank holding companies across the country. The 12 Reserve Banks also serve as the eyes and ears of our central bank in assessing the economic pulse of Main Street as it formulates and implements monetary policy. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors selected to represent a cross- section of banking, commercial, and community interests. These directors fulfill the traditional governance role, but they also provide valuable insights into economic and financial conditions, which contribute to our assessment of the economy. The Reserve Banks seek to stay in touch with Main Street in other ways. Some have Branch offices with their own boards, and all have a variety of advisory councils. The Federal Reserve Banks also collect and analyze data about economic activity. However, published data are generally looking backward at the last month or the last quarter. So, the viewpoints we gather through our boards and advisory councils, and our outreach to businesses and communities through events like this help us add a real- 3 time perspective to the data and help us form a rich and detailed mosaic of our nation’s economy. Within the Federal Reserve, the body that considers this mosaic as it makes monetary policy decisions is the FOMC. Here again, Congress has designed the System with a number of checks and balances. Since 1935, the composition of the FOMC has included the seven Governors in Washington, D.C., who are appointed by the President of the United States and confirmed by the Senate, as well as the president of the New York Fed, and four other Reserve Bank presidents, who serve one-year terms as members on a rotating basis. Philadelphia votes this year, but whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee’s assessment of the economy and the policy options. The FOMC has eight regularly scheduled meetings each year to set monetary policy. In normal times, the Committee votes to adjust short-term interest rates to achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us. The goals for monetary policy are articulated in the Federal Reserve Act and specify that the FOMC “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are stable, many have interpreted these instructions as being a dual mandate to promote maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Economic Conditions So, with that background, let me turn to an overview of the U.S. economy as we enter the fourth quarter of 2014. The economic expansion began more than five years ago in June 2009. While the pace has been sluggish and uneven, I believe progress is undeniable. In fact, I remain optimistic about the prospects ahead. 4 This year began with a harsh winter, which proved to be highly disruptive to the economy. Gross domestic product (GDP) declined at a 2.1 percent annual rate in the first quarter. But second-quarter GDP growth rebounded to 4.6 percent, according to the most recent estimates. In the second quarter, the strongest recoveries were in categories that were most directly affected by the first quarter’s severe weather, including investment in equipment, residential structures, inventory accumulation, and exports. Personal consumption, the largest spending sector of the economy, slowed during the first quarter to 1.2 percent. After all, it is hard to go shopping when snow and ice keep you from getting out of your house or driveway. In the second quarter, personal consumption growth roughly doubled to 2.5 percent. Purchases of durable goods, such as automobiles, advanced at an annualized rate of 14.1 percent. I anticipate that consumer and business spending will help real GDP to grow at about 3 percent for the remainder of this year and next before reverting to trend, which I see as about 2.4 percent. The Philadelphia Fed’s Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey has proven to be a reliable indicator of national manufacturing trends in the U.S. We will get October’s reading just after this meeting at 10 a.m., but September’s reading was the seventh consecutive month in positive territory. The survey’s future activity indexes remained at high readings, suggesting continued optimism about manufacturing growth. In late September, the Bank also officially launched a monthly Nonmanufacturing Business Outlook Survey, which we have been conducting since March 2011. The latest results from nonmanufacturing firms suggest continued expansion in the region. The jobs report for September was also very strong, with employers adding 248,000 jobs 5 in the month nationwide. Additionally, the initial low estimate for August was revised upward, as was the estimate for July. These revisions added 69,000 more jobs. In all, employers have added more than 2 million jobs thus far in 2014, at an average pace of 227,000 per month through September. The unemployment rate fell to 5.9 percent, marking its lowest level since July 2008 and well below the 6.7 percent we experienced in December 2013. Even the broader U6 measure, which includes discouraged workers and involuntary part-time workers, dropped to 11.8 percent, its lowest since October 2008 and down from 13.1 percent in December 2013. The unemployment rate continues to fall faster than many policymakers had been forecasting. For instance, in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) submitted in December 2013, the central tendency of FOMC participants was an unemployment rate of 6.3 to 6.6 percent at the end of 2014, and by the end of 2015, the central tendency was expected to be 5.8 to 6.1 percent. We have clearly exceeded these expectations. The unemployment rate is now below where the Committee thought it would be at the end of 2014 and is now within the range expected at the end of 2015. Thus, it is fair to say that we are at least a year ahead of where we thought we would be when we started to taper asset purchases. In fact, in September, the central tendency was lowered yet again to 5.9 from 6.0 percent for 2014 and to 5.4 from 5.6 percent by the end of 2015. We reached our year-end number for 2014 weeks later. How soon will we reach the year-end 2015 number? In Pennsylvania, job growth has been positive as well. The state added more than 47,000 jobs over the past 12 months. The August unemployment rate in Pennsylvania was 5.8 percent, down 1.6 points from a year ago and down from a peak of 8.7 percent immediately following the recession. 6 This is not to claim that all is rosy in the labor markets. Many Americans remain frustrated and disappointed in their jobs and job prospects. For example, a large contingent of those working part time for economic reasons would like to be working full time. Nonetheless, we have to acknowledge that significant progress has been made. Inflation remains somewhat below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent, but it appears to be drifting upward. Headline inflation as measured by year-over-year change in the consumer price index, or CPI, was 1.7 in August, down from 2 percent in July. That broke a four-month streak of inflation at or above the 2 percent level. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation is the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. In December 2013, inflation stood at 1.2 percent. The most recent reading for August 2014 was 1.5 percent. Compare that with the December 2013 SEP estimates for 2014, and you will find that we are currently in line with the FOMC’s central tendency of 1.4 to 1.6 percent for PCE inflation. In the September SEP, FOMC participants left their assessment of inflation unchanged with a central tendency for PCE inflation by the fourth quarter of 2014 to between 1.5 and 1.7 percent. The Philadelphia Fed’s most recent Survey of Professional Forecasters also increased its average estimate of headline PCE inflation to 1.8 percent in 2014, up from 1.6 percent in the last survey. The survey also increased the estimate of PCE inflation to 2.0 percent in 2015, up 0.1 percentage point from the previous estimate. The FOMC has stated that it expects the inflation rate to gradually rise to the 2 percent target, and I agree with that assessment. Since last year, the economy has moved closer to the Committee’s goals and has done so more quickly than anticipated. Yet, the stance of policy and its projected path provided by the Committee have not changed. 7 Monetary Policy So, let me turn to some thoughts on monetary policy, including why I departed from the majority view at the July and September FOMC meetings. The Fed has taken extraordinary monetary policy actions, keeping the federal funds rate near zero for nearly six years and expanding its balance sheet to more than $4.5 trillion. Yet, the recovery began over five years ago, and the unemployment rate has declined from 10 percent in October 2009 to 5.9 percent now. Whether you believe that the labor market has fully recovered or not, it is clear that we have made considerable progress toward full employment and price stability. We are no longer in the depths of a financial crisis nor is the labor market in the same dire straits it was five years ago. In its July and September statements, the FOMC reaffirmed its highly accommodative stance. The statements noted that “in determining how long to maintain the current 0 to ¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will assess progress — both realized and expected — toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.” In assessing this progress, the Committee reported that it will look at a wide range of information, including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The FOMC also noted, based on its assessment of these factors, “that it likely will be appropriate to keep its target federal funds rate near zero for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends …” I objected to this forward guidance regarding the expected timing for raising the funds rate because I believe this language is no longer appropriate or warranted. Appropriate monetary policy must respond to the data. I believe that by indicating that the FOMC 8 continues to anticipate that it will be a “considerable time” after the end of asset purchases before it is likely that the Committee will raise interest rates does not reflect the significant progress made toward our goals. It also limits the Committee’s flexibility to take action going forward. We have moved much closer to our goals since last December, and, accordingly, the stance of monetary policy should reflect such progress and begin to adjust gradually. That is the essence of being data dependent. In the current context, we must acknowledge and thus prepare the markets for the fact that interest rates may begin to increase sooner than previously anticipated. I felt that adjusting our language was the appropriate first step in responding to better-than-anticipated economic conditions. My view is informed, as I have indicated, by realized and projected economic progress toward our goals. But it is also influenced by guidance gained from the historical conduct of past monetary policy. In particular, my views on the appropriate funds rate setting are — and continue to be — informed by Taylor-type monetary policy rules that depict the past behavior of monetary policy in response to deviation from its desired inflation target and economic activity from its natural or efficient level. I find such rules useful for benchmarking my policy prescriptions. These rules have been widely investigated and have been shown to be robust in that they deliver good results in a wide variety of models and circumstances. The guidance I take from such robust rules is that we should no longer consider monetary policy as being constrained by the zero lower bound. A variety of these rules, which I discussed in a speech earlier this summer, indicates that given the current inflation rate of just under our target of 2 percent and the current unemployment rate of 5.9 percent, the funds rate should be above zero or should be lifting off in the very 9 near future.1 In fact, maintaining a funds rate target near zero is unprecedented under such circumstances and as such could pose risks to the economy in the years ahead, including higher inflation and financial instability. I am not suggesting that rates should necessarily be increased now. Our first task is to change the language in a way that allows for liftoff sooner than many now anticipate and sooner than suggested by our current guidance. Raising rates sooner rather than later also reduces the chance that inflation will accelerate and require policy to become fairly aggressive with perhaps unsettling consequences. Thus, I believe that our forward guidance should be adjusted to reflect economic realities and to give us the flexibility to respond sooner and more gradually to the evolution of the economy. There is a point of view that rates cannot be raised because the labor market has not completely healed. That is, we must wait, maintaining our current stance of policy until we have achieved our goals. I think this is a risky strategy for three reasons. First, we do not know how to confidently determine whether the labor market is fully healed or when we have reached full employment. In January 2012, the FOMC affirmed in its statement of longer run goals and strategies that, “The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors, such as demographics or advancements in technology, may change over time and may not be directly measurable.” Chair Yellen gave an excellent speech at the Jackson Hole conference in August that highlighted some of the structural and nonmonetary factors affecting the labor market. Economists don’t fully understand how these factors may be influencing our efforts to assess the meaning and measurement of full employment. 1 Charles I. Plosser, “Systematic Monetary Policy and Communication,” remarks to the Economic Club of New York, New York, NY, June 24, 2014. 10 Second, if we wait until we are certain that the labor market has fully recovered before beginning to raise rates, policy will be far behind the curve. One risk of waiting is that the Committee may be forced to raise rates very quickly to prevent an increase in inflation. In so doing, this may create unnecessary volatility and a rapid tightening of financial conditions — either of which could be disruptive to the economy. This would represent a return of the so-called “go-stop” policies of the past. Such language was used to describe episodes when the Fed was aggressively providing monetary accommodation to stimulate employment and the economy — the go phase — only to find itself forced to apply the brakes abruptly to prevent a rapid uptick in inflation — the stop phase. This approach to policy led to more volatility and was more disruptive than many found desirable. A third risk to waiting is that the zero interest rate policy has generated a very aggressive reach for yield as investors take on either credit or duration risk to earn higher returns. While the Fed is attempting to monitor such behavior, it is difficult to know how or where the consequences of such actions may show up. It seems to me that the law of unintended consequences looms large in this arena. For these reasons, I would prefer that we start to raise rates sooner rather than later. This may allow us to increase rates more gradually as the data improve rather than face the prospect of a more abrupt increase in rates to catch up with market forces, which could be the outcome of a prolonged delay in our willingness to act. Conclusion In conclusion, I remain positive about the economic outlook. Second quarter growth has rebounded after the disappointing first quarter caused by the harsh winter. At the end of this month, we will get the first look at the third quarter, which I expect will help us reach an average of about 3 percent for the remainder of this year and in 2015, 11 before settling back down to long-term growth levels of about 2.4 percent. The unemployment rate continues to improve more quickly than many had expected. We are now approaching the rate that many policymakers view as a long-run sustainable value. Inflation appears to be drifting up toward our 2 percent goal. Raising rates sooner rather than later reduces the chance that inflation will accelerate and, in so doing, require policy to become fairly aggressive with perhaps unsettling consequences. Waiting too long to begin raising rates — especially waiting until we have fully met our goals for maximum employment — is risky because we cannot know when we have arrived. That could also put monetary policy behind the curve and could lead to a return to abrupt go-stop policies that in the past have led to unwelcome volatility. Finally, delay is likely to increase the risk of overstaying our welcome at the zero bound, thus fostering unintended consequences for financial stability. If monetary policy is to be truly data dependent, then our stance of policy must begin to change. I’m not suggesting a rate increase now, but changing the forward guidance would at least afford us the flexibility to gradually raise rates beginning earlier than currently anticipated.

The U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy UBS European Conference 2014 London, England November 12, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 The U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy UBS European Conference 2014 London, England November 12, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser gives his views on the U.S. economy and discusses why he remains positive about the economic prospects for the U.S. • President Plosser shares some thoughts about the stance of monetary policy and the advantages of raising rates gradually and starting sooner instead of being forced to raise them abruptly later. • President Plosser believes that the FOMC’s forward guidance should be adjusted to provide more information about the reaction function and how policy will respond to economic data. This will give the Fed the flexibility to respond more gradually to the evolution of the economy. Introduction It is a pleasure to be with you this morning. I want to thank our host Axel Weber for that kind introduction and for inviting me to speak at this annual conference and to participate in the upcoming panel on monetary policy with fellow central bankers. I am looking forward to a lively and interesting discussion. In a few days, on November 16, 2014, we will mark the 100th anniversary of the date when the 12 Federal Reserve Banks, each independently chartered with oversight by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C, first opened their doors. Of course, among central banks, this makes the Fed the new kid on the block compared with the Bank of England; it also makes the Fed perhaps an older sibling to the ECB. I view the decentralized structure of the Federal Reserve as one of its great strengths. However, it requires that I begin by reminding you that the views I express this morning are my own 2 and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Economic Conditions Let me begin with an update on the U.S. economy. The U.S. is now more than five years into a steady, if unremarkable, recovery that began in June 2009. The unemployment rate has gone from a peak of 10 percent in October 2009 to 5.8 percent in October of this year. Gross domestic product (GDP) declined to a 2.1 percent annual rate in the first quarter of 2014 due to a severe winter. However, second-quarter GDP growth rebounded to 4.6 percent. The advance estimate for the third-quarter GDP growth is a solid 3.5 percent. Personal consumption, which accounts for more than two-thirds of U.S. GDP, has recovered from 1.2 percent growth in the first quarter, to average 2.2 percent over the second and third quarters. I anticipate that consumer and business spending will help real GDP to grow at about 3 percent for the second half of this year and for 2015 before reverting to trend, which I see as about 2.4 percent. The Philadelphia Fed’s Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey has proven to be a reliable indicator of manufacturing trends in the U.S. In October, manufacturers reported the eighth consecutive month in positive territory and well above its average nonrecession level. The survey’s future activity indexes also remained at high levels, suggesting continued optimism about manufacturing growth. In addition, the Philadelphia Fed now releases a monthly Nonmanufacturing Business Outlook Survey, which showed that the region’s service sectors continued to grow in October, with improvement in general activity, new orders, and sales or revenues. Nonmanufacturing firms also continue to be optimistic about activity during the next six months. 3 Last week’s employment numbers showed employers adding 214,000 jobs in October. Revisions for September and August added 31,000 more jobs than originally estimated. Interestingly, what we once thought was a weak jobs report for August now shows we added 203,000 jobs, which means that we have had nine months of job growth above 200,000 for the first time in nearly 20 years. In all, employers have added more than 2.3 million jobs thus far in 2014, at an average pace of 229,000 per month through October. The unemployment rate in October was 5.8 percent, well below the 6.7 percent we experienced in December 2013. Whereas the headline U3 measure fell 0.9 percentage points since December 2013, the broader U6 measure, which includes discouraged workers and involuntary part-time workers, dropped 1.6 points, from 13.1 percent to 11.5 percent, its lowest since September 2008. The unemployment rate continues to fall faster than many policymakers had been forecasting. For instance, in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), submitted in December 2013, the central tendency of FOMC participants’ projections for the unemployment rate at the end of 2014 was 6.3 to 6.6 percent, dropping to 5.8 to 6.1 percent at the end of 2015. We have clearly exceeded these expectations. At 5.8 percent, the unemployment rate is already notably below where the Committee thought it would be at the end of 2014 and is at the low point in the range expected at the end of 2015. Thus, it is fair to say that we are at least a year ahead of where we thought we would be when we started to taper asset purchases. This is not to claim that all is rosy in the labor markets. Many Americans remain frustrated and disappointed in their jobs and job prospects. For example, a large contingent of those working part time for economic reasons would like to be working full time. Nonetheless, we have to acknowledge that significant progress has been made. 4 Inflation remains somewhat below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent, but it has risen since last year. The Fed’s preferred measure of inflation is the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. In October 2013, inflation stood at 0.9 percent. The most recent reading for September 2014 was 1.4 percent. Other measures of inflation have risen modestly as well. While inflation remains somewhat below the Fed’s target, the gap seems to be gradually closing. As noted by the FOMC in the October 2014 statement, the Committee believes it is unlikely that inflation will remain persistently below our long-term goal. The FOMC has stated that it expects the inflation rate to rise gradually to the 2 percent target, and I agree with that assessment. However, over the next quarter or two, headline inflation is likely to ease somewhat, reflecting the decline in the dollar price of oil and other temporary factors. But looking through such transitory changes in relative prices, the FOMC sees underlying inflation gradually moving toward its 2 percent target. Thus, since last year, the economy has moved closer to the Committee’s goals and has done so more quickly than anticipated. Monetary Policy So, let me turn to some thoughts on monetary policy. The Fed has taken extraordinary monetary policy actions, keeping the federal funds rate near zero for nearly six years and expanding its balance sheet to about $4.5 trillion. Yet, the recovery began over five years ago, and the unemployment rate has declined from 10 percent in October 2009 to 5.8 percent now. Whether you believe that the labor market has fully recovered or not, it is clear that the economy has made considerable progress toward full employment and price stability. We are no longer in the depths of a financial crisis nor is the labor market in the same dire straits it was five 5 years ago. To me, that means we should no longer be conducting monetary policy as if we were still in the midst of a financial crisis or in the depths of a recession. In its October statement, the FOMC reaffirmed its highly accommodative stance. In doing so, it acknowledged that the economy had made significant progress. Therefore, as widely anticipated, the Committee brought to a close its asset purchase program. However, the Committee indicated that it would continue its practice of reinvesting principal payments. This should maintain the size of the Fed’s balance sheet at its current, and sizable, level. The Committee also adjusted its language somewhat regarding the expected path of interest rates — the federal funds rate more specifically. In particular, the Committee reiterated its assessment that it would likely maintain the current target range of 0 to ¼ percent for the fed funds rate for a “considerable time” after the end of the purchases. As some of you may be aware, I objected to this forward guidance in both the July and September meetings because it conveyed a date-based approach to guidance rather than a data-based approach. I also objected to the fact that it failed to acknowledge the progress made during the last year toward full employment and price stability. While the Committee retained the “considerable time” language, it added clarity by stressing the fact that the decision to lift the interest rate target would be driven by the data. The Committee explicitly noted that should the economy make faster progress than anticipated toward its goals, liftoff could occur earlier, and if progress was slower than anticipated, liftoff could be delayed. From my perspective, this is the operative language and it makes clear that the Committee intends for policy to be data- dependent. It provides a start, but we could offer greater clarity as I will explain in a moment. As I said, we have moved much closer to our goals since last year, and, accordingly, the stance of monetary policy should reflect such progress and begin to adjust gradually. 6 That is the essence of being data dependent. Given the progress to date, we must acknowledge and thus prepare the markets for the fact that interest rates may begin to increase sooner than previously anticipated. I felt that adjusting our language was the appropriate first step in responding to better-than-anticipated economic conditions. More generally, how do I think about the stance of policy and how it should be adjusted as the economy evolves? My view is informed by realized and projected economic progress toward our goals. But it is also influenced by guidance gained from the conduct of past monetary policy — that is, historical experience. In particular, my views on the appropriate funds rate setting are — and continue to be — informed by Taylor- type monetary policy rules that depict the past behavior of monetary policy in response to deviation from its desired inflation target and economic activity from its natural or efficient level. I find such rules useful for benchmarking my policy prescriptions. These rules have been widely investigated and have been shown to be robust in that they deliver good results in a wide variety of models and circumstances. The guidance I take from such robust rules is that we should no longer consider monetary policy as being constrained by the zero lower bound. A variety of these rules, which I discussed in a speech earlier this summer, indicates that given the current inflation rate of just under our target of 2 percent and the current unemployment rate of 5.8 percent, the funds rate should be above zero or should be lifting off in the very near future. 1 In fact, maintaining a funds rate target near zero is unprecedented under such circumstances and, as such, could pose risks to the economy in the years ahead, including higher inflation and financial instability. 1 Charles I. Plosser, “Systematic Monetary Policy and Communication,” remarks to the Economic Club of New York, New York, NY, June 24, 2014. 7 There is a point of view that rates cannot be raised because the labor market has not completely healed. That is, we must wait, maintaining our current stance of policy until we have achieved our goals. I think this is a risky strategy for three reasons. First, we do not know how to confidently determine whether the labor market is fully healed or when we have reached full employment. In January 2012, the FOMC affirmed in its statement of longer run goals and strategies that, “The maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable.” Chair Yellen gave an excellent speech at the Jackson Hole conference in August that highlighted some of the structural and nonmonetary factors affecting the labor market. Economists don’t fully understand the degree to which these factors may be influencing our efforts to assess the meaning and measurement of full employment. Second, if we wait until we are certain that the labor market has fully recovered before beginning to raise rates, policy will be far behind the curve. One risk of waiting is that the Committee may be forced to raise rates very quickly to prevent an increase in inflation. In so doing, this may create unnecessary volatility and a rapid tightening of financial conditions — either of which could be disruptive to the economy. This would represent a return of the so-called “go-stop” policies of the past. Such language was used to describe episodes when the Fed was aggressively providing monetary accommodation to stimulate employment and the economy — the go phase — only to find itself forced to apply the brakes abruptly to prevent a rapid uptick in inflation — the stop phase. This approach to policy led to more volatility and was more disruptive than many found desirable. 8 A third risk to waiting is that the zero interest rate policy has generated a very aggressive reach for yield as investors take on either credit or duration risk to earn higher returns. While the Fed is attempting to monitor such behavior, it is difficult to know how or where the consequences of such actions may show up. It seems to me that the law of unintended consequences looms large in this arena. For these reasons, I would prefer that we start to raise rates sooner rather than later. This may allow us to increase rates more gradually as the data improve rather than face the prospect of a more abrupt increase in rates to catch up with market forces, which could be the outcome of a prolonged delay in our willingness to act. Of course, financial markets are not always patient, so some volatility will be unavoidable. Of course, there are also risks of moving too soon as tightening financial conditions could stifle a fragile recovery, and some argue that this is the greater risk. However, it is important to recognize that rates always rise during a recovery — always. Thus, rising rates are not inconsistent with a continuing recovery. The inflation-adjusted or real federal funds rate in the U.S. is notably negative, and it has been for some time. A negative real rate is neither sustainable nor desirable when an economy is growing at 2 to 3 percent and is near full employment. In addition, by referring to historical experience as captured in some of the rules I mentioned, we can determine, to a degree, the economic conditions that have been consistent with rising rates in the past. And as I discussed, these rules suggest that, given current conditions, we should begin raising rates in the near future. Moreover, it is important to recognize that these rule-like guidelines take into account the fact that inflation is running below our target. They do not tell us that we should keep rates at zero until inflation rises to 2 percent any more than they tell us to keep rates at zero until we reach full employment. They tell us that the stance of policy should be calibrated and adjusted based on how far the economy is from our goals. We are closer 9 to our goals than we have been in quite some time. The stance of monetary policy should reflect such progress. Conclusion In conclusion, I remain positive about the U.S. economic outlook. Growth in the second and third quarters has rebounded, demonstrating that the effects of the wintry first quarter were indeed transitory. Thus, I expect growth will average about 3 percent for the remainder of this year and in 2015, before settling back down to long-term growth levels of about 2.4 percent. The unemployment rate continues to improve more quickly than many had expected. We are now approaching the rate that many policymakers view as a long-run sustainable value. Further, numerous labor market indicators continue to show broad improvement and inflation is not appreciably below our 2 percent goal. Beginning to raise rates sooner rather than later reduces the chance that inflation will accelerate and, in so doing, require policy to become fairly aggressive with perhaps unsettling consequences. Waiting too long to begin raising rates — especially waiting until we have fully met our goals for maximum employment or attained our inflation target of 2 percent — is risky because doing so could put monetary policy behind the curve. Such policies could lead to a return to abrupt go-stop policies, which in the past have led to unwelcome volatility. Finally, delay is likely to increase the risk of overstaying our welcome at the zero bound, thus fostering unintended consequences for financial stability. If monetary policy is to be truly data dependent, then our stance of policy must change with the data. Changing the forward guidance to provide greater clarity about the policymakers’ reaction function would strengthen accountability and afford us the flexibility to gradually adjust rates as the economy evolves.

Economic Growth and Monetary Policy: Is There a New Normal? The George Washington University and Princeton University’s Griswold Center for Economic Policy Studies Philadelphia, PA November 13, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Economic Growth and Monetary Policy: Is There a New Normal? The George Washington University and Princeton University’s Griswold Center for Economic Policy Studies November 13, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser gives his views on the debate about a new normal for economic growth in the U.S. economy. • While some economists believe we are in a secular stagnation with low growth and reduced productivity that may persist for some time, President Plosser sides with those who think it is impossible to predict the state of future technology. • President Plosser notes, though, that monetary policy is not a tool that can fix such a secular stagnation in any case. Introduction I would like to thank George Washington University and Princeton University’s Griswold Center for Economic Policy Studies for organizing this event. I also am delighted to be here with my fellow panelists, Frank Schorfheide of the University of Pennsylvania, who is a regular visiting scholar at the Philadelphia Fed, Neal Soss of Credit Suisse, and, of course, our moderator, Binyamin Appelbaum of the New York Times. As usual, I should remind everyone that my remarks today are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The question of whether we are facing the prospect of some sort of new economic normal or steady state growth path is a challenging one. Some have pondered whether the severity of the financial crisis and recession, or perhaps even the policy responses to these events, have ushered in a period of low growth and reduced productivity that may persist for some time. 2 Others have suggested the seeds of a secular decline in growth predate the recession. This view stresses an evolving secular decline arising from a weakening in the rate of innovation and the productivity gains that such innovation often fosters. This view also points to demographic factors, such as an aging population, that will strain government programs that transfer resources from workers to the elderly. The evolution of longer-run growth also has implications for the longer-term real interest rate, which is largely determined by the growth in per capita consumption and the growth rate in population. In turn, the growth in per capita consumption depends on productivity gains and the share of the population engaged in production. The implications of these factors on the real interest rate is, of course, relevant for central bankers as they seek to set a policy rate to stabilize prices and promote sustainable growth. Yet, it is important to note that monetary policy is not capable of reversing or mitigating such secular slowdowns. Consequently, it is at best tangential to the efforts of a nation seeking to address secular declines in growth. In my brief time, I will highlight some of the issues underlying the views of a secular slowdown. That said, however, I want to emphasize that it is very hard to determine with any precision the longer-term growth rate of the economy. It often takes many years of data to establish any degree of confidence in asserting a change in a trend. As a result, it should come as no surprise that I do not have an answer for the question whether we are facing a new normal. Instead, I will offer observations on what I believe are some of the key issues that make such assessments so challenging. Long-Run Trends Let me start with the question of future productivity growth, since it is the most fundamental determinant of economic prosperity. Recently, Robert Gordon has advanced the notion that we are in for a bout of long-term secular stagnation.1 His writings reflect the idea, also 1 See Gordon, “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds” and “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections.” 3 proposed by Tyler Cowen, that all the low-hanging fruit has been picked and that technological advances will become increasingly more difficult.2 On the other hand, scholars such as Joel Mokyr, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Andrew McAfee do not see any reason to anticipate a long-lasting decline in human ingenuity. Gordon has produced some provocative research concerning the demise of economic growth in this country. He describes a number of headwinds, four of which are relevant for my discussion: slowing innovation, reduced growth in human capital due to a dysfunctional education system, slower population growth, and the associated changing age distribution. These four components are important because economic growth and the natural level of the real interest are directly affected by growth in total factor productivity. Further, slower growth in population or declines in participation rates due to aging, other things being equal, can reduce the natural or long-run real rate of interest and lower per-capita economic growth. Gordon’s view of stagnation is based on his evaluation of data over a long sweep of economic history. He has noted a decrease in total factor productivity, a decline in the growth rate of human capital, reduced hours per worker, and a decline in labor force participation rates. He dates the beginning of stagnation in these factors to 1972. For the 80 years before then, Gordon asserts that economic growth was sparked by three great inventions: the electric light bulb, the internal combustion engine, and wireless signals. He noted that these three inventions eventually led to rounds of spinoffs that transformed society. Gordon sees no such round of spinoffs from the IT revolution, biotech, or such advances as 3-D printing. 3 Economic historians such as Joel Mokyr are a bit more cautious, believing much as I do that it is 2 See Cowen, The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better. 3 Gordon believes that future developments from existing or even yet-to-be-invented technologies are reasonably predictable, for instance, citing Jules Verne as one such visionary. I don’t see why he then chooses to ignore the imagination of Gene Roddenberry: Think iPhones, needleless injections, and touch- screen computers, to name a few. 4 nearly impossible to predict the state of future technology.4 He notes that the 20th century experienced considerable technological advancement, even in the face of considerable headwinds, including two world wars, a cold war, and the Great Depression. Some might argue, however, that the world wars were not a headwind but a boost to technological advancement. It also may be that some impediments to innovation are not endemic to the nature or science of technological progress, but instead they are created by governments and thus can be reversed. For example, does increased regulation make the development of new drugs more costly and risky? Could the significant increase in financial regulation after the financial crisis reduce the productivity of intermediation and thus impede investment and possibly the rate of growth? Or have increased taxes on the returns to saving and investment to support transfer programs potentially reduced productivity growth? Regulatory and tax burdens can often act to reduce entrepreneurial activity and innovation and thus retard productivity growth. Such costs must be weighed against any perceived benefits of such burdens. Brynjolfsson and McAfee are very optimistic about the future. They believe that we are at an inflection point and that a substantial period of more robust economic growth awaits us in the not-too-distant future. 5 They point out that many revolutionary discoveries, such as DNA sequencing, occurred by creatively stringing together prior scientific procedures. They point out that the improvements in computational speeds and algorithmic developments are making computers capable of stringing together ideas, which could result in significant improvements in productivity. I believe technological advancement and the increased productivity it can foster is the overwhelming driving force behind economic growth. Demographic factors that may drive 4 See Mokyr, “The Next Age of Invention.” 5 See Brynjolfsson and McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. 5 hours per worker and labor force participation are relatively insignificant when compared with innovation’s effects on productivity. After all, the remarkable growth of the 20th century occurred with a significant decline in the workweek from 60 hours to less than 40, as well as a significant increase in vacation or leisure time. It is hard to envision a decline of similar magnitude going forward. Thus, I continue to have faith in the promise of human ingenuity and do not envision the dire outcomes envisioned by Gordon.6 That does not mean that we won’t experience spurts of unusually high- and low-productivity growth, but those periods are likely to be identified and understood only well after the fact. The arguments presented by both sides of the secular stagnation debate highlight that the future could unfold in very different ways. I think there is no doubt that longer-term growth rates can and do vary, and thus, longer-term real interest rates also vary. Yet, such movements tend to occur gradually and are very difficult to assess with any precision in real time. As my discussion suggests, we should focus on policies designed to enhance innovation and productivity if we are to continue to improve per capita consumption and general economic welfare. Monetary Policy How do variations in the longer-term growth rate of the economy, and thus the longer-term real rate of interest, affect monetary policy? First, I want to reiterate that long-term growth is primarily determined by productivity growth. Monetary policy is not an appropriate tool for addressing perceived declines in productivity. However, assessments of long-run potential growth can influence the setting of monetary policy because they influence the steady-state or long-run real interest rate. If steady-state real rates are lower, then the so-called “neutral setting of monetary policy” would also be lower. That is, the neutral funds rate would be lower. 6 Summers in “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound ” offers different concerns. He argues that the real rate of interest may have declined to very low, or even negative, levels leading to the possibility of an inefficient equilibrium and a form of secular stagnation. 6 The debate about a secular decline in growth today thus translates into a discussion of where, or how high, the neutral policy rate should be. So, the higher it is relative to the current funds rate, the more aggressive policy might have to be and vice versa. But there are other factors that could complicate the policy path. If potential output is lower in the future than previously thought, then there is likely to be less “slack” in the current economy than one might think. So, “output gaps” are likely to be smaller, which in many policy rules would suggest higher interest rates, other things being equal. While a lower steady-state real rate may act to shift down the neutral rate, the effects on the dynamic path of policy as it returns to the neutral are somewhat more complex. While the expected neutral funds rate is something that may be relevant, estimating and communicating a value with any confidence would be challenging. Measuring longer-run trends is a difficult and delicate issue. Because expectations about monetary policy are important, particularly in financial markets, it may be useful for the FOMC to indicate what ranges are likely for the neutral federal funds rate. But given the uncertainties, this may be difficult and conveying a false sense of precision may prove to be counterproductive. So, I believe, adjustments to the perceived neutral funds rate should be done with great care and discipline. They should not be done in response to the typical cyclical fluctuations in real rates. Our ability to truly assess a significant shift in the longer-term real rate is quite limited, and, in the presence of such uncertainty and measurement error, one should be careful not to confuse the public. Conclusions In summary, there is a lively debate about the future of innovation and other factors that shape our prospects for growth. My own view is that human ingenuity and innovation will continue to be a source of productivity growth. But that does not mean we should be complacent about our future. Productivity is the ultimate means to economic prosperity and we should 7 undertake policies that promote innovation and technological progress and eliminate practices that discourage such progress. Monetary policy has a limited role to play in this endeavor except as it can promote a stable environment to allow these long-run forces to succeed. Yet, the appropriate setting of monetary policy can be affected by the longer-term trends. Failure to adjust to such trends can lead to deviations from a central bank’s inflation target. Yet, distinguishing short-run or transitory fluctuations from more permanent or persistent movements in growth and real interest rates is a tricky and difficult task. It is near impossible in real time. These considerations lead me to believe that monetary policymakers should take great care in making significant adjustments in their view of the neutral policy rate. We live in a constantly changing world and one that will hopefully be full of surprising new developments that enhance economic welfare. References Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee. The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company, 2014. Cowen, Tyler. The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All the Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern History, Got Sick, and Will (Eventually) Feel Better. New York, NY: Dutton Adult, 2011. Gordon, Robert J. “Is U.S. Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds,” NBER Working Paper 18315, (August 2012). Gordon, Robert J. “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections,” NBER Working Paper 19895, (February 2014). Mokyr, Joel. “The Next Age of Invention,” City Journal, (Winter 2014); www.city- journal.org/2014/24_1_invention.html. Summers, Lawrence H. “U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound,” Business Economics, Vol. 49:2 (April 2014), pp. 65–73.

A Longer-Term View of the U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy Charlotte Economics Club Charlotte, NC December 3, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 A Longer-Term View of the U.S. Economy and Monetary Policy Charlotte Economics Club Charlotte, NC December 3, 2014 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights • President Charles Plosser gives his views on the U.S. economy and discusses why it is important to take a longer-term view of economic data. • President Plosser shares some thoughts about the stance of monetary policy and the advantages of raising rates gradually and starting sooner rather than being forced to raise them abruptly later. • President Plosser also discusses how policy rules can offer useful guideposts for policymakers and the public in assessing and communicating the stance of monetary policy. Introduction Thank you for the invitation to be here today. The Charlotte Economics Club has welcomed many leading Federal Reserve voices to this podium over the years, including a number of my fellow Fed presidents. You have heard from President Jeff Lacker of the Richmond Fed, which has its Charlotte Branch over on East Trade Street, as well as Presidents Richard Fisher of Dallas and Dennis Lockhart of Atlanta. So I am pleased to have been included among your distinguished guests. On November 16, the Federal Reserve observed the 100th anniversary of the opening of all 12 Federal Reserve Banks around the country on the same day. These institutions along with the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., comprise our nation’s decentralized central bank. This decentralized structure is one of the System’s great 2 strengths. Not only does it promote a diversity of views, but it also helps to build public trust and preserve independence. However, it requires that I begin by reminding you that the views I express today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Your program chair, Professor Rob Roy McGregor, has spent a great deal of his academic career studying the workings of the FOMC — including the use of power by the Chair and the nature of consensus building and dissent within the Committee. Interestingly, some of this work has been coauthored with a former colleague of mine at the Philadelphia Fed, Todd Vermilyea, who now works at the Board of Governors. Today, I plan to talk about the importance of taking a longer-term view in setting monetary policy. We live in a 24-hour news cycle that focuses a lot of time and energy on analyzing the tea leaves from the daily onslaught of new economic data at our disposal. Yet, I believe it is a mistake for policymakers to focus too intently on the most recent numbers to justify a policy decision. Our data are always noisy and often subject to substantial revision, as we just witnessed with last week’s GDP revisions and as we see regularly with the monthly employment report. Instead, we must focus our attention on the underlying trends and the likely path of the economy over the intermediate to longer-term horizon. One reason why policymakers must think long term is that the effects of monetary policy actions on inflation and employment may not be felt for many quarters and maybe years in the future. Thus, the near term path of the economy is unlikely to be altered in any significant way by today’s policy choices. We must look further ahead in assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy. Of course, there is a great deal of uncertainty about the future and that too has implications for how we should approach policy. 3 I will begin with a brief overview of the economy as one policymaker sees it as we near the end of 2014. Economic Conditions Over the past year, we have seen encouraging signs in the economy. The most recent estimate of annualized real GDP growth in the third quarter was 3.9 percent, which followed strong growth in the second quarter of 4.6 percent. Taking a longer view, growth from the third quarter of last year to this year was 2.4 percent. But this includes a negative 2.1 percent growth rate in the first quarter of 2014 that was a consequence of a severe winter and was largely transitory in nature. We are seeing continued strength in personal consumption, especially in durable goods, as well as business fixed investment, which marked the strongest two quarter growth in investment by businesses in nearly three years. GDP growth has averaged 2.3 percent over the 21 quarters of the recovery since mid- 2009. That is a half point below the 5-year growth rates measured during most of the 2000s before the recession, which is, in part, why this recovery is often seen as being moderate or modest from an historical perspective. Nonetheless, we have seen a sustained improvement in the manufacturing sector. The November reading from the Philadelphia Fed’s Manufacturing Business Outlook Survey indicated very strong growth in manufacturing activity. Even more encouraging are the sustained increases we have witnessed in this sector. After a mediocre performance from mid-2011 to mid-2013, the index has now been positive for nearly 18 consecutive months, with the only aberration in February 2014 during the depths of our severe winter weather. Our index is often viewed as a useful indicator of national manufacturing activity, and indeed the national ISM manufacturing index has also shown solid performance over the past 18 months. 4 The labor market has also strengthened over the year. Employers added jobs at an average rate of 229,000 per month in the first 10 months of the year, which is 18 percent higher than the rate in 2013, and it’s the highest we have seen at any point in the recovery. This acceleration in job growth has helped bring the unemployment rate down to 5.8 percent as of October, compared with 7.2 percent a year ago. Over the course of this recovery, the unemployment rate has fallen from a peak of 10 percent in October 2009 to 5.8 percent today. Other measures of unemployment have also declined. For example, the measure called U6, which includes marginally attached workers and those working part time for economic reasons, has fallen from its peak of 17.2 percent to 11.5 percent. Inflation, for the moment, remains well contained. The personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, price index, the measure of inflation preferred by the FOMC, registered a 1.4 percent increase over the 12 months through October. It is running somewhat below the FOMC’s stated longer-term target of 2 percent, but it remains above the level that should stoke concerns of sustained deflation. Falling energy prices are generally good news for consumers and a favorable development for the economy going forward. In the short term, the decline in the relative price of energy will show up in lower headline inflation, but as energy prices stabilize, headline inflation will increase. Policymakers tend to look through such volatile and transitory price changes to assess the underlying trend in inflation. The core PCE index, which excludes food and energy, is a bit higher than the overall measure, increasing 1.6 percent over the 12 months through October. Other measures of inflation, including those that attempt to reduce the weight given to large outliers in any given month, all tend to suggest that inflation is running between 1.5 percent and 2 percent. Given the precision with which we can measure such things, I find this 5 outcome satisfactory. Nevertheless, I anticipate that the FOMC will conduct policy over time in such a manner that inflation will gradually move toward the Fed’s 2 percent target. Private sector forecasters seem to share this view as the Philadelphia Fed’s most recent Survey of Professional Forecasters shows that long-term inflation expectations remain stable at 2 percent. Monetary Policy In my discussion of the economy, I have emphasized the longer-run path of the recovery rather than the month-to-month fluctuations. Viewed in this context, it is clear that the economy has come a long way since the recovery began in June 2009. To me, that means we should no longer be conducting monetary policy as if we were still in the midst of a financial crisis or in the depths of a recession. The financial crisis was an extraordinary event, and much of the commentary on monetary policy has focused on the actions of central banks in response to the financial crisis. That is appropriate and understandable. Yet, there is another lesson to be learned from the past six years that I think is important to recognize. And that is how difficult it is for monetary policy to fine-tune real growth in the economy. Despite the FOMC’s stated desire and aggressive actions to accelerate the pace of the recovery, growth has proceeded at a moderate pace since the end of the crisis. Monetary policy has simply not proved to be the panacea that many had hoped. As I have argued on a number of occasions, I believe we have come to expect too much from monetary policy. We would be better served by greater humility and lowered expectations of the potential for monetary policy to manage real economic growth and employment. Ten years ago, I suspect most commentators would have told you that six years of a near-zero federal funds rate target and more than $3.5 trillion of long-term asset purchases by the Fed would likely produce an economic boom in the near term and would risk inflation in the longer term. Well, although we have experienced modest 6 growth, we have not experienced a boom, and the jury remains out as to whether inflation will materialize as a consequence. Some argue that the absence of the boom is because the Fed didn’t do enough — more was needed to offset the constraint of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. Of course, there is an alternative hypothesis: Monetary policy was not capable of offsetting or mitigating the sorts of real challenges the economy was facing. Distinguishing between these two hypotheses will undoubtedly be the subject of intense research in the coming decades. After all, economists are still studying the policy choices and their effects during the Great Depression eight decades ago. But let me turn our attention to how monetary policy should evolve going forward. I began my remarks by noting that monetary policy should focus on the intermediate to longer term and be less sensitive or reactive to short-run and transitory movements in the data. To that end, I see the economy continuing to improve with real growth averaging about 3 percent in 2015 before coming back down to its long-term trend growth rate of about 2.4 percent. Employment will continue to expand, and inflation will move closer to our 2 percent target. While people can disagree about the extent to which the labor market has healed, it is clear that the labor market is in much better shape than it was in 2009 when unemployment reached its peak of 10 percent. The economy has come a long way, and monetary policy should reflect such progress. This progress suggests that monetary policy should begin to normalize. Keeping the funds rate target near zero when inflation is close to our goal and the economy is near full employment is both unprecedented and risky in my view. Waiting too long to begin the process of raising the policy rate risks facing the possibility that the rate may have to increase rapidly when the time comes and that could prove unnecessarily disruptive. And waiting could also risk a more rapid pickup in inflation. Of course, policymakers face many uncertainties, and so they must be prepared to 7 adjust policy as the underlying trends in inflation and the real economy evolve. So, how should a central bank best inform the public about those uncertainties and the prospective path of policy? The appropriate way to communicate the future of policy is to describe in a general way a reaction function. That is to describe what key economic variables influence the setting of policy and to give a sense of how policy will change in response to changes in those variables. Over the past several years, I have criticized policy messages that suggest that calendar time is a relevant metric for determining a policy action. We must avoid such date-based forward guidance, whether it uses specific calendar dates or more vague references alluding to a “considerable period” of time. As policymakers, we do not know what the future holds, so forward guidance in this form cannot be very credible. Unfortunately, it is unlikely that policymakers will adopt a specific reaction function in the near term. Yet, there are numerous examples of such systematic approaches or reaction functions that can help us to gauge the stance of policy. Some of these reaction functions have been shown to be robust in a variety of circumstances and useful in describing past monetary policy behaviors. They can, I believe, provide useful guidelines for assessing the stance and the likely path of monetary policy. They can also be useful in communicating policy to the public. I frequently consider such reaction functions as I think about policy. These are typically Taylor-like rules named for the Stanford University economist John Taylor who first proposed them in the early 1990s. These policy rules typically call for the targeted funds rate to respond to deviations of inflation from some desired target and to deviations of output from some measure of potential — sometimes referred to as economic “slack” or the “gap.” Sometimes such gaps are translated into deviations from full employment. These policy rules can offer useful guideposts for policymakers and the public in 8 assessing the stance of monetary policy, and communicating more about such guideposts would enhance transparency and help make policy more systematic. Thus, there is no need to mechanically follow any particular rule, and judgment will always be required. Yet, policymakers and the public should be very cautious when they call for policy rates to deviate in important or significant ways from these guideposts. Making such judgments should require careful analysis, and the justification for deviating from such guidelines should be clearly communicated to the markets and to the public. A monetary policy strategy such as I have just described could be communicated through a regular Monetary Policy Report, perhaps published quarterly. The report would offer an opportunity to reinforce the underlying policy framework of the Committee and how it relates to current and expected economic conditions. Publishing a Monetary Policy Report with an assessment of the likely near-term path of policy rates, in conjunction with its economic forecast, would also provide added discipline for policymakers to stick to a systematic, rule-like approach. Communication about that path, in turn, gives the public a much deeper understanding of the analytical approach that guides monetary policy, thus making policy more transparent and predictable. In the current environment, an assessment of a variety of these robust rules suggests that the funds rate target is no longer constrained by the zero lower bound. These rules indicate that liftoff of the funds rate target from zero should have already occurred or should occur in the very near future. It is important to point out that all of these rules recognize and take into account the fact that the inflation rate remains somewhat below the FOMC’s target of 2 percent. Nevertheless, they do not call for maintaining the funds rate target near zero. These rules are helpful because they not only suggest when liftoff should occur, but they 9 offer guidance about the future path of rate changes, given the likely direction of the economy — that is, forecasts of inflation and employment “gaps.” Even more important is that if the forecasts of the future change, these guideposts can highlight how the entire policy path is likely to evolve. As such, they are capable of better aligning the public’s expectations of policy with those of the FOMC, making the conduct of monetary policy more accountable and more efficient. Conclusion In conclusion, the U.S. economy continues to recover at a moderate pace. Although we have not witnessed the strong bounce back from the depths of the recession that some anticipated, the recovery has been somewhat remarkable in the steadiness with which it has progressed. Labor markets continue to heal, and their stronger-than-expected recovery should serve to underpin continued economic expansion. Consumer balance sheets are much improved, and individuals have regained significant fractions of the wealth they lost during the crisis. That gives me additional confidence that the economy is now operating fairly normally and that policy should reflect that normalization. Policy can also be made more transparent and effective by specifying more completely the variables that guide policy and the general way that one can expect policymakers to react to those variables. To this end, I believe the FOMC should move forward to describe in a qualitative way its reaction function and then communicate our actions and decisions in terms of this reaction function. A detailed Monetary Policy Report could be a useful vehicle for such enhanced communication by discussing a range of robust policy rules. Placing policy choices in such a context will lead to a more systematic approach to policy and one that is more transparent and predictable.
