January 11, 2018 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York City As prepared for delivery Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak with you at this event. Today, I will focus on the economic outlook for 2018 and beyond. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Broadly speaking, the prospects for continued economic expansion in 2018 look reasonably bright. The economy is likely to continue to grow at an above-trend pace, which should lead to a tighter labor market and faster wage growth. Under such conditions, I would expect the inflation rate to drift higher toward the FOMC’s 2 percent long-run objective. Over the longer term, however, I am considerably more cautious about the economic outlook. Keeping the economy on a sustainable path may become more challenging. While the recently passed Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 likely will provide additional support to growth over the near term, it will come at a cost. After all, there is no such thing as a free lunch. The legislation will increase the nation’s longer-term fiscal burden, which is already facing other pressures, such as higher debt service costs and entitlement spending as the baby-boom generation retires. While this does not seem to be a great concern to market participants today, the current fiscal path is unsustainable. In the long run, ignoring the budget math risks driving up longer-term interest rates, crowding out private sector investment and diminishing the country’s creditworthiness. These dynamics could counteract any favorable direct effects the tax package might have on capital spending and potential output. Favorable Near-term Outlook Turning to the near-term outlook, the prospects appear favorable for another year of above-trend growth. Consumer spending should continue to grow at a moderate pace, supported by solid fundamentals. Household income is being bolstered by faster compensation growth and continued healthy employment gains. Moreover, the aggregate household balance sheet remains in good shape, due in part to rising home prices, a strong stock market, and only moderate growth in household debt. Over the past year, home prices have risen by about 7 percent on a national basis, and the S&P 500 equity index has risen by nearly 20 percent. In contrast, household debt has risen about 4 percent over the past year, only slightly higher than the growth in personal income. Further, the household debt service burden is low, reflecting the extended period of low interest rates. Of course, the aggregate figures mask some underlying problems. Two issues worth highlighting are the persistent growth in income and wealth inequality and the burden of rising student loan debt. 2 Many people of more modest means don’t directly benefit from rising home and stock prices. And, increasing student debt burdens have made it more difficult for many young adults to become homeowners. 3 This is significant because homeownership is a major avenue for wealth accumulation for many households. Nevertheless, the tightening labor market should provide greater opportunities for workers to obtain employment, build human capital, and gain greater opportunities to improve their financial circumstances. On the business side of the ledger, investment spending should remain solid. Business cash flows are strong, and the corporate sector is set to receive a meaningful lift from the recently enacted tax legislation. The large reduction in the statutory corporate income tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent and the 100 percent expensing provision for investment should drive down the effective cost of capital for business. In addition, the U.S. economy should be well supported by the recent improvement in the global economic outlook. More synchronized cyclical recoveries in Europe and Japan—and a revival of growth in many emerging market economies—should ensure that demand for U.S. goods and services remains strong. Putting it all together, I have raised my real GDP forecast for 2018 by about half a percentage point to three quarters of a percentage point to a 2½ percent to 2¾ percent range. About one-third of this upward revision reflects the firmer momentum of the economy going into 2018 and about two-thirds the stimulative impact of the tax legislation. While this legislation will reduce federal revenues by about 1 percent of GDP in both 2018 and 2019, I anticipate the boost to economic growth will be less than that. Most importantly, most of the tax cuts accrue to the corporate sector and to higher-income households that have a relatively low marginal propensity to consume. This suggests that a significant portion of the tax cuts will be saved, not spent. On the business side, the boost to investment from the lower corporate tax rate and full expensing is likely to be relatively modest. In the past, aggregate investment spending has not been very sensitive to the cost of capital, which is only one of many factors that influence investment spending. 4 Moreover, the reduction in the effective tax rate for corporations—or what they typically pay in practice—is only about 3 to 4 percentage points, far smaller than the reduction in the statutory rate. On the household side, the impact is likely to be attenuated by the temporary nature of many important provisions. Households may not spend much of the additional after-tax income if they perceive the gains as likely to be transitory. Finally, the legislation is likely to generate some frictional costs that will mitigate its effects on growth. In particular, it likely will have disparate impacts regionally and across economic sectors. For example, the $10,000 cap on the amount of state and local income and property taxes that can be deducted will raise the effective cost of owning higher-end residential property in high-tax states. This could adversely affect prices and construction activity of high-end housing in such states. If the economy continues to grow at an above-trend pace in 2018, the labor market should tighten further. In fact, I anticipate that the civilian unemployment rate will fall below 4 percent this year and reach the lowest level since at least 2000. If this scenario proves accurate, this should lead to further firming of wage growth. On this point, some wonder whether the relationship between tight labor markets and higher inflation has broken down. I have not lost faith in this relationship. As the labor market has tightened over the past few years, we have seen a discernible firming in the wage inflation trend from 2 percent to around 2½ percent. 5 Also, data at the state level indicate that states with lower unemployment rates tend to have firmer wage trends. This supports the case that tighter labor markets tend to be associated with higher wage growth. As the labor market tightens and wage growth firms further, I would expect these conditions to push up price inflation, particularly for services. Research by the New York Fed has found that prices of manufactured goods do not appear to be sensitive to labor market tightness. 6 In contrast, tighter labor markets tend to be associated with higher price inflation for services. This difference presumably reflects several factors. First, prices of manufactured goods are determined in global markets, whereas prices for most services are determined locally. Second, there remains significant excess capacity in manufacturing across much of the world. In the United States, for example, the manufacturing capacity utilization rate was only 76.4 percent in November, about 2 percentage points below its average since 1972. Third, for manufactured goods, there may be more scope for substituting capital for labor, and/or lowering labor costs by importing labor-intensive intermediate goods. To the extent that this margin of adjustment is available, it would tend to dampen the impact of higher wage costs on prices of manufactured goods. Finally, the so-called “Amazon” effect, which results in greater price transparency for buyers, may weigh disproportionately on goods prices. Although inflation remains somewhat below the FOMC’s 2 percent objective on a year-over-year basis, I still anticipate that it will stabilize around that level over the medium term. As I noted earlier, above-trend growth should tighten the labor market further, pushing up wage inflation and eventually services prices. In fact, we have already seen some increase in inflation in recent months. Over the three months ending with November, core personal consumption expenditure prices rose at a 1.8 percent annual rate, up from a corresponding rate of just 0.4 percent last May. The pronounced slowing of core inflation during the first half of 2017 was due, in part, to transitory factors, such as a sharp fall in prices for cellular phone services. Those influences have been temporarily depressing the year-over-year figures. When these transitory influences drop out of the year-over-year numbers this spring, the inflation rate is likely to move higher. Importantly, even as inflation undershot the FOMC’s objective over the past year, inflation expectations have been broadly stable. I would be much more concerned if low inflation outcomes were contributing to a decline in inflation expectations. That would make it more difficult to push inflation back toward our 2 percent objective and would increase the risk of getting stuck at the effective lower bound for interest rates following the next economic downturn, which inevitably will come. Even if inflation were to remain somewhat below 2 percent over the near future, that might not be a serious problem, if the economy were to continue to perform well in other respects. To me, it would imply that the unemployment rate associated with “maximum employment” is lower than current estimates and that we could let the labor market tighten a bit further. This would be a positive outcome because the productive capacity of the U.S. economy would be enhanced and more people would be able to find jobs, develop their job skills, and build their human capital. In short, 2018 looks like it will be a good year for the economy. I anticipate that the Federal Reserve will make further progress in achieving its dual mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. If circumstances evolve close to what I have outlined today, I will continue to advocate for gradually removing monetary policy accommodation. As I see it, the case for doing so remains strong. While the fact that inflation is below the FOMC’s 2 percent objective argues for patience, I think that is more than offset by an outlook of above-trend growth, driven by accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions as well as an increasingly expansionary fiscal policy. Moreover, if the labor market were to tighten much further, there would be a greater risk that inflation could rise substantially above our objective. But, let me be clear: A small and transitory overshoot of 2 percent inflation would not be a problem. Were it to occur, it would demonstrate that our inflation target is symmetric, and it would help keep inflation expectations well-anchored around our longer-run objective. In contrast, if inflation were to shoot appreciably above 2 percent for a considerable time, the FOMC would have to adopt a markedly tighter policy stance that would put the economic expansion at risk. In such circumstances, it is unlikely that we would be able to sustain a low level of unemployment and also achieve our inflation objective. Potential Concerns for the Longer-term Outlook So, if 2018 looks good, what about the longer term? Let me start by discussing what I’m not worried about, before turning to those areas where I have greater concerns. For one, I do not think the economic expansion—now in its ninth year—is vulnerable just because it is “old.” As we like to say, expansions don’t die of old age—they die either because monetary policy needs to be tightened appreciably to combat rising inflation, or because the economy gets hit with a large shock that overwhelms the ability of the Federal Reserve and other policymakers to stabilize it successfully. In general, with inflation below the FOMC’s long-run objective we can be cautious in how we adjust monetary policy. Similarly, I am not concerned about the recent flattening of the Treasury yield curve even though some commentators believe that such a flattening foreshadows a recession. At the end of 2017, the spread between the 10-year Treasury bond and 2-year Treasury note had narrowed to 52 basis points, from 125 basis points at the start of the year. As I see it, some flattening in the yield curve should be expected as we gradually remove monetary policy accommodation. If the yield curve were not flattening, it would suggest that we were behind the curve in removing accommodation. Moreover, this recent flattening is not particularly pronounced. For example, the 10-year/2-year spread of 52 basis points is only 46 basis points narrower than the average since 1978. In addition, all else equal, we should expect the yield curve to be flatter than normal in the current environment. Not only are bond term premia depressed due to quantitative easing both here and abroad, but the low inflation environment is also likely a contributing factor. If investors perceive that the risk of significantly higher inflation has fallen over time as inflation has persistently undershot 2 percent, they should demand lower bond term premia as compensation for inflation risk. Finally, while inverted yield curves have typically preceded recessions, I am unaware of any causal element in that relationship. For example, I don’t believe that banks become unwilling to lend when the yield curve inverts and that this tightening of credit availability “causes” a recession. I think it is noteworthy that in the current environment, higher short-term interest rates tend to raise—not lower—the banking industry’s profitability. This is demonstrated, in part, by the strong performance of bank stocks in 2017 as the Federal Reserve raised short-term interest rates. As I see it, the Treasury yield curve becomes inverted when investors believe that short-term real interest rates are high and monetary policy is tight. Investors anticipate that such a regime will slow the economy and be followed by a reduction in short-term rates. Because these expectations turn out to be validated eventually, we observe that inverted yield curves precede and signal recessions. But, we are not in this situation currently. Investors expect short-term interest rates to rise, not drop, and to remain higher in the future than they are now. Despite the flatter yield curve, the consensus view continues to be that monetary policy is not yet tight. One area I might be slightly—but not particularly—worried about is financial market asset valuations, which I would characterize as elevated. While valuations are noteworthy, I am less concerned than I might be otherwise because the economy’s performance and outlook seem consistent with what we see in financial markets. Volatility in the real economy has been low, and this has been matched by low volatility in financial markets, which has helped support high valuations. I am also less worried because the financial system today is much more resilient and robust than it was a decade ago. Thus, even if financial asset prices were to decline significantly—which presumably would occur if the economic outlook were to deteriorate—I don’t think such declines would have the destructive impact we saw a decade ago. Higher capital and liquidity requirements for major banks have made the banking system more resilient and better able to absorb market shocks without this impairing its ability to intermediate credit flows between borrowers and savers. It was the collapse of confidence in the financial system in 2008 that caused credit availability to dry up, contributing greatly to the severity of the Great Recession. 7 So, what am I worried about? Two macroeconomic concerns warrant mention. The first is the risk of economic overheating. Now, this seems like an odd issue to focus on when inflation is low, but it strikes me that this is a real risk over the next few years. Not only do we have an economy that is growing at an above-trend pace—at a time when the labor market is already quite tight—but the economy will be getting an extra boost in 2018 and 2019 from the recently enacted tax legislation. Moreover, even though the FOMC has raised its target range for the federal funds rate by 125 basis points over the past two years, financial conditions today are easier than when we started to remove monetary policy accommodation. This suggests that the Federal Reserve may have to press harder on the brakes at some point over the next few years. If that happens, the risk of a hard landing will increase. Historically, the Federal Reserve has found it difficult to achieve a soft landing—especially when the unemployment rate has fallen below the rate consistent with stable inflation. In those circumstances, the Federal Reserve has been unable to both push up the unemployment rate slightly to a level that is consistent with stable inflation and avoid recession. 8 Now, I don’t want to imply that a recession is inevitable once the FOMC finds it necessary to nudge up the unemployment rate to a sustainable level. The starting point in terms of the inflation rate is also important because it will influence how far the FOMC is likely to go in terms of making monetary policy tight. Nevertheless, I think it is fair to say that the track record on this score is not encouraging. The second risk is the long-term fiscal position of the United States. Recognizing that fiscal policy is the domain of the executive and legislative branches rather than the Federal Reserve, I would emphasize several points. For one, the current U.S. fiscal position is far worse than it was at the end of the last business cycle. For example, in fiscal year 2007, the budget deficit was 1.1 percent of GDP; in fiscal 2017, it was 3.5 percent of GDP. Similarly, federal debt held by the public was 35 percent of GDP in fiscal 2007, and 77 percent in fiscal 2017. Additionally, three factors will undoubtedly cause these budgetary pressures to intensify over time: the tax legislation will push up the federal deficit and federal debt burden; debt service costs will rise as interest rates normalize; and entitlement outlays will increase as the baby boom generation retires. Let me discuss each of these in turn. With respect to the tax legislation, the Joint Committee on Taxation estimates the cost at around $1.1 trillion over the next 10 years. 9 This estimate takes into consideration the likelihood that the legislation will boost the productive capacity of the U.S. economy somewhat—raising the economy’s potential growth rate—and that this incremental growth will generate additional tax revenues. To me, this seems like a reasonable estimate, recognizing that with any complex tax legislation, there is a high level of uncertainty about its impact on longer-term growth and revenues. It is possible that the boost to the nation’s productive capacity from higher capital spending and greater labor supply will be higher than anticipated, leading to faster growth and greater revenue. But, on the other side, the revenue projections might also turn out to be overly optimistic as households and businesses react to changes in the tax code by adjusting how they conduct their activities in a way to minimize their tax liabilities. This might especially be true as people look to take advantage of the lower top marginal pass-through rate that is available on sole proprietorships, partnerships, LLCs and S corporations compared to wage income. Debt service costs will undoubtedly be boosted by higher levels of federal debt and higher interest rates. In fiscal year 2007, federal debt service costs totaled $237 billion on $5 trillion of federal debt held by the public. By fiscal year 2017, although federal debt held by the public had nearly tripled to almost $15 trillion, debt service costs were $263 billion, only modestly above where they were 10 years earlier. Over the past decade, the sharp decline in short- and long-term interest rates has kept a lid on debt service costs—that lid is now being lifted. Although the future path of interest rates is highly uncertain, the most recent 10-year projections of the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) illustrate where debt service costs are heading. For example, the CBO projects that debt service costs in 2027 will be more than $800 billion—nearly 3 percent of GDP, more than double their current share. 10 Finally, the retirement of the baby boom generation over the next decade will put considerable pressure on outlays. The CBO projects that, by 2027, outlays on Social Security and Medicare will rise to 6 percent and 5 percent of GDP, respectively—each more than a percentage point higher than in 2017. As the economist Herbert Stein once remarked, trends that are unsustainable must end. How, precisely, the United States chooses to address its fiscal challenges will have important consequences for the economy, monetary policy, and financial markets in the years ahead. To sum up, I am optimistic about the near-term economic outlook and the likelihood that the FOMC will be able to make progress this year in pushing inflation up toward its 2 percent objective. The economy has considerable forward momentum, monetary policy is still accommodative, financial conditions are easy, and fiscal policy is set to provide a boost. But, there are some significant storm clouds over the longer term. If the labor market tightens much further, it will be harder to slow the economy to a sustainable pace, avoiding overheating and an eventual economic downturn. Another important issue is the need to get the country’s fiscal house in order for the long run. The longer that task is deferred, the greater the risk for financial markets and the economy, and the harder it will be for the Federal Reserve to keep the economy on an even keel. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Gerard Dages, Saraphin Dhanani, Beverly Hirtle, Jonathan McCarthy, Richard Peach, and Paolo Pesenti assisted in the preparation of these remarks. 2 See William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the Regional Economy, August 10, 2017 and 2017 Economic Press Briefing: Wage Inequality in the Region . See also William C. Dudley, The Monetary Policy Outlook and the Importance of Higher Education for Economic Mobility , October 6, 2017. 3 See the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing on Household Borrowing, Student Debt Trends and Homeownership , April 3, 2017. See also Bleemer, Brown, Lee, Strair, and van der Klaauw, 2017. Echoes of Rising Tuition in Students’ Borrowing, Educational Attainment, and Homeownership in Post-Recession America . Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 820 (July). 4 For example, business investment in new equipment has historically been highly correlated with the capacity utilization rate, which remains relatively low. 5 As measured by average hourly earnings or the Employment Cost Index. 6 Peach, Richard, Robert Rich, and M. Henry Linder. 2013. The Parts Are More Than the Whole: Separating Goods and Services to Predict Core Inflation . Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance , Vol. 19, No. 7. 7 See William C. Dudley, Lessons from the Financial Crisis . 8 Since the late 1940s, any time the three-month moving average of the unemployment rate increased by 0.3 percentage points or more, it was a sign that the economy was either already in or about to enter recession. The cumulative rise in the monthly unemployment rate from its low prior to the official start of the recession to its peak has been at least 2 percentage points. 9 See Joint Committee on Taxation, Macroeconomic Analysis of the Conference Agreement for H.R. 1, the ‘Tax Cuts and Jobs Act’ , December 22, 2017. 10 Congress of the United States, Congressional Budget Office, An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027 , June 2017. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Transcript of Banking Culture - Still Room for Improvement? Panel Discussion at Thomson Reuters, New York City: February 7, 2018 - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Transcript of Banking Culture - Still Room for Improvement? Panel Discussion at Thomson Reuters, New York City: February 7, 2018 February 07, 2018 Posted February 09, 2018 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Moderator: Rob Cox, Global Editor, Reuters Breakingviews James Rosener: Distinguished guests, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen: good morning. My name is James Rosener. I'm President of the European American Chamber of Commerce, and managing partner of the New York Office of Pepper Hamilton. First, let me thank Thomson Reuters for hosting this event and our own partnership with them together. On behalf of the European American Chamber of Commerce, it's a great pleasure to welcome you today to a program on "Banking Culture: Room for Improvement?", which brings together three of the foremost thinkers on the subject. Here with us today are William Dudley, President of the New York Federal Reserve Bank; William Rhodes, President and CEO of WR Rhodes Global Advisors, and author of Banker to the World ; and Ellen Alemany, Chairwoman and CEO of CIT Group, who also brings us a European perspective from her tenure in London. Among our esteemed guests, we also have Stuart Mackintosh, Executive Director of the Group of Thirty. And moderating today's panel is Rob Cox, editor of Breakingiews, of Reuters News. This panel discussion is particularly important as many consumers are still with the process of rebuilding wealth and financial services firms continue to struggle with consumer mistrust as well as regulatory compliance issues. We all remember the crisis of 2007 and 2008, and how it shook the foundations of the exciting economic system. People all over the world became increasingly angry, cynical, and distrustful. Stock markets plummeted, companies collapsed, individuals watched their savings evaporate, and unemployment rose to levels unseen in decades. In the aftermath of the global crisis, regulators introduced a wide range of measures and began implementing stricter micro- and macroprudential policies intending to strengthen the resilience and stability of the economic system. Although in the years since the financial crisis, authorities have increased investigative and enforcement capabilities, punished business for misconduct, and addressed violations, we've learned from a number of scandals and corporate abuses regularly making the headlines that malfeasance, reckless business practices and behavior are a common and widespread phenomenon across business sectors worldwide. Almost every active observer acknowledges that the state of affairs represents a bigger problem and calls for drastic change in culture—how employees and management interact and handle business affairs. Just last Friday, the Fed made it clear to the entire banking system that it will hold boards of directors responsible for conduct and impose limitations on growth where financial institutions have not shown sufficient progress in implementing the kind of risk management that is expected. At the same time, we're hearing from the administration about increased deregulation. Thankfully, there's growing and spirited debate on culture and conduct. A majority of banks and institutions are active participants in the debate. They employ consultants, host workshops and conferences, and adopt culture-oriented mission statements. Everyone agrees there's plenty of room for improvement. Creating a virtuous business culture is not an easy task and presents some serious challenges. We hope this discussion will shed some light on how banks and financial institutions can benefit from corporate governance best practices—specifically culture change—and overcome the widespread negative perceptions that continue to rattle the sector. I encourage all participants to engage in the discussions. Do not hesitate to ask questions, not only of our panelists but to one another, and make this a truly interactive event. Thank you for your attention, and I hope you enjoy this important discussion. With that, I'll handle it over to Rob Cox. Rob Cox: Thanks Jim. Good morning everybody. Thank you for braving the incipient snow and getting yourselves away from your screens, showing us reds and greens in the stock market. It's hard to believe it's only Wednesday. But I can only surmise from your participation here that you also see a link between culture, banking culture, and the global economy, as I think these panelists that we have up here do, and have done quite a bit to champion our thinking in that regard. They don't need any introduction. You've got their bios. Their reputations precede them. I thought I'd just start with you, Bill D. I'm going to go with Bill D, it could be your hip-hop name when you retire next year. But we have two Bills here. So, four years ago, you kicked off this conversation with a conference on banking culture, and forming banking culture. It's gone global. Are you happy with the progress that's been made up to now? What's the state of affairs in our understanding of good bank culture? President Dudley: Well, I guess I would say I'm pleased that there's been substantial progress, but I'm not satisfied with the progress. In other words, there could be even more progress. I think in the United States, for example, we could do more in terms of having an industry-wide survey that actually allows firms to benchmark their results versus one another—we have that in the U.K. We could probably do more to address the so-called "rolling bad apple problem." This is where someone leaves a firm after bad behavior, and then gets hired by another firm that's completely unaware of why that person was let go. So we proposed—the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has proposed a banking registry, where you could actually keep track of why people actually were dismissed. There is something similar to that in the U.K., so I think they've actually made a bit more progress than we have. The good news, though, is I think bankers are taking this a lot more seriously. A number of bank leaders have endorsed working on culture. A number of boards of directors have set up committees on culture. So, I think—have we gotten as far as we need to go? No. Have we made a lot of progress? Yes. Rob Cox: You're speaking as the New York Fed President, but what is your sense of other folks around the world, whether it's the Bank of England who are starting the Financial Conduct Authority, or whoever it might be in the U.K. and Europe. President Dudley: I think there's a pretty broad acceptance of the notion that regulation and compliance only takes you so far, and that bad conduct really does undermine the effectiveness of the financial system, because it basically reduces trust. We saw in the middle of the financial crisis that it was the breakdown of confidence in the system that really led to the severity of the Great Recession. And I'm not sure how much conduct played into that, but I think it probably played a role. Rob Cox: Bill R, a question for you. Maybe stepping back, what are we talking about when we talk about culture? It's not yogurt, right? As someone who has been a banker for many years, and now has spent a lot of time looking at this issue from the vantage point of the G30, how do you characterize culture? Bill Rhodes: I think culture is really made up of the history, tradition, and values of a given institution. Each institution is different, and it must look to those three elements, and it can't be imposed by the supervisors and regulators, which they understand. I mean, this isn't something like capital, where you can say—or liquidity— Rob Cox: Which is a number? Bill Rhodes: Exactly. At the end of the day, though, it's the most important element of all, because if you don't have a good culture and you don't enact it in the sense of conduct, you're going to ruin your reputation. And once an institution, particularly a financial institution, loses its reputation, then it is a very, very difficult road to slog back. And this is why the Group of Thirty decided to get into this area in the first place. We've been working on it for five years. We are now finalizing with our third report, and as we go around the world in all areas of the world, we are finding that financial institutions, mainly banks, understand the importance of this thing. And if we needed to have a reminder, it was the Great Recession, and what occurred there. Rob Cox: One of the things that's come out of this discussion, I think it was Baroness O'Neill in the U.K., her argument was that you have to ask yourself as an institution, what are you for? And I think that's a pretty interesting—I think any company, it doesn't have to be a bank, but certainly a bank—there are certain other social imperatives to make sure that you know what you are for. How would you, Ellen, describe what CIT is for? Ellen Alemany: Sure, actually CIT has a very long history, but it's a 110-year-old company that started out as a commercial finance company in St. Louis, as Commercial Credit and Investment Trust, which then became Commercial and Investment Trust, CIT. It had a lot of different owners. It was unregulated, and what happened was it took TARP money during the crisis, filed bankruptcy, and then reemerged, and then acquired OneWest Bank. So when I took over the company, it definitely had "who are we?" And I think one of the first things we had to do with employees was really come up with a specific "this is our strategy," which is to give loans and leasing to small and middle-market companies on a national basis, funded by deposits. And a very clear statement. We also—because of all the different ownerships, and unregulated/regulated et cetera—really didn't have a value set at the company. And so another exercise I did with the team was we did a cultural survey, and it was really telling what came out of the cultural survey, but as a result of that, we said "what are the top behaviors that we want for the company going forward?" And we came up with six behaviors. The first was straight talk. In the institution, we found that people were just really afraid to be open and to talk about bad news. And so straight talk was the first. The second was collaboration. Everybody just wanted to be left alone. That was one thing that came out loud and clear in the survey, it was just "leave me alone." They felt if they were doing their piece of the project, that was enough. No one was looking at the enterprise-wide or the full picture. Accountability was another one. When 15 people sign a credit memo, who's really accountable? And then we also came up with customer-focused, risk-disciplined, and high-performing. And so these are our six values. And we have to constantly reinforce these values in the company. Rob Cox: You had to do a fair amount of pruning and pairing back of some of the businesses. You had an international business, aircraft leasing. Does that tell us anything about the difficulty of actually imparting culture across borders, or was it just too difficult to pull all those things together? Ellen Alemany: No, I mean we put a strategy in place that we wanted to be a leading small and middle-market domestic lender, and we did a strategic review of the company, and we saw that we were in many countries. These businesses were underperforming. There was no connectivity with any of the other businesses. We also felt that an aircraft leasing company shouldn't be in a bank because of the capital requirements on the forward order book. So, this was all part of a clear, crisp strategy for the employees, for our shareholders, and then executing against it. Rob Cox: Bill Rhodes, you were at Citigroup for many, many years. It in many ways it defines sort of the international banking culture. Just thinking about that culture—not necessarily Citigroup—but when do you think it lost its way a bit? That American banking culture, the global culture of banking? Bill Rhodes: Well, when I started out in banking, which was obviously a long time ago, we had embedded in us three things. First of all, the reputation of the bank. That was number one. But also along with that was the need to look after your customer, and also work with the community. These were the three basic values that were embedded in us. Along the way, unfortunately, I think it shifted to short-term profitability, and those early, let's say "commandments" tended to be forgotten. And what was the result of this? The financial institutions—again, we're talking banks here—lost the trust of the public, the shareholders, and even of their own staff. And we can see this in some of the more recent cases like Wells Fargo. All three of them are there. The other point which people tend to forget, and this is just basic business logic for success, is that if you have a good culture and you act in the proper way, conduct-wise, you are going to do better in your business. It's something that Mario Draghi always says, and he's correct. It's that good business practices, in the sense of culture and conduct, makes your customer feel better, loyal, and people want to bank with an institution that has that. So at the end of the day, this is something that pays off to the so-called bottom line. The whole idea of having a proper culture and conduct, embedding it, monitoring it, and very, very importantly, what do you do if someone crosses the line? I think first of all, you have to look at compensation for the individual. Take a hit compensation-wise, and if that doesn't do it, then you look at termination. I think these are all basic points that we've seen, and pretty much agreed to in our surveys of the Group of Thirty. As I said, we are finalizing that now. There are a lot of other things we came forth with. But this is basically what I think happened along the way. And if institutions, banks are smart, they will never allow themselves to go back to that. Forget about what the regulators and supervisors say. The institution itself is the first line of defense. And it's always easy when the problems come up, to say, well, the rating agencies gave us triple-A on this particular instrument, and the supervisors, regulators didn't pick it up. And oh, by the way, the politicians were pushing us to make those mortgage loans. No matter what it took. Rob Cox: When I think about what you just said, it sounds to me like the cult of shareholder value may have been more influential in forcing companies to think, or banks—companies generally, but let's keep it to banks—in thinking about short-term reward, or short-term incentives. Bill Rhodes: Well, that was all part of the short-term profitability. And that was, as you know, for a period of time the most important metric, and the press built it up. You know, what's the shareholder value and— Rob Cox: But I'm wondering how do you balance this need to serve shareholders who can turf out a CEO or the boards of directors? At any time, you always have that barometer of the stock price. Bill, you want to answer this? I also want to ask Ellen: how do you manage this? You've got on the one hand your investors, and on the other, you've got this need to build a long-term, stable, culturally good institution. Bill Rhodes: Yes, but if your customer does not trust you and the public does not trust you, it's going to fall to the bottom line. So, good business practices like the ones I've mentioned actually help the bottom line. And when you don't have that, you can see the consequences. Rob Cox: Yes, yes. Bill Dudley? President Dudley: You asked the question, why does this happen? I think there are a lot of reasons, but there are two things that I guess I would talk about. Number one is business became more transactional rather than client-focused, and that's partly the growth of the capital markets. The second thing is scale. The scale of the institutions got a lot larger. And so I think it became much harder for people at the top to actually—for their views to penetrate deep into the organization. I really do have a question about whether it's actually possible to manage organizations of several hundred thousand people effectively. Time will tell. One reason to work on culture, though, is to actually get the views of the CEO, and the executive suite, to penetrate down into the organization. It's really difficult the bigger you get and the more complex you get. Rob Cox: So how do you manage this balance? Milton Friedman on the one hand and Bill Rhodes on the other, in making sure you're delivering for shareholders but at the same time delivering for the long term and not creating problems down the road? Ellen Alemany: Sure, before I answer that question, though, I think if there's any one takeaway from today, it is the point that Bill made, is that having a good culture is good business. And it's the tone from the top and believing that if your colleagues are engaged, if your customers are satisfied, if the communities you do business with prosper, then business is going to prosper, which in turn turns into shareholder value. And it's always that balance between the short and the long term. And we manage that through lots of different ways. Compensation is only one piece. But in compensation we make sure that we have a balanced business scorecard for the senior managers. So, a percentage is based on the financial results, and it's not just one financial measure, it's several financial measures. And then the other piece is qualitative. We break it up into three buckets—strategic/operational, risk, and then people/culture. Does this employee demonstrate the CIT values? We also have clawback, and by having this qualitative, too, if something does go bad or someone doesn't do something that we think is appropriate, you have enough flexibility there to manage the compensation. Rob Cox: I want to delve further into incentives because I think it's really critical to this conversation. But just sort of stepping back a little bit to my first question to you, Bill Dudley, which was about the progress we've made. A corollary to that is the President has talked quite a bit about his deregulatory efforts. We've certainly seen some measures from the House Financial Services Committee that probably will never see the light of day in the Senate. But we also have seen the Senate with its bill to soften, shall we say, parts of the Dodd-Frank Act. Is there a danger that this whole cultural discussion gets thrown out with this deregulatory swing back of the pendulum? President Dudley: Well, first of all, I guess I don't think that the deregulatory swing is going to be that great, thankfully. I've been talking about this for many months about how it's really important, while we can make regulations simpler and more efficient, that makes a lot of sense, we don't want to go back to where we were in 2007, 2008. So higher capital requirements, higher liquidity requirements, better resolution regime, the ability to centrally clear over-the-counter derivatives, regulate the entities that we clear these through, all of those things need to be kept. Orderly liquidation authority. And so far I'm actually pretty optimistic that the regulatory reforms are going to be around the edges as opposed to wholesale. The second thing I would just say, though, is that regulation and culture—these are complements, not substitutes. If you think that regulation can somehow substitute for culture, I think you're really mistaken. In fact, in some ways, the more intense the regulatory regime, it can actually undermine culture, because people can actually say, well, the regulators are saying what I can and cannot do, and so as long as I stick within the confines of those regulations, it's all fine. But that's actually not true. Just because a regulation sets this frame or field of scope, there may be things within that that you actually don't want to do. There are number of examples, as we saw, during the financial crisis. One of the most famous ones was Repo 105, which Lehman Brothers did to dress up their balance sheet to misrepresent their balance sheet to the public. That was legal under the accounting rules, but very deceptive. So that was an example where if you just go by what's regulatory-appropriate, you can actually have very bad outcomes. So I think that it's not one or the other. You need a good regulatory regime supplemented by various good conduct and culture in the organizations. Rob Cox: But I was recently in London speaking to the CEO of a big U.K. bank, and he was saying, "I'm really worried that they're going to relax the Volcker Rule," for instance, and "If those guys are trading using their balance sheet, how are we going to compete?" And so there's definitely a fear about this. President Dudley: Oh, you're right, there's always a little bit of pressure that regulation gets rolled back in one regime and everyone says, oh, now these people are more competitive than our people. And so the "race to the bottom" problem is obviously all something we have to be aware of. That's one reason why I think that the U.S. involvement in Basel with the Bank for International Settlements is important because that helps establish minimum standards that are implemented across the world, to essentially lean against that pressure to race to the bottom in terms of regulation. Rob Cox: But some things—for instance, relaxing the threshold at which you're a G-SIFI, things like that—that would help CIT, I would imagine. In other words, you can hold less capital as a result of some of these rule changes. Ellen Alemany: We're in an interesting situation because we're actually the first bank in the U.S. that actually raised our hand and said we want to become SIFI. And then we decided to sell the aircraft—we would have been about $80 billion in assets, and we decided to sell our aircraft leasing business, and now we are right at the cusp. We're around $50 billion in assets. And I had gotten so many questions from investors, our board, et cetera. "Do you de-SIFI?" "Will you save a lot of money if you de-SIFI because you don't have to spend money doing these things?" And we sat there as a management team and we said, you know what? We needed to improve our capital planning process at the company, and that a lot of what is required for a SIFI bank, and if we want to build a strong foundation to grow the company going forward, we needed to invest in. So, if the threshold changes, it's really not going to impact what we do day-to-day, because the Federal Reserve Bank still requires us to have a capital planning process that meets the new standards. The standards have been raised for the industry. And we want to build a strong foundation for the company. Rob Cox: So, does that mean if you don't have to, even if you don't have to hold an extra one basis point of capital, you would? Ellen Alemany: No, it's more of—the whole capital plan—what's involved with the capital planning process. And we also want to maintain capital that's appropriate for the risk profile of the company. And just because the regulators demand a certain level, it's our assessment of what capital is appropriate for the risks that we're taking as a company. It's a guideline. Rob Cox: What is your sense of the regulatory environment? How has it changed with the examiners or whoever it is that are sort of crawling around the bank? Are they now smiling, offering lollipops? [CROSSTALK] Pretend Bill is not here. Is there a mood music change of some sort? Ellen Alemany: I think that the tone at the top is different in terms of what people are saying—how it actually flows down and impacts us on a day-to-day basis. It really hasn't changed yet in the regulations. For us, there's been more of a tone change at the OCC rather than the Federal Reserve Bank. President Dudley: People act like this is sort of this big giant fight between firms and the supervisors. In a lot of ways, the interests are actually very well aligned. We want to have good risk management. We want to have good governance. We want to have adequate capital, adequate liquidity. The firms presumably want all of the same things. So this idea that we're all going head-to-head, I just don't think that is really actually how good supervision and good private sector engagement with that supervision actually works. Rob Cox: So you don't have grumpy examiners on your staff? President Dudley: I'm sure we have some grumpy examiners on our staff. Rob Cox: I mean this actually goes back to the question—you mentioned it before, Ellen—which is good culture being good business. Bill, you wrote a column for us over the summer in which you pointed out that misdeeds and bad behavior and settlements have cost the industry something like $330 billion since the crisis. I mean, that's coming right out of shareholder value. Bill Rhodes: Now it's somewhere north of, I think, $350 billion. Those are Boston Consulting figures. Rob Cox: Yes, but of course, you know, everything is doing well, everybody is making tons of money now. Is there a risk that these settlements and fines that we've seen meted out are basically just seen by bankers as a cost of doing business over the cycle? Bill Rhodes: I certainly don't think so, because in addition to what fines you're paying, you're getting very bad publicity. And it doesn't make the shareholders, your staff, or your customers very happy when they see something like this. Forget about the impact on the bottom line. And I think Ellen commented on the tone at the top, which is key. But it must go right down to middle management, or right down to the teller level. Everyone has to be a believer in this, and they have to practice it. It has to be embedded and monitored throughout. And as I said, and then when you have bad players—bad apples, as Bill said—compensation is a first hit. But eventually you're going to have to go to termination. And I think this has to be understood all the way from the top down to the bottom. The other point is that if, in fact, we see let's say less regulation and supervision across the system, that gives even more importance to the culture and conduct area. Because the last thing an institution wants to do is to repeat some of the failures that we've seen over the last decade or more. And I think these things built up over the last 20 years or so—it didn't happen overnight. And the price to pay, with loss of trust—forget about the financial settlements—I think has been significant. Because what do you find today? The area of trust has still not I think fully been given by any of the constituents, as I mentioned, to the institutions. Plus the politicians around the world—particularly in the United States, Canada, Western Europe—are still very I'd say antsy about the banking system, as you can see. So I think we still have a lot of work to go in this area. We've made progress but it's like a stop on a train. You've got more distance to go. Rob Cox: How do you feel? President Dudley: Two things that I think are important. Number one, the fines have gotten a lot bigger. At times there's been actually a risk to firms that's existential. The risk of actually losing your charter. So, I think that's causing the senior management to take this a lot more seriously. So I think that's an important change from what we had before. I think the second thing is the industry is held in not such high regard now. And that has actually consequences for their ability to attract talent. So we've been having a number of business school deans come in and talk to us at New York Fed over the last few years, and what they say is that there are people who will actually not go into the financial services industry because of this bad conduct. That's not a good cycle. If the most ethical people coming out of the business schools decide that they are not going to go into this industry, that means there's quite a bit more work to do. Rob Cox: They're all going into journalism. Ellen Alemany: Bill D. actually makes a really good point. By the year 2020, 50% of our workforce is going to be millennials, and the millennials prioritize different things than we did coming up in our careers. They want corporate social responsibility. They want culture, they want values. And so if you have a good culture, it's really a competitive advantage in terms of attracting the millennials to your workforce. Rob Cox: So, Bill, you said in one of your speeches on this topic that incentives shape behavior, and behavior drives culture. If you want a culture that will support your long-term business strategy, you need to align incentives with the behaviors that will sustain your business over the long haul. This is for all of you, but I'll start with you, Bill D. What specifically has been done around the issue of compensation? What are you seeing when you look at comp plans, and not just for the CEOs and CFOs, but throughout the organizations? President Dudley: The reason why I stress that, because people always say, culture is sort of a soft subject, so what can we actually do about it as leaders in banking organizations. Well, you can look at how you compensate people, how you promote people. Those are things that you can actually set. And by having an appropriate set of incentives, you're probably going to get the behaviors that are more consistent with what you desire. And if you get that, over time, that will actually establish the culture of the organization. That will sort of set the social norms that define the organization. So, the reason why I stress incentives is this is something that senior management actually has control over. There are things that they can actually do in terms of how people are compensated, how they are evaluated, how they are promoted. And that's why I really— Rob Cox: Well, what are those things? If you were to trace back to 2006— President Dudley: Look, I think we've made some progress on the compensation front, in the sense that there's more deferral of compensation, and there's more scope for clawbacks. But I personally think that there's scope for doing even more on this front. If you go back to the old partnership model where people actually had their capital tied up in the firm, and couldn't get their capital back until years after they retired, they had strong incentives to make sure that the firm didn't— Rob Cox: You were at Goldman when it was a partnership, right? President Dudley: Well, I wasn't a partner when it was a partnership. But, yeah, I think that culture was helpful in terms of risk management. The willingness to take risk. So, one thing you could look at for example is do we really want to have all these deferrals in the form of stock grants? Maybe we should have these deferrals in the form of total loss-absorbing debt. Rob Cox: Like a hybrid coco or whatever those things are? President Dudley: Well, or just something that basically if the firm does badly in the future, and fails, the compensation that has been deferred in the form of debt gets converted to equity, and the management actually has to suffer some of the consequences. Another thing that I think would be really worth looking at a little bit would be who pays the fines when firms have bad conduct and behavior. Why does it always come out of the shareholder's pocket? The shareholders may not have even been shareholders at the time of the bad behavior. Maybe there should be a device that could actually reach down and grab some money out of the pockets of the managers who actually were responsible for the bad behavior and the bad conduct. Rob Cox: What have you done Ellen? Do you have specific formulas? Is there something you can tell us about the contours of your incentive schemes that are designed to do exactly what Bill is talking about? Ellen Alemany: Sure, I just touched on some of it before, but at least for the senior team, we put a balanced business scorecard in place that's—a percentage of it is financial performance, with financial targets. And then there's a qualitative piece. We also have deferral through performance stock units and restricted and stock units. And then we also have clawback. Rob Cox: Have you had to ever claw anything back? Ellen Alemany: Not at my current firm, but in a prior firm that I worked at, yes, we have used the clawback for employees. And I actually think that the European banks use it a little more aggressively than the American institutions, and they were really—the European banks were the first to implement clawback. Rob Cox: Is that right? When you were at Citi in the '80s and '90s, you probably didn't have all of these kinds of highfalutin bells and whistles on compensation then. Bill Rhodes: Well, the compensation was a lot lower to start off with. Rob Cox: Oh, that's true. Bill Rhodes: I want to just pick up some of the things that Ellen and Bill have said. I think it's very important that your staff—we talk about those at the top, the middle management down to the teller—have pride in the institution that they are working for. And this then spills over to the client and the customer. And I think that's when we're going to get the trust level back. And then when you talk about pros and cons of rating people, for compensation, one of the things that has become somewhat controversial is the role of the whistleblower. A lot of institutions don't even call it whistleblowing, they call it—I think in CIT, Ellen told me it's a hotline. And the responsibility that if you're sitting next to somebody, or you see something that is not correct, that you will speak up in some form or fashion. And I can run through some institutions where this did not happen, or where the employee tried to speak up and was suppressed or even fired. And so I think it's key to maintain the pride of the employees and the trust of your customers, that you have some sort of mechanism where if an employee sees something that's being done incorrectly, he or she will speak up. And it makes a lot of sense that this be done really right up to the board level, because what do you want to do? Read about it in the newspaper? Or have your friendly supervisor call you and say, "We just got a call from someone in your organization saying they've seen this or that." And I think that has been another problem. This was suppressed during this period of time. The whole idea of people in the institutions speaking up, and that also has to go back to pride in the institution, that they will do so because they think it's wrong and they don't want to be with an institution that does bad things. President Dudley: And then senior management has to be receptive to that employee. Bill Rhodes: Exactly, exactly. Right up to the board level. Because too often—in our first report, as Stuart knows, we worked on, and Bill—was the role of the Board. Because too often boards either didn't want to know, or frankly didn't push senior management to let them know what was going on. And in the most recent cases that I've seen—it's out there. A number of board members of Wells Fargo said we were never told, we didn't know. And it's not just Wells. All of the institutions involved in this in the United States and Europe went through the same bit. So I think this is key. Rob Cox: Let's talk about Wells. Wells is a living and breathing case study, really, in some of this stuff. I mean Bill Dudley—the Fed last week issued an order forbidding Wells from growing its balance sheet further until they say "sufficient improvements" in governance and risk management are made. As Bill Rhodes points out, four directors, concomitant with this announcement, were leaving the board. I mean if culture is improved broadly across the industry, how are we to interpret what's happened with Wells, which, prior to this last two years, was considered the sort of paragon of good banking culture? President Dudley: Well, that goes back to the discussion we were having before on incentives. They had really bad incentives in terms of how they evaluated and compensated their employees. So you were compensated on the basis of how many accounts you opened. And that was sort of problem number one. So the incentives were wrong. And then two, when people complained about it—employees complained about it—and went up the chain of command, that was essentially not heard or ignored. To Bill's point, you want to have a culture where people are willing and comfortable raising their hands. But that willingness and comfort at raising your hand depends on how that's received in the organization. So at Wells Fargo, apparently, people did raise their hands, or tried to raise their hands, and the message just wasn't received by senior management, and I think it never really got to the board of directors. Rob Cox: Has enough been done on Wells Fargo? I will just say, we've called for a full change of management, CEO level, pretty much since this thing came. We didn't think it was—given the level of cultural rot, that you could have someone who had come from that culture running the place. You think they should fire Tim Sloan? President Dudley: I don't have a view on that. That's way beyond my pay station. I think Wells Fargo understands that they have to change their culture. I mean, I think they completely understand that. Betsy Duke is the lead director at Wells Fargo, and I've worked with her when she was at the Board of Governors. Rob Cox: She's chair now. President Dudley: Yes, she's chair now. And I think they get that they have to do some pretty substantive things to change the culture there. So, the proof of the pudding will be in meeting those, so they actually have to do it. And, you know, it's hard to change culture in very large, complex organizations. It's not something that one can do overnight. The problem that people always talk about is that the people at the top of the house may have the greatest intentions. But how can they actually reach down into the middle layers of management and sort of change how people perceive the organization? You can have a lot of cynicism at the mid-level and lower levels. Like, "Yeah, the senior management is doing this, but they're just doing this because they are under regulatory pressure. They don't really mean it." So it is hard to actually change in these large, complex organizations. Rob Cox: There are successful precedents. One could say JPMorgan and Jamie Dimon, there is a sort of inculcated culture at all levels. Of course, we'll see what happens. Headlines may pop at any time and ruin our view of that. But Ellen, you wanted to say something? Ellen Alemany: I just want to pick up on that point that cultural change just doesn't happen overnight. And a lot of the studies say it's at least a three-year process, and it's also just not about the regulatory and the compensation. There's what do you do on a day-to-day basis to make sure that the values and behaviors really flow through the entire organization, and that it's living and breathing within the organization. And some of the things that we do—in every town hall and through all our communication and messaging to our employees, we talk about culture and we talk about our values. I do town halls where I give out a chairwoman's award for employees who demonstrate that they're living our core values and behaviors. And it doesn't sound like a lot, but it really is very meaningful inside the organization. Through some of our corporate programs, like even wellness, to show that we care about our employees. Or we look at our customer complaints. We have a new product approval process where we sit and we talk about, well, gee, what does this product do for the customer? We look at business practices, or do you have any financial results that are outsized? I remember taking over a leasing business, and I couldn't figure out—it was a business that when I was at Citi, that Citi had acquired, and I couldn't figure out why they made so much more money in their business versus our business. And so we tried to look at the whole process, front end to back end, and realized that this company we bought had really egregious end-of-lease practices, and we immediately terminated those. Because those things aren't sustainable in the long term. We have a hotline. I can't tell you how important the hotline is, and it's important that employees feel like they have a safe environment. And we have my head of human resources, my general counsel, and my head of audit chair the ethics committee, and they look at all of the hotline reports that come through and say is there anything here we think we need to investigate further? So, as I said, there's just so many things you need to do in the company. Having a diverse board, so that there are board members that are more sensitive to some of these types of issues and ask the questions at the board meeting. There's just a long list of things that need to be done. Rob Cox: I want to pick up on the Board question, I mean— Bill Rhodes: I would say that that is key—tone at the top, but all the way down, as I said, to middle management and the teller, because often this gets shipwrecked at the middle-management level. But one of the things that we recommended in our last report, which came out in July 2015, was an incident— Rob Cox: This is the G30? President Dudley: The G30 report, yes. One of the things we recommended is that boards take a look at forming separate committees to look at culture and conduct, because the norm usually was to put audit and risk together. First of all, audit and risk never should have been put together, because the tendency was to spend all the time on the audit side and nothing on the risk side. But in addition to having an audit committee and a separate risk committee, a number of institutions have picked up—or some institutions—have picked up on our recommendation to form a separate committee on culture and conduct. And the reason why this is so important is so you don't get this point that you were making where the board says "we didn't know what was going on" type thing. Because they are then responsible for seeing that the culture—whatever it is in the institution—is embedded, is monitored, and then action be taken when an employee does the wrong thing. So, I think there have been improvements along the way of getting the board more involved. And Ellen was talking about the hotline, which was very important, in the sense of getting the staff involved right down to the teller level. That everyone feels it's his job, because the whole idea here is when you enter an institution, no matter what level, you want to have some pride in your job. I mean that's the whole idea, to have pride in what you're doing. And the reasons that we're getting a lot of college graduate, MBAs, whatever, not wanting to go into the industry is they don't feel this is an area where they could have pride. And that's the whole area of trust that we've got to bring back on the table. And it's not an easy job. As I said, we're like on a train and we made a couple of the right stops, but the journey isn't over. And as I mentioned before, it will be even more important if the politicians decide that they want to reduce regulation, supervision, the authority of supervisors and regulators—then it's even more important to make sure you have a strong culture and conduct in a positive fashion. Rob Cox: I've got a couple more questions before I open it up to the audience. One is this question about are you guys anxious at all about some of the financial innovations we've seen. One of the stories yesterday was about the sort of anti-VIX product that Credit Suisse was selling, and actually, it is redounding negatively on the reputation of Credit Suisse, arguably. Or you see the way banks or some of the exchanges have gotten into bitcoin futures. Bill Dudley, are these appropriate products for banks to be selling? Are they culturally appropriate? President Dudley: I think it's really a question of the suitability of the clients that the products are being sold to, and their understanding of the risks associated with the products. I don't have a problem with a product being sold to someone as long as that person is a suitable investor for that product and understands the risks of the product. Because you have to be careful here—you don't want to discourage innovation, and you don't want to discourage offering products that allow a lot of people to hedge risk in various ways, adjust their portfolio for risk. But you have to make sure that they are appropriate and well designed. I think the thing that we worry about when we look at the financial system and we worry about financial stability risks—where are there cases where there are feedback loops? So right now with the stock market having a little bumpy ride over the last few days, there's a question: As volatility goes up, is that going to cause people to sell stocks because they have a strategy of investing that's tied to the level of volatility in the stock market? If that were the case, then that could cause the stock market to be bumpy in the future. So, it's those feedback loops that we focus on very intensely, when we analyze financial markets for financial stability risk. And I think that firms when they design products, they need to be cognizant of that. I mean the classic example is the stock market crash in 1987, when people had this product called portfolio insurance, which meant that when the stock market went down, you had to sell stocks. So as the stock market went down, portfolio insurance kicked in, you had to sell, and that caused the stock market to go down even further. That probably was not a very well designed product, and people I don't think had thought through what the implications were, how that product would actually work in practice. Some of these VIX products, I think people are going to now look at this with the benefit of hindsight and say, "Were these really well designed?" This wasn't that big a bump in the equity market, and these products actually blew up. So you have to sort of ask yourself the question, "Were these products well-designed?" Rob Cox: Are there are other elements out there, things that worry you, whether it's risk parity trades or some ETFs? I mean when you look at what's happened in the last couple of days with the stock market, what keeps you up at night? President Dudley: Look, I think the stock market had a remarkable rise over a very long time, with extremely low volatility. I, and many others, had observed that the valuation of the equity market is elevated. And so having a bump like this has virtually no consequence, in my view, of the economic outlook. My outlook hasn't changed just because the stock market is a little bit lower than it was a few days ago. I mean it's still up sharply from where it was a year ago. That said, if the stock market were to go down precipitously, and stay down, then that would actually feed into the economic outlook, and then that would affect my view in terms of the implications for monetary policy. But so far, this is a big story in the press. It's a big story for financial market participants. But I don't think it's a big story at all at this point for central bankers. Rob Cox: Go ahead Ellen. Ellen Alemany: What concerns me is really what's being done in the unregulated bank space. So for example, the fintech space. We bought a fintech company, Direct Capital, a couple of years ago. And it took a lot of work to have it work within a bank environment, including significantly reducing the amount of pricing that we earn on the product, the transparency of the terms we give to customers, but they can get a 30-minute credit approval from us. But there are other companies out there that, if customers don't understand the fine print, they're being charged 35, 40% on some of these products. It's the business of BDOs out there that are lending to middle-market companies at terms that we haven't seen since before the financial crisis. And my concern is that this is the whole shadow banking system that hurt us during the last crisis, and if interest rates rise substantially, these companies are going to get into trouble, and guess who finances them? Banks. Banks are giving lines of credit to these companies. So I am worried about this whole shadow banking system, and I think that our regulators should look more at some of these, into these. Rob Cox: Can I ask just sort of one corollary, something you raised a minute ago, which was diversity of boards. But let me ask, where does the whole "Me Too" movement fit into this discussion about banking culture? I'll start with you, Ellen. Or, how should it? Ellen Alemany: No, it does, and I've gotten a lot of questions of, well, gee, why hasn't—we haven't seen financial services companies, fortunately, in the press a lot. And as an industry, we faced this 20 to 30 years ago. The old boom-boom room at Salomon Brothers. I think that the industry, to give it credit, was terrific in terms of sensitivity training, making sure you have a proper code of conduct, actually having public firings, if somebody demonstrated inappropriate behavior, et cetera. And I think that it's really positive that people are feeling they can come out and talk about things right now, but I think as an industry, in financial services, we took a lot of steps to avoid that. Rob Cox: Do you agree with that, Bill Dudley? That's sort of been the premise that we've written—the sort of "they went through this." The financial industry went through this and created a lot of safeguards. President Dudley: You know, I hope so. I hope that's right. Rob Cox: Yes. President Dudley: You never know what's unknowable, but I hope that's right. It should be right. Rob Cox: All right, I'm going to open this up to questions from the audience. Please, no filibustering. Ask your question, state your case. We'll start here with the gentleman. I think we have mics. Audience Member: Just to follow up on the shadow banking question. If you could elaborate more with respect to the potential risks as far as shadow banking globally. Of course we have it here, but China has a rather large shadow banking situation, and although we can contain it here in the United States, what happens with the risks overseas that might impact the U.S. economy? Rob Cox: You want to take that Bill? Bill Rhodes: Well, I would just say I think it's a very good question, and I'm very concerned, and Ellen brought it up right now, shadow banking. And you mentioned China, where it's a particular problem. It's not clear to me that they've gotten their hands around it either, because every time they close something up, they come up with something else. Trust companies—I could run through all of the instruments, because the Chinese business community is very adept at innovation. And we have to remember that China is the world's second largest economy. In fact, if it hadn't been for China in 2008, when they put a stimulus package in, anywhere from $850 billion to $1 trillion, we would have had a Great Depression, not a Great Recession. And so I'm very concerned about that. And China is probably where it's most serious. But as Ellen brought up there are problems here, there are problems in Europe also. When you talk to bankers in Europe, and there was an article in the Financial Times and Reuters the other day about this whole question of regulation of shadow banking in Europe. I think it's a major challenge, this whole question of shadow banking, because here we spend the time on supervising, the regulatory side, and what the banking community is doing. And the tendency is you don't see that same effort in the shadow banking area. So I think it's most important. Audience Member: I have a question really for Bill, just because on a really good day my currency and fixed-income portfolio managers complain about the lack of liquidity in the market, let alone on Friday and Monday. So I'm just wondering how much you view liquidity as an issue and how concerned you are about a liquidity crunch. President Dudley: Well, people have been looking at the issue of what have the changes in regulation done to liquidity in various fixed-income markets. I think there's probably been some consequence, for example, in the repo market, and a few other markets. But I think generally, I would say market functioning actually seems to be pretty good. I mean there was a period on Friday where there was a very sharp movement downward around three o'clock in the equity market. So there's something that we have to look at and evaluate what really caused that. But I think generally, liquidity actually is pretty good. If you look at things like bid-offer, bid-ask spreads, more people can execute. I think it's not as good as it was back in 2006, 2007. But there's a lot of reasons not to want to return to 2006, 2007. Rob Cox: When you say "not as good," you mean bid-ask spreads— President Dudley: Well, I think there's probably not as much depth in the market. In other words, if you want to do a large transaction, you're probably going to have a little bit more of a price concession now than back then. People talk about the corporate bond market as one area where dealers have reduced the amount of corporate bonds that they hold on their balance sheets because of capital charges against those corporate bonds have gone up. So, I think there has been some consequence, but in general, I think markets are functioning quite well. I think the ability of savers to meet borrowers efficiently in the financial system is very much intact. And actually what we care about is, is the financial system able to supply credit to small businesses, to households, in an efficient manner to support economic growth? And I think if you look around the world, the answer is yes. I mean we have a global synchronized recovery now, which I think is quite positive. So, it's something that we're going to continue to look at. There is no question we want to continue to focus on what's the appropriate level of regulation, what are some of the consequences of regulation for things like liquidity? But so far, I would say, we have a much safer financial system, and that's able to perform its function throughout the business cycle. Now the other thing is, if you have looser requirements for things like capital and liquidity, it might lead you to have a little bit more free flow of credit at the top of a boom. But what happens if the system then breaks in the economic downturn? So you really want a system that's actually sustainable throughout the business cycle. And I think we have a much better system now to ensure that. Audience Member: To what extent might banking culture improvement include a reduction in the pay gap between the C-suite and the average worker? Rob Cox: Ellen? Ellen Alemany: I don't think they have to worry about my pay ratio. No, just kidding. But, you know I think I'm going to pass that to one of the Bills. I'd have to think about that. President Dudley: Look, I think the issue of income inequality and the issue of income mobility in this country is really important. I think that some of the things that you see happening in the political space is a consequence of U.S. poor performance in both those regards. I've been surprised at how high the pay is at the very top of the house. It seems like people would be willing to do the jobs for probably considerably less money. But how we got this result, that's something that people very much debate. People talk about the winner-take-all society. I think that as a country we need to do a lot better on working on both the income distribution issue, but even more importantly, in my mind, is income mobility. You know there's a lot of work that Raj Chetty and a number of his associates have done about income mobility, and what they find is where you're born has a huge consequence in your ability to have income mobility through your lifetime. So it's not about you, it's actually literally where you were born physically. That says that in the United States we have a lot of work to do, to create a much more even set of opportunities for people so that it doesn't matter where you're born. It depends on your work ethic. So I think there's a lot more we can do in the United States in this realm. Audience Member: I was just wondering if changing the culture seems like a very noble attempt at changing the industry. But how will you avoid poaching your talent if there are firms that are not on the same objective as you are? You know it happens all the time. It happens with traders, it happens with—they're just going to want to go to a Goldman rather than a Citi if Citi is not paying them. Rob Cox: Ellen, you brought this up a little bit, the issue of shadow banking is part of that I suppose. Ellen Alemany: Yes, I mean so maybe I'm being a little idealistic here, but I don't think it's all about the money. I mean there are some individuals that it's about the money, but I think for the most part, our employees, it's about working for a firm that they can be proud of, that has a good culture, that is interested in long-term shareholder value, et cetera. And I think if you have a good employee proposition, it will prevent some of your employees from being poached. And in institutions where they are having troubles right now, it's actually an opportunity for us because they want to come work for a company where they feel that the employee proposition is very positive. President Dudley: And if it is all about the culture for those individuals, maybe they don't actually fit in with your culture. Ellen Alemany: Yes, exactly. Rob Cox: You know we're talking about banking culture. But there are a lot of other industries that have—we've given them a social license with our data, for instance. Big tech is a great example. I don't see conversations like this being promulgated by whatever it is—the regulators, should there be any—of the Googles and the Facebooks. It's great that we're all focused on this, but as a society, are we focusing on the wrong industry right now? President Dudley: Well, let's take care of the financial industry first, before we start moving out. Rob Cox: I'm trying to figure out what you're going to do next, Bill. Bill Rhodes: Well, you know, the answer to that, I think this goes back to the shadow banking and comments that were made here. I think some of these real large, enormous high-tech firms are eyeing, as you read in the newspaper all the time, are eyeing the entrance into the financial sector. And we brought up China before, and this is a big issue now on China, with Alibaba, and the others. How much are the supervisors, regulators going to be allowing them to get into what amounts to virtual banking? So it all really goes back to that. And I think it's going to be one of the major issues in the financial system going forward. And the question is, has this really been thought out by the politicians, the supervisors, regulators? Not clear. And very importantly, by the banking industry itself so that it can remain competitive? And so I think it is a major issue going forward, without a doubt. Rob Cox: I think that is all we've got time for. I want to thank you all for coming out in this—and hopefully you can get out of here, it looks like it's coming down like cats and dogs now. Please thank my panelists, and thank you for coming. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands After Hurricanes Irma and Maria - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands After Hurricanes Irma and Maria February 22, 2018 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands After Hurricanes Irma and Maria, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning, and welcome to the New York Fed’s Regional Economic Press Briefing . Today, we will provide an update on the economies of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, with particular focus on the impacts of Hurricanes Irma and Maria. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Initial Fallout from the Storms Hurricanes Irma and Maria did immense damage to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, severely exacerbating what were already very difficult economic conditions. My heart goes out to our fellow citizens who have suffered so much and who face a long and difficult recovery ahead. Maria was the most devastating hurricane to hit Puerto Rico in nearly a century. Many lives were lost, homes and businesses suffered immense damage, and large parts of the Island’s infrastructure and agriculture were destroyed. Moreover, Puerto Rico’s power outage was, by far, the most severe in U.S. history, in terms of total customer-hours lost, and it will still likely take many more months to fully restore electricity and other critical infrastructure to all of the Island’s residents. As a result, a sizable number of residents went to the U.S. mainland in the weeks following Maria, and it still is unclear how many will return once circumstances improve. Even before the storms hit, Puerto Rico was struggling with severe fiscal difficulties and a long period of poor economic performance. For over a decade, the Island has been experiencing a shrinking economy, contracting employment, low and declining labor force participation, and persistent out-migration of residents to the mainland. Furthermore, public debt reached a problematic level, and the Commonwealth and its instrumentalities—including the power and water authorities—lost their ability to borrow in the public markets. Defaults and ongoing debt restructuring efforts followed. In the U.S. Virgin Islands, the situation is similar in many ways. St. Thomas and St. John were ravaged by Irma, and St. Croix was devastated by Maria just two weeks later. Their economy, which is much more dependent on tourism than that of Puerto Rico, has also been contracting for the better part of a decade. However, the population of the U.S. Virgin Islands has not fallen nearly as sharply as Puerto Rico’s, and its economy had stabilized in the past two years following the closure of a major refinery in 2012. Still, while by some measures the U.S. Virgin Islands are not as fiscally stressed as Puerto Rico, they, too, do not have access to the debt markets. Recovery and Rebuilding The combined impact of complex preexisting economic problems and the hurricanes has made recovery much more challenging. The loss of market access has severely hampered the ability of the governments to mobilize resources to respond to the damage and rebuild and upgrade infrastructures. One example is Puerto Rico’s electrical grid, which is a major obstacle to recovery. Even before Maria, Puerto Rico suffered frequent blackouts, and the high cost and unreliability of electricity had reduced business competitiveness. Puerto Rico’s power plants are largely outdated and inefficient, and the electrical distribution system is poorly maintained and extremely fragile. In my mind, given this poor starting point, now is a perfect opportunity for Puerto Rico to essentially start from scratch and build a resilient power generation and distribution network. I would assume that an emphasis on renewable energy would be part of this effort, especially given the dramatic fall in costs for this form of electricity generation. The challenge, of course, will be how to finance this investment, when the Commonwealth is already mired in debt. Despite these woes, there are signs of resilience in Puerto Rico. As we will show, job losses following the storm were very substantial, totaling around 4 percent in Puerto Rico and 8 percent in the U.S. Virgin Islands. These losses are considerably steeper than after most major hurricanes that have hit the United States. However, they are not as devastating as Katrina’s impact on the New Orleans economy more than a decade ago, which was and remains unprecedented. Nonetheless, the labor market, at least in Puerto Rico, appears to be stabilizing as jobs in sectors that were most affected—such as leisure and hospitality—have started to come back. And, as repair and rebuilding efforts get underway in both Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, jobs are being created in sectors such as construction. These job gains are expected to continue for some time to come. Looking Ahead Puerto Rico now must not only complete the recovery from the hurricane, but also do what is necessary to get on a sustainable economic and fiscal path. Given the Island’s high debt, unfunded pension obligations, declining population, and now the hurricane, the outlook may seem grim. But there are good reasons not to despair. As I have noted previously, New York City went through a similar crisis during the 1970s: its population was declining, the economy was in a five-year recession, and the city had literally run out of money to pay its employees and could not borrow in the debt markets. However, leaders had the courage to confront these problems head on, and they adopted a series of reforms, including the establishment of a fiscal oversight board and a more transparent budgeting process. All of this helped transform the city from an increasingly blighted urban landscape to the vibrant economy of today. And, New York City is not the only example of a major turnaround. Now-dynamic cities such as Washington, D.C., Pittsburgh, and Seattle also went through wrenching economic and fiscal contractions. While Puerto Rico’s path to prosperity will not look exactly like that of New York or other cities, history can provide valuable lessons, as well as hope for a better future. The same can be said for the U.S. Virgin Islands. In addition, Puerto Rico has a number of unique attributes and endowments that it can leverage as it seeks a path toward prosperity, including its educated and bilingual workforce, its proximity and access to markets on the U.S. mainland, and its extensive experience as a host to various major U.S. multinational corporations. But, a recovery is not going to happen on its own. We at the New York Fed have made a number of suggestions over the years that we think can help improve Puerto Rico’s competitiveness and economic prospects. 2 Some of these issues are now being addressed, and still more are at least being discussed. Among others, lowering the costs and disincentives to doing business, helping Island residents develop and use their human capital, and improving labor market opportunities are all important steps that must be taken. On the fiscal side, the Financial Oversight and Management Board and the Commonwealth together will be making a series of difficult choices over the coming months. It will be critically important that these decisions put the Commonwealth on a sustainable fiscal path going forward. As in other examples, such as New York City in the 1970s, the fiscal adjustment will be painful, and many important decisions will undoubtedly be unpopular. While the pain has been—and will continue to be—widely shared, it is also critical to seek ways to ensure that the benefits from the restoration of growth are shared broadly. How exactly to make this work is an open question that I am certain the oversight board and its stakeholders will consider carefully over the coming months. The New York Fed will continue to help in the best ways we can—by providing independent research and analysis, and by leveraging our convening authority to bring together stakeholders to share expertise, explore opportunities, and provide information to those who need it most. We recently held two events on the Island—one for small business owners impacted by the storm and another for credit unions. We plan to do more in the months and years ahead, and I look forward to gaining a better understanding of conditions on the ground and how we can help when I travel to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands next month. Now, I’d like to turn it over to Jason Bram, who will talk more about what we are starting to see in terms of the economic impact of the storms. 1 Jaison Abel, Jason Bram, Gerard Dages, Richard Deitz, Suzanne Elio, Jack Gutt, and Andrew Haughwout assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See, for example, our Report on the Competitiveness of Puerto Rico’s Economy , June 2012, and An Update on the Competitiveness of Puerto Rico’s Economy , July 2014. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

March 01, 2018 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Central Bank of Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil As prepared for delivery Thank you, Ilan, and thanks to the Central Bank of Brazil for organizing this event. It is a pleasure to have the opportunity today to talk about the issue of globalization. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Although the debate about the benefits and challenges of globalization is not new, it has recently come into sharper focus. This debate is important to all of us, and I think it is particularly relevant to Brazil given its importance in the global economy. Globalization means different things to different people. In my remarks today, I will focus on the role of globalization as a force for international economic integration and economic development. I will highlight three themes: First, the important role that trade plays in promoting higher standards of living globally. Second, how changes in trade can create challenges for industries and their workers when they lose competitiveness. Insufficient attention has been given to this issue. We must do better in addressing the very large costs that can be imposed on particular communities and households. Third, the answer to those challenges is not greater protectionism. Instead, we need to provide greater support to displaced workers so they can obtain the skills needed to find new well-paying jobs. We also need to ensure that there are strong global institutions and international cooperation to help manage the effects of globalization. This includes responding to the challenges stemming from financial globalization—the flow of capital across national borders. These issues are important to me as a central banker, as they affect the long-term health and productivity of the U.S. economy, the economic opportunities available to our people, and the efficiency and stability of the global financial system. The debate around globalization, particularly in advanced economies, reflects many factors. Undoubtedly, the global financial crisis and subsequent slow recovery have been significant. But, just as important have been longer-term trends, such as growing income inequality, the loss of middle-income jobs, and the rise of large emerging market economies such as China and India. Although the debate about globalization is not new, I believe we are at a particularly important juncture. If support for liberalized trade and an integrated global economy were to suffer a significant setback, the consequence could be slower economic growth and lower living standards around the world. While considerable effort has gone into liberalizing trade and developing the existing set of trade agreements, that does not mean they cannot be improved upon. I have no doubt some trade agreements could be enhanced or updated. Some may not adequately address recent changes in the global economy—such as the rise of digital trade—and may need to be refreshed. And, important trade barriers still remain that should be addressed. In particular, from a U.S. perspective, the access of U.S. firms to some foreign markets and the protection of intellectual property rights are issues that deserve close attention. But, in addressing these issues, we should take care to preserve the vital benefits of trade to higher standards of living in both advanced and emerging market economies. Our focus should be on further strengthening an open trade regime, and, as appropriate, amending and improving these agreements. The Pace of Globalization To begin, let me briefly describe the pace of globalization as a reminder of what is at stake. Global economic integration has increased dramatically in recent decades. Trade in goods and services, for example, has grown from nearly 40 percent of global GDP in 1990 to 54 percent in 2016. Over the same period, the stock of foreign direct investment has increased from roughly 10 percent of global GDP to 36 percent. Put simply, national economies and financial systems have become more integrated and interdependent. 2 This rapid growth in trade reflects falling trade barriers, declining transport costs, and improved information and communication technology. These trends have enabled the development of complex global supply chains that allow companies to manage their production more efficiently. Emerging market economies now make up a much larger share of global trade, the global economy, and global growth. As an illustration, emerging market economies have accounted for 70 percent of global economic growth since the crisis—double their share from two decades ago. 3 This growth has provided much-needed support to world economic activity, as advanced economies have recovered slowly from the crisis. Rising economic integration is also evident when we examine the trade relationship between Brazil and the United States. Bilateral trade flows in goods have risen from $17 billion in 1994 to nearly $57 billion in 2016. The United States is Brazil’s second-largest export market, and an important destination for manufactured goods. In 2016, the stock of U.S. direct investment in Brazil was $64 billion, up from $18 billion in 1994. 4 Recent initiatives announced by the Brazilian authorities—including a large and transparent infrastructure concession program and greater foreign participation in the oil and gas and aviation industries—underscore the potential for further increases in foreign direct investment. The Benefits of Open Trade Increased trade, through its longer-term impact on productivity, has been a key contributor to global growth and prosperity since the Second World War. Openness to trade brings many benefits to the supply side of the economy, including: larger markets, greater specialization opportunities, and the increased ability to exploit economies of scale and scope; faster transmission of technology and innovation; and greater competitive pressure on domestic firms to increase their productivity. Collectively, these forces lead to a more efficient allocation of a country’s scarce resources—one that is more closely aligned to its international comparative advantage. As a consequence, consumers can benefit from lower prices, higher real incomes, and greater variety and quality of goods and services. Increased openness may also reduce wasteful rent-seeking behavior on the part of protected industries and the related costs of corruption. Openness to trade has certainly played a large role in the economic ascent of Asia. Following the rise of Japan, Korea, Taiwan, and others, fast growth in China and India has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of extreme poverty—an unprecedented feat in human history. Reflecting these gains, a number of emerging market countries have become strong supporters of open trade, a sign of how much the world has changed in recent years. Benefits from open trade are evident in Brazil. 5 Following its dramatic trade reforms in the 1990s, productivity growth in Brazil increased. Brazil also has leveraged its ample and diverse natural resource endowments to become a leading exporter of iron ore and a number of agricultural products. And, the country has benefitted from the rise of China—total export volumes more than doubled between 2000 and 2010, and have now nearly tripled. Brazilian multinational companies are also important global players in industries such as mining and metals, food, paper products, and transportation equipment. But, increased openness to trade is not a panacea in and of itself. Actual benefits depend on a range of other critical factors. These include macroeconomic policy, the business and regulatory environment, the legal and tax regime, labor and product market flexibility, and the quality of infrastructure and public services, such as education. While the gains from a liberalized trade regime are not guaranteed, the alternative of trying to achieve a high standard of living by following a policy of economic isolationism will fail. Trade has played a key role in nearly all of the high-growth success stories since the middle of the last century. The Challenges of Open Trade It is important to recognize that while trade and international integration tend to increase the overall economic pie, the distribution of the larger pie may be very uneven. In fact, slices for some particular groups may even shrink. Some workers—particularly those in industries that are less competitive and whose skills may have become less relevant—can be hurt and can find adjustment difficult. Successful adjustment often requires individuals to change industries and to relocate to different regions. So, while trade is almost always a win for a country’s economy, not everyone within that economy will be a winner. This is especially the case where the policies to cushion the negative consequences of trade and to facilitate adjustment are lacking or inadequate. Effects are country- and industry-specific, and depend on initial endowments and conditions. Low-income workers in emerging markets, for example, may find it more difficult to adapt, given weaker safety nets and fewer financial resources available to deal with adverse economic shocks. The bigger the adjustment process, the more the gains from trade will tend to be eroded. While the rise in the skill premium from trade liberalization has been well established for both developed and developing countries, determining the aggregate impact of trade on jobs has been more challenging. To date, the evidence has been mixed. We need further research in this area to determine with more confidence a reasonable range of estimates for these employment effects. Although evidence of the extent to which jobs have been lost due to global trade is inconclusive, job losses that are attributed to trade tend to be viewed differently. That is, they are seen as having been “lost to foreigners” and are often viewed as a consequence of the policy decision to liberalize trade in the first place. The challenge of adjusting to open trade is a serious issue that has not received the degree of attention it fully deserves. This may partly reflect the fact that the burden has been borne unequally and spread out over a long time period. It also may reflect the fact that the winners from trade have often tended to have a stronger voice than those who have been the losers. Research has documented that the effects on individuals of job dislocation—including those resulting from trade—can be significant and long lasting. Older workers tend to suffer larger earnings losses, and often face more difficult transitions. Displaced workers may not have the appropriate skills to find good jobs in other areas of the economy, including in growing export sectors. When the affected industry represents a large share of the local economy, the damage is often magnified. In this case, the burden can become more widespread as the level of wages across the community is negatively affected. And, this doesn’t begin to capture the full human toll—including the impact on workers who have lost confidence in the future and the poorer health outcomes that occur because of increased stress. Research on Brazil has found that workers employed in regions facing larger tariff cuts experienced declines in formal sector employment. 6 They also generally did not migrate to more favorable regions. Instead, they either became unemployed, moved into the informal sector of the economy, or—when more fortunate—moved into another sector within the same region. We should find better ways to help communities that are struggling because of the effects of free trade. In the United States, we have historically experienced a high degree of geographic labor mobility—much higher than in other advanced economies. The ability to move in search of better opportunities, when possible, has helped to mitigate some of the adverse effects of trade. But, mobility has declined in the United States in recent years, implying that the adjustment costs to trade may have increased. Protectionism Is Not the Answer Given these costs of global integration and more liberalized trade, what is the best path forward? Although protectionism can have a siren-like appeal because of its potential to provide short-term benefits to particular segments of the economy, in the longer term it would almost certainly be destructive. Countries need to compete better, not compete less. Trade barriers are a very expensive way to preserve jobs in less competitive or declining industries. They blunt opportunities in export industries and they reduce the affordability of goods and services to households. Indeed, such measures often backfire, resulting in harm to workers and diminished growth. A better course is to learn from our experience. From a U.S. standpoint, we should work to reduce remaining foreign trade restrictions that impair our ability to capitalize on our comparative advantages. For example, market access restrictions can mean that certain U.S. industries cannot realize their full potential. Similarly, weaknesses in the protection of intellectual property rights limit the ability of U.S. producers to realize the full returns from their investments. This lowers profits and diminishes incentives to grow the business and employ more workers. If we are going to enhance the benefits of free trade and better manage its costs, it is critical that we continue to strengthen the global rules-based system. On the positive side, I would point to the World Trade Organization’s Trade Facilitation Agreement, which addresses customs procedures and could reduce global trade costs significantly. But, at a broader level, the momentum behind global trade reform has clearly waned in recent years. This has occurred even though there are a number of areas that would benefit from further reform, such as agriculture and services. That momentum needs to be rekindled and reaffirmed. Although advanced economies historically have tended to lead the way, it is important that large emerging market countries now play a greater role. This is appropriate given their growing prominence in the global economy. There are many approaches to dealing with the costs of globalization, but protectionism is a dead end. Trade restrictions address the symptoms and not the underlying problems, and they introduce other costs and distortions. While such measures might generate a temporary boost to growth from greater domestic production and consumption, these would likely be offset by a range of other costs. Over time, such measures would retard productivity growth and thereby shrink the economic pie. As an illustration, import substitution models that were pursued by many emerging market economies following the Second World War eventually led to poorer economic outcomes. Such was the experience in Brazil, which helped trigger the reforms of the early 1990s. In assessing the benefits and costs of trade, it is important to understand that a nation’s trade balance reflects much more than its trade policy. Just as important are the country’s saving and investment spending proclivities, which are affected by many factors, including tax and fiscal policies. For example, in the United States, we have a chronic trade deficit because domestic investment spending exceeds our domestic saving. Foreign capital inflows make up the gap. In this process, the foreign exchange value of the dollar plays an important equilibrating mechanism. If the domestic saving/investment imbalance is unchanged, then any reduction in the trade balance from higher trade barriers will need to be offset by lower exports. The domestic currency will appreciate to cause the trade deficit to widen to accommodate the desired capital inflows. Thus, trade restrictions affect the composition of trade but not the gap between exports and imports, which is determined by the difference between domestic savings and investment. At the end of the day, the protectionist country would produce more goods in sectors protected by higher trade barriers but also fewer goods for export. The expectation that higher trade barriers would save jobs ignores these critical second-round effects. Moreover, the story may not end there. What happens if another country that now faces higher trade barriers responds by raising its own barriers? That would push production even further out of high-value-added exports that are now deterred by the higher foreign trade barriers and into those exports that face lower trade barriers, or into the goods protected by the higher domestic trade barriers. Raising trade barriers would risk setting off a trade war, which could damage economic growth prospects around the world. Measures that raise trade barriers typically would protect lower-wage, import-competing jobs, but would also weigh on the prospects for jobs in the more efficient export sector, which tend to be higher-paying. The outcome would be countries producing more where they have a competitive disadvantage, and less where they have a competitive advantage—the exact opposite of what we should be aiming for. For example, in the United States, one of our largest manufacturing exports is aerospace parts (which requires skilled labor) and one of our largest imports is apparel (which requires less skilled labor). These second-round effects would also likely hurt productivity growth. Scarce resources would be used less efficiently and trade protection would likely lessen the level of competitive pressure that helps drive innovation. Moreover, lower productivity growth would likely lead to a slower improvement in a nation’s living standards over time. 7 Better Approaches to Deal with Globalization Rather than protectionism, a better policy would be to help domestic workers and companies compete more effectively, rather than compete less. We need additional mechanisms that allow us to more fully capture the benefits from liberalized trade and to more proactively mitigate its costs. Ideally, policy should also better address job losses and income inequality from automation and other technological advances. How we respond should depend on regional and industry circumstances. These include the nature of trade impacts, the skill sets and location of the workers that have been affected, and the amount of resources that can be mobilized to facilitate adjustment. Increasing specialization brings real economic benefits, but can also leave workers more exposed to shifts in demand for their services, potentially on short notice. These issues are not going away, especially as emerging market economies take on a larger role in the global economy and automation continues apace. If we are to maintain a more open trade regime, globalization must be socially and politically sustainable. For that to be the case, we have to provide greater support to those who are hurt by trade. Policies should include more assistance with job retraining, help with job search and mobility, and broader unemployment support. 8 We also need to do more research into what measures have been effective in economies around the world, and we should encourage greater experimentation with new approaches. Getting the balance right between providing assistance and making sure that individuals hurt by trade can get back on their feet and achieve their earning potential will be a challenge, and we need a better understanding of what actually works. More generally, we need to do a better job positioning our workforce to cope with globalization and technological change. Improvements across a range of areas—including not only education and training, but also the business regulatory environment and infrastructure investment—could support greater worker mobility. These measures would also promote higher productivity growth. While the scope and scale of issues differ substantially by country, many of these issues may also be relevant in Brazil. There are various measures available in current trade agreements, such as antidumping measures and countervailing duties for dealing with “unfair” trade, as well as escape clauses that provide safeguards for industries that face a sudden surge of imports. Again, the challenge is to ensure that such measures are effective, that they help facilitate rather than retard adjustment, and that they are not abused so as to avoid foreign competition. But, both sanctions and temporary relief have been provided for in global trade rules. We should be willing to use them when their use would lead to more equitable outcomes and would help sustain political support for a more open trade regime. Financial Globalization Is Also Important Financial globalization—the flow of capital across national borders—is also an important issue that must be considered. These flows help to support global economic integration in the trade of goods and services. This is a large, complex subject—and one the Central Bank of Brazil is well acquainted with, having successfully managed the pressures of heavy capital inflows as well as outflows during periods of stress. The tremendous damage of the global financial crisis underscores the importance of this issue. As with issues related to trade, achieving effective financial globalization requires robust and mutually supportive measures at both the domestic and international levels. First, the high level of cross-border capital flows—and their potentially volatile nature—further underlines the importance of solid domestic fundamentals, including exchange rate flexibility, a credible monetary policy framework, sustainable fiscal policy, sufficient foreign exchange reserves, and a strong financial system. The United States has a special responsibility to keep its own house in order, given the large size of its financial markets and the U.S. dollar’s status as a reserve currency. Indeed, the U.S. financial system was the epicenter of the global financial crisis. I believe that promoting economic growth and financial stability at home is the most important contribution the United States can make to promoting growth and stability worldwide. With that in mind, U.S. monetary policy can have a significant impact on global financial conditions, including exchange rates, and shifts in U.S. monetary policy can lead to consequential shifts in global capital flows. Therefore, good communication and transparency from the Federal Reserve is needed. In this respect, I believe we have made a number of improvements in recent years that have facilitated smoother market adjustments to policy changes. One example is the process by which the Federal Reserve began the normalization of its balance sheet last year. We foreshadowed our intentions and initiated a program that was transparent in its design and ramped up only slowly. While the Federal Reserve has a domestic mandate set for it by the U.S. Congress, it needs to be mindful of the international effects of its actions, which can have important potential consequences for the global economy and financial markets. 9 A high level of global interdependence also requires robust cooperation and effective international institutions. To provide one example, I have traveled several times a year for the last decade to Basel, Switzerland, to discuss economic, monetary, and regulatory policy with foreign central bankers at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). This dialogue—supported by ongoing bilateral discussions between central banks—helps build trust, understanding, and the valuable relationships that are crucial during periods of stress. The global financial crisis put the need for a more robust and resilient financial system in stark relief. Such a regime is necessary if we are to maintain the flow of credit to the real economy—both domestically and internationally—during times of stress. Over the last decade, policymakers have implemented a range of reforms that have materially strengthened the banking system, including higher capital and liquidity buffers for the major international banks. 10 International coordination has been essential to the successful implementation of these reforms. Banking is a global business that requires a high degree of regulatory consistency and as level a playing field as possible to avoid distortions and regulatory arbitrage. Under the auspices of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision of the BIS, a wide-ranging set of reforms has been introduced progressively, including the recent finalization of the Basel III reforms. 11 Tighter regulation of international banks must be complemented by effective supervision, and much progress has been made in improving home/host supervisory cooperation. In a local context, cross-border supervisory coordination has taken on increased importance as Brazilian banks have expanded internationally in recent years. Still, greater clarity around how large global banks will be resolved is required if we are to successfully end “too big to fail.” Finally, it is increasingly clear to me that we also need to develop a better shared understanding of the proper role of exchange rate policies and reserve accumulation in a healthy and fair global trading system. To be sure, in a world of volatile capital flows, experience has shown that having adequate reserve cushions has helped many emerging market economies ward off costly instability. Indeed, Brazil’s large stock of foreign exchange reserves has been a key pillar of stability through turbulent periods. But, reserves are a relatively expensive form of insurance, and excessive reserve accumulation can undermine global adjustment, shift burdens onto trading partners, and erode political support for continued trade openness. As I have said on other occasions, I think that part of the solution lies in further improving the international safety net, so that countries have more efficient and less costly ways of ensuring resilience. 12 To conclude, although the benefits from an open trade regime remain compelling, we must also recognize that such a regime imposes costs, and these need to be forcefully addressed. Focusing on these costs is necessary if globalization—including its financial dimensions—is to work for all of us. Thank you for your time. I would be happy to take some questions. 1 Mary Amiti, John Clark, Gerard Dages, Matthew Higgins, Emily Howard, and Tom Klitgaard assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 Figures from UN World Investment Report, IMF World Economic Outlook Database, World Bank World Development Indicators. 3 IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2017, in market exchange rate terms. 4 Figures from U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, IMF. 5 Dix-Carneiro, Rafael (2014) “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Econometrica, Vol 82(3), 825-885; Dix-Carneiro, Rafael (2018) “Trade and Labor Market Adjustment: Recent evidence from Brazil,” Proceedings of the IMF Conference “Meeting Globalization’s Challenges.” 6 Dix-Carneiro, Rafael (2014) “Trade Liberalization and Labor Market Dynamics,” Econometrica, Vol 82(3), 825-885; Dix-Carneiro, Rafael (2018) “Trade and Labor Market Adjustment: Recent evidence from Brazil,” Proceedings of the IMF Conference “Meeting Globalization’s Challenges.” 7 This negative consequence of higher trade barriers can be illustrated most starkly by the estimates of the costs per job saved through protectionist measures. Researchers that have studied this closely estimate that the costs per job saved from protectionist measures in the United States typically run into the hundreds of thousands of dollars per year. To illustrate, consider the case of import restrictions on Chinese tires. The cost of a job saved was estimated at $900,000 per year while the measures were in place, or more than 20 times the average worker’s compensation. Hufbauer and Lowry, “US Tire Tariffs: Saving Few Jobs at High Cost”, Peterson Institute for International Economics, April 2012. 8 The U.S. provides some assistance to workers displaced due to trade through its Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program. A recent academic paper finds that TAA-trained workers have higher cumulative earnings (after 10 years) than similar workers who didn’t receive the training. These higher earnings reflect both higher incomes and greater labor force participation, with returns concentrated in the most disrupted regions, where workers are more likely to switch industries and move to labor markets with better opportunities in response to training. Hyman, Benjamin (2017) “Can Displaced Labor Be Retrained? Evidence from Quasi-Random Assignment to Trade Adjustment Assistance,” University of Pennsylvania. 9 For further discussion, see William C. Dudley, Panel Remarks at Bank for International Settlements’ Annual General Meeting , June 26, 2017. 10 For further discussion, see recent Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) report, Structural Changes in Global Banking after the Crisis . 11 Other committees of the BIS, including the CGFS, which I chair, and the Financial Stability Board, which the BIS hosts, play an important role in analyzing international financial stability issues and developing related policy prescriptions. 12 See William C. Dudley, U.S. Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies , March 27, 2014. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
