Governor Jerome H. Powell At the "Community Banking in the 21st Century" Fourth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, St. Louis, Missouri Share Watch live Welcome to Day 2 of the conference. I am grateful to the organizing committee for inviting me to be part of this important event once again. This is the third time that I have had the privilege of addressing this unique audience, which brings together bankers, bank supervisors, and banking researchers to share their thoughts regarding the current and future state of community banking. The interactions that occur at these annual gatherings are incredibly valuable and stimulate innovative thinking on the part of all three groups of participants. As usual, the organizers have put together a highly relevant agenda. I was particularly struck by the way in which this year's program spans generations, from last night's keynote speaker, Gene Rainbolt, who began his career in banking more than 50 years ago, to the winners of the case study competition, who are just preparing to embark on their careers. I hope that these impressive and accomplished young men and women will enjoy long and successful careers in banking that they will be able to reflect back on during the 54th annual community banking conference in 2066. I have already penciled in the date on my calendar, and I look forward to hearing what they will have to say. While the keynote addresses, case study competition, and networking opportunities all contribute to the appeal of this event, it is the research sessions that form the core of the conference. In the first research session yesterday, we heard about the importance of community banks to the Missouri economy, the viability of the traditional banking model, what is special about community banks, and the changing characteristics of the communities served by minority depository institutions. In the second session, we heard about the relationship between bank size and performance from three quite different perspectives. Both of these sessions provided cause for optimism about the future relevance and importance of community banks while simultaneously raising concerns about the viability of the very smallest banking organizations. In my remarks today, I would like to explore this mixed message a bit further and ask what the observed trends in the data imply for today's community bankers and the communities they serve. In doing so, I will look at changes in the community banking sector at a national level and will also look at geographic patterns of community bank growth and decline. For purposes of these remarks, I will define community banks as those with less than $10 billion in assets, although my conclusions would be the same if I used a lower cutoff, such as $1 billion in assets, or a more detailed definition of community banks, such as that developed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) a few years ago. 1 As always, the views I express here today are my own. I will start by discussing figures showing the number of community banks operating in the United States over the past 20 years. Figure 1 shows the number of community banks for each year from 1995 to 2015. It shows a steady decline in the number of such banks over time. The rate of decline is considerably steeper in the late 1990s than in the period from 2000 to 2010. In the past five years, the rate of decrease has accelerated somewhat but remains slower than that experienced in the late 1990s. Breaking the universe of community banks down into subgroups based on size, we can see that the decline in community bank numbers is far from uniform. 2 The number of banks with between $1 billion and $10 billion in assets has doubled since 1995 ( figure 2 ), although such banks still make up a small percentage of all community banks. I should note that the growth in this "large community bank" category is greater than that among banks with more than $10 billion in assets, in terms of both the number of banks added to the category and the percentage growth rate. Banks ranging in size from $300 million to $1 billion have also roughly doubled in number over these past 20 years ( figure 3 ). And the number of banks in the size range from $100 million to $300 million in assets has declined by only a very modest percentage since 1995 ( figure 4 ). However, the picture for banks with less than $100 million in assets is very different from the picture for larger banks. As can be seen in figure 5 , the number of such banking organizations has declined by more than two-thirds since 1995. As with the pattern for all community banks, the decline in the number of these small community banks was steeper in the late 1990s than in later years. We can identify four factors that help to account for the decrease in the number of banks with under $100 million in assets. Some of this decline reflects the growth of small banks (often de novo banks) out of the smallest size range into larger size categories due to either organic growth or acquisition of another bank. Indeed, 90 percent of the large drop-off in the number of banks in this size range in 2014 and 2015 is due to banks moving up into a larger size category. A number of the smallest banking organizations also disappeared as a result of being merged with or acquired by other banking organizations. Some of the decline reflects the failures experienced in the Great Recession. And, finally, there have been few new bank formations in recent years. As noted in a 2014 article by McCord and Prescott, a key difference between the past few years and the late 1990s is that the recent acceleration in the rate of decrease in the number of community banks is due in large part to a decline in new bank charters rather than an increase in the annual number of exits. 3 This fact can be seen in figure 6 , which shows the number of new charters each year (in blue, with squares to mark yearly values), the actual annual change in the number of community banks (in green, with triangles), and what the annual change in the number of banks would have been in the absence of new entry (in red, with circles), over the past 20 years. It is clear from this figure that in the absence of new entry, the annual decline in the number of community banks between 2000 and 2010 would have been quite similar to what it has been since 2010. Or, viewed from a different perspective, if entry had remained at more "normal" levels during the past 5 years, the rate of decline in the number of community banks would not have accelerated. And, since almost all new entrants have less than $100 million in assets, the decline in the number of banks in this smallest size category would have been much less steep during the past 5 years. Research by Adams and Gramlich that was presented at the 2014 community banking conference and subsequently published in the Review of Industrial Organization considers the underlying causes of the virtual absence of new bank formation since 2009. 4 This research suggests that slow economic growth and low interest rates in the post-crisis environment can explain about 75 percent of the decline in new bank charters. The authors were not able to isolate the effect of regulatory changes on the rate of new bank formation, but note that regulation may also play a role. The sharp difference in trends for the number of banks with less than $100 million in assets compared with larger community banks naturally leads to the question of whether this difference is reflected in basic bank performance measures. I will begin with return on assets (ROA). Breaking down all community banks into the same size categories I used earlier, with the addition of a category for all banks larger than $10 billion in assets, we find striking differences in the patterns of bank profitability over time ( figure 7 ). The largest community banks--those with $1 billion to $10 billion in assets (in green, with diamonds to mark yearly values)--followed a pattern similar to that of our largest banks (in black, with crosses), but with slightly worse results throughout the past 20 years. These large community banks had lower average levels of profitability than our largest banks prior to the recent recession, suffered worse losses in 2009, and have enjoyed lower levels of earnings since the crisis. Banks in the size range from $300 million to $1 billion in assets (in blue, with triangles) have been the most consistently profitable group among community banks, although their profit levels still lag those for the largest banks. These midsize community banks performed as well as banks with $1 billion to $10 billion in assets before the recent recession and remained profitable, on average, even in 2009. The story is much the same for banks in the size class from $100 million to $300 million in assets (in red, with squares). Their profit levels were slightly lower than those for larger community banks prior to the crisis, but they performed similarly until 2015, when banks of this size showed a decline in profits not experienced by any other size grouping of community banks. Time will tell whether this is an anomaly or the beginning of a pattern. Looking at the smallest community banks, those with less than $100 million in assets, gives some hints for why their numbers have declined. The average ROA for the smallest banks (in purple, with circles) has been consistently lower than that for the next-smallest class of banks since 1995. The already lower level of profits for the smallest banks began to decline further in 2006. Since 2009, profits for the smallest banks have increased slightly but remain below their levels of profitability prior to the recession and below the ROA levels for larger banks. 5 Data on nonperforming loans (NPLs) show a mixed picture. 6 A breakdown of community banks by size indicates that the ratio of NPLs to total loans peaked for every size category in 2010 ( figure 8 ). Prior to 2007, the smallest community banks consistently had a higher ratio of NPLs than did larger community banks; but from 2007 until 2013, their NPL rate was below that of larger community banks. In the past two years, NPLs on the balance sheets of the smallest banks have declined more slowly than for larger banks so that banks with less than $100 million in assets once again have the highest NPL ratio. Let me turn now to consider changes in the number of community banks over the past 20 years at a more local level. For purposes of this discussion, I define local banking markets as counties in rural areas and as Metropolitan Statistical Areas in urban areas. Figure 9 shows those local banking markets in which the number of community banks decreased over the 20 years from 1995 to 2015 (in white) and those markets in which the number of community banks increased or stayed constant (in blue). As you can see, there are markets in every state where the number of community banks has declined. However, there also are markets in every state where community banks have maintained or increased their presence. In fact, the number of local markets that saw their population of community banks hold constant or increase between 1995 and 2015 was more than double the number of local markets that experienced a decline in the number of community banks over this period. And, perhaps surprisingly, the share of rural markets experiencing a decrease in the number of community banks (about 32 percent) was slightly lower than the share of urban markets facing such a decline (about 35 percent). As we saw, the vast majority of the decline in the number of community banks involved banks with less than $100 million in assets. This next figure ( figure 10 ) shows changes in the number of banks in this smallest size category together with changes in the number of all community banks. The local markets that are shaded in dark blue are those where both the number of banks with less than $100 million in assets and the number of all community banks declined between 1995 and 2015. The light-blue markets are those where the total number of community banks remained constant or increased despite a decline in the number of banks in the smallest size category. There are just over twice as many markets shaded in light blue as there are shaded in dark blue, indicating that in two-thirds of the markets where the number of very small community banks declined, the number of community banks overall did not decline. Markets in white are those where the number of banks in the smallest category increased or remained unchanged over the past 20 years. This examination of the geographic patterns of changes in the population of community banks has shown that most markets in the United States have maintained or increased their numbers of community banks over the past 20 years. Those local markets that have lost community banks have not been concentrated in any particular section of the country, and urban markets have been slightly more likely to lose community banks over the past 20 years than rural areas. One might ask, what factors have led some markets to lose community banks while others gained community banks or saw no change? Because of the importance of community banks as a source of small business lending and other retail services, we have explored this question but do not yet have any definitive answers. We considered the possibility that underlying demographic characteristics were driving the observed changes in the number of banks in a local market area. Perhaps the size of the labor force or the population density, the racial and ethnic mix of the population, or changes in any of these factors might explain the outcome. We also considered whether economic conditions such as the unemployment rate, the median household income, the number of business establishments, or changes in any of these measures might be useful in predicting which markets would lose community banks over time. Taking into account all of these variables in a regression framework did not yield much explanatory power. This analysis has not led us to a clear story regarding the determinants of changes in the number of community banks serving a local market area, but we intend to continue our research efforts and hope that they will ultimately yield some valuable insights. We can take some comfort from the fact that the number of local markets that either maintained or increased the number of community banks serving their residents and small businesses is much larger than the number of markets that saw a decline in the number of community banks. That said, we recognize that the loss of community banks may have caused some communities to suffer adverse economic consequences. So, what do we take away from this review of bank numbers and performance? First, the decline in the number of community banks is not a recent phenomenon--it has been a constant theme over at least the past 20 years. Second, it has occurred almost exclusively among the smallest community banks--those with less than $100 million in assets. However, I want to emphasize that the long-trending decline in the number of very small community banks does not mean that these banks do not play an important role in our financial system. Almost all newly chartered banks fall into this category, and many of these banks thrive and, ultimately, outgrow the smallest size category. Thus, banks with less than $100 million in assets should be viewed as a key source of dynamism and competition within the banking sector. Third, although the rate of decline has accelerated a bit during the past 5 years, that acceleration is largely due to a lack of entry rather than an increased rate of exit. Fourth, although the lack of entry may be due in part to increased regulatory burden, much of it can be explained by very low interest rates and a post-crisis expansion that has been slower than usual. Fifth, at a local level, about one-third of markets have seen a decline in the number of community banks over the past 20 years, but about two-thirds have seen no change or an increase in the number of community banks. It is unclear what factors explain observed changes in the number of community banks at a local market level. More research is needed on this question. I think the key question for policymakers is whether the recent acceleration in the rate of decline in the number of small banks is primarily a structural change attributable to increasing economies of scale--or, perhaps more accurately, diseconomies of very small scale--or whether recent efforts by the FDIC and others to encourage more chartering of new banks, combined with a return to higher interest rates and stronger economic growth, will mitigate the decline in numbers. At this point, I think it is too soon to say. The Federal Reserve and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors began this conference three years ago in order to stimulate research on community banks, with the goal of improving our understanding of their condition and their important contributions to economic growth and prosperity. We plan to continue our own research efforts across the Federal Reserve System, as well as our efforts, through initiatives such as this conference, to encourage academics to focus their attention on community banks. Of course, the Federal Reserve's support for community banks goes well beyond research. One of the clearest lessons from our most recent recession is that, when it comes to bank regulation and supervision, one size does not fit all. As we seek to promote safety and soundness and ensure consumer compliance, we increasingly tailor rules and supervisory approaches to the differing risks posed by institutions of different size and complexity. This way, we can achieve our aims without creating undue regulatory burden. The Federal Reserve is committed to this approach to community bank oversight and to ensuring that new and existing regulations are not unduly burdensome for community banks. In addition to fulfilling this commitment, the Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies have launched a review to identify banking regulations that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome, as required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act. The Federal Reserve has taken some concrete steps to provide burden relief by publishing a streamlined Call Report for non-complex community banks, extending the examination cycle for banks with $1 billion or less in total assets, increasing the threshold for the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement to $1 billion and expanding the scope to include savings and loan holding companies. In addition, we have efforts underway to reduce burden associated with our real estate appraisal requirements, to simplify the regulatory capital requirement for community banks, to encourage resource sharing among community banks to help manage their BSA and AML obligations, and to use Call Report data and forward-looking risk analytics to identify high-risk community banks, which would allow us to focus our supervisory response on the areas of highest risk and reduce the regulatory burden on low-risk community banks. We will continue to work with bankers and the other banking regulators to ensure that we reduce burden and complexity in our regulations and guidance. Another way that we further our understanding is by talking to the bankers themselves. The entire Board of Governors meets twice a year with the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, which includes representatives of community banks, thrifts, and credit unions in each of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. Individual Governors also take advantage of opportunities to meet with community bankers from time to time. I speak regularly to bank executives, including those who run smaller institutions. I find these types of conversations--with people who live and work in the world outside the Capital Beltway and far from Wall Street--to be particularly enlightening. In addition, I hope that some of the conversations here today among researchers, bankers, and bank regulators will continue, leading to benefits to all in the form of more informative research, better design and implementation of regulatory policy, and enhanced community bank performance. 1. The FDIC definition of community banks can be found at https://www.fdic.gov/regulations/resources/cbi/report/CBSI-1.pdf . Return to text 2. All asset sizes are converted to 2005 dollars, so the changes in size distribution cannot be attributed to inflation. Return to text 3. See Roisin McCord and Edward Simpson Prescott (2014), " The Financial Crisis, the Collapse of Bank Entry, and Changes in the Size Distribution of Banks ," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly, vol. 100 (First Quarter), pp. 23-50. Return to text 4. Robert M. Adams and Jacob Gramlich (2016), "Where Are All the New Banks? The Role of Regulatory Burden in New Bank Formation," Review of Industrial Organization, vol. 48 (March), pp. 181-208. Return to text 5. The patterns for return on equity (ROE) are similar to those for ROA, although community banks as a whole had negative ROE in both 2009 and 2010. The largest community banks, with $1 billion to $10 billion in assets, suffered much greater negative returns on equity in these years than did smaller community banks. Midsize community banks, with $300 million to $1 billion in assets, fared better than their larger and smaller counterparts. The smallest community banks showed an unusual pattern in their ROEs. (It should be noted that, for banks of this size, ROE can be a questionable measure of profitability because such banks tend to be either privately held or very thinly traded.) These banks were in the only size category that did not show a negative ROE in 2009, but it was also the only class to show a negative ROE in 2013, and the ROE for these banks has been consistently below that for larger banks since the recession. Return to text 6. NPLs are defined as nonaccrual loans plus loans that are 90-plus days past due and still accruing. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: September 29, 2016 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market: Second Annual Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Share Watch live This panel will focus on the settlement infrastructure for U.S. government securities--a vital component of the Treasury market and one that is undergoing an important transition. This segment of the industry has been in a period of slow but steady consolidation for several decades now. Thirty years ago, there were six banks providing a full suite of settlement services for U.S. government securities. Due to mergers and exits, two firms, Bank of New York Mellon (BNYM) and J.P. Morgan Chase (JPMC), have been the two dominant providers of these services since the 1990s. And soon there will be just one, given JPMC's planned exit. Given the importance of these services, the official sector has had a long involvement as the market structure has evolved. After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Federal Reserve convened the private-sector Working Group on Government Securities Clearance and Settlement to recommend steps to mitigate risks to the financial system from a disruption to these services. That work led to the "NewBank" proposal. 1 Although the proposal was ultimately put aside, NewBank would have been a dormant financial institution that could spring into action in the event of potential disruptions from an exit from this business by either of the clearing banks. Some of today's panelists were actively involved in that work. Of course, at that time, the business was roughly evenly split between the two providers. Today's situation is very different--BNYM now has over 80 percent market share, due mainly to consolidation among end users. The Federal Reserve has been working closely with the Department of the Treasury to ensure a smooth transition as JPMC prepares to exit. JPMC has said that it recognizes the need for, and its own interest in, ensuring that its exit does not disrupt the market. Indeed, JPMC will itself need to rely on these services going forward. The timeline set for a gradual transition over the next two years should be sufficient to avoid significant dislocations; however, if unexpected complications arise, that timeline may need to be adjusted. In the near term, this exit will leave BNYM as the sole provider of U.S. government securities settlement and triparty repo services for broker-dealers. We have been working intensively with BNYM in anticipation of this transition. We have long recognized that any disruptions to these critical market services could have serious consequences for financial stability, and have calibrated our supervisory expectations accordingly. To ensure financial stability, we expect the provision of U.S. government securities settlement services to be robust in nearly all contingencies. As BNYM becomes the sole provider, we will raise our expectations even higher. The bank has anticipated and welcomed this higher bar. BNYM is one of 8 U.S.-based systemically important banks. The bank is therefore subject to heightened capital and liquidity requirements and a resolution process that explicitly requires planning to ensure the continuity of critical services even in the event of a default. BNYM is unique in that it also plays the dominant--and soon the sole--role in government securities settlement and in the triparty repo market. These activities are comparable in their importance to those of the financial market utilities that have been designated as systemically important by the FSOC. Thus, BNYM will continue to be held to the high standards to which all U.S. bank SIFIs are held. And it will also be expected to operate in a manner that provides confidence that it is as resilient and robust as a systemically important financial market utility (FMU). Such FMUs are, of course, held to the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMIs). 2 The PFMIs overlap with our banking regulation in many areas; for example, both emphasize the need for sound risk management and the importance of resilience and recovery. The PFMIs also emphasize a strong governance role in support of financial stability and the interests of market functioning, and this has been a focus of our work with Bank of New York Mellon regarding the transition. Although our current task is to establish appropriate expectations for Bank of New York Mellon as a sole operator, that focus should not be taken as an indication that the Federal Reserve or other public authorities have pre-judged what the longer-term landscape for government securities settlement should look like. In fact, we do not have a specific market design end state in mind. Rather, we recognize the systemic importance of these activities and the need to ensure their continued availability in nearly all states of the world, regardless of the firms that offer them or the specific market structure. The industry as a whole should play an important role in shaping the evolution of the settlement infrastructure. Other firms may seek to enter this market. There have also been discussions over time of a settlement utility, and the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation is currently considering a new variant of such a model. Our focus is on the quality of the services offered--their safety, resilience, and support of the market--and not on the particular mechanism for offering them. If new proposals come forward that are consistent with our goals of a safe and resilient settlement system, then they will receive fair consideration. 1. Report to the Federal Reserve Board by the Working Group on NewBank Implementation (PDF) , December 2005. Return to text 2. See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012), Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures , report (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, April). Return to text Last Update: October 24, 2016 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At "CPBS 2016 Pacific Basin Research Conference," sponsored by the Center for Pacific Basin Studies at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California Share It is a pleasure for me to return to the Center for Pacific Basin Studies here at the San Francisco Fed. The global economy is at a critical juncture today. According to the International Monetary Fund's latest World Economic Outlook , global gross domestic product (GDP) is set to grow at only 3.1 percent this year, the lowest rate of growth since the Global Financial Crisis. Investment and productivity remain subdued, despite extremely low and even negative interest rates in many economies. 1 One key aspect of global weakness that is of particular relevance to emerging Asian economies is the sharp slowdown in global trade. This slowdown represents a notable departure from the "normal" times of the past few decades, and is the subject of my remarks today. 2 More specifically, I will discuss four topics. First, I will review the main features of the global trade slowdown and summarize the evidence on its potential causes. Second, I will examine the special role that structural changes in China appear to be playing in the trade slowdown. Third, I will turn to the implications of this slowdown for economic growth in the region. And, finally, I will offer some views on how Asian economies can respond to the slowdown by rethinking their "export-led growth" paradigm. Documenting the Global Trade Slowdown and Its Likely Causes To set the scene, I will review the main features of the recent global trade slowdown. As you can see on the first slide , growth in world trade rebounded after the Great Recession but has slowed substantially since 2011. On a real inflation-adjusted basis, world imports have grown at an average annual rate of less than 3-1/2 percent since 2011, about half the 7 percent pace seen in the eight years prior to the Global Financial Crisis. 3 As illustrated in the next slide , trade is no longer outpacing GDP growth. The share of real world imports in world GDP has been flat at just under 30 percent since 2011 after nearly doubling between 1985 and 2007. 4 This sustained slowing of real trade relative to GDP is quite unusual: Since 1870, trade has generally grown faster than production, outside of wartime and recessionary periods. Trade has been sluggish almost everywhere. Real trade growth has been lower over the 2011-15 period compared with the 2000-07 period for every G-20 country outside of Japan, where trade growth was constant. The third slide shows that the fall in real import growth in emerging Asia has been particularly pronounced from over 10 percent in the first period to just about 3 percent in the second. But import growth has declined in Latin America and the advanced economies as well. The next slide shows the differential between real import growth and real GDP growth for the same two periods. For emerging Asia, the differential went from positive to substantially negative, indicating that real import growth slowed to well below real GDP growth. In advanced foreign economies, the differential was just about zero in the more recent period, indicating that real import growth barely kept pace with GDP growth. Trade relative to GDP has held up better, though, in the United States and Latin America. Is the trade slowdown just another manifestation of slow growth, or is it an independent concern? That depends on the reasons for the slowdown. Weak global growth is surely part of the explanation, as emphasized by several recent empirical studies, including a special chapter on the topic in the latest IMF World Economic Outlook . 5 As can be seen in slide 5 , global GDP growth has fallen from an average of 3.5 percent before the Global Financial Crisis to about 2.5 percent since its end. But weak global growth alone does not explain why trade has slowed to about the same pace as GDP after growing faster than GDP for decades. Part of the reason could be that the particular expenditure categories in which international trade flows are concentrated have become especially weak. A stark case in point is the Global Financial Crisis, when plummeting demand for investment and durable goods--two highly traded expenditure categories--contributed to the sharp 4 percentage point fall in the ratio of world trade to GDP. The special weakness in some components of demand has persisted beyond the crisis and could also explain some of the recent sluggishness in trade relative to GDP. In particular, as you can see from the middle two bars of slide 5, the slowdown in world investment growth--from about 4.5 percent growth before the Global Financial Crisis to only about 3 percent growth since 2011--has been more pronounced than the slowdown in world GDP growth or in world consumption. But the differences are not huge, suggesting that this explanation can go only so far. Indeed, research suggests that other factors are also important in accounting for the slowdown in world trade. 6 One such factor is the deceleration in the pace of trade liberalization policies. From the early 1990s through the mid-2000s, trade barriers were coming down rapidly, including the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1994, the 2001 entry of China into the World Trade Organization, and the 2005 expiration of the multifibre agreement restricting textile imports to the United States and European Union. These changes resulted in the most rapid increases in the trade-to-GDP ratio since 1870. As the pace of trade liberalization has slowed in recent years, perhaps reflecting limits to further gains from trade agreements, it is only natural that the trade-to-GDP ratio should flatten out as well. Another related factor is the maturation of global value chains. Increased fragmentation of production across international borders--a natural outgrowth of the gains from specialization--meant more trade for any given value of final production, thus adding to the major expansion in gross trade flows in the 1990s and 2000s. As shown in the next slide , global value chain participation, as measured by the share of foreign value added in world exports, increased substantially during this period. It is quite plausible that the process of increased fragmentation of production across borders is subject to "diminishing returns" and has its natural limits. Consistent with this notion, the trend toward greater product fragmentation has slowed in recent years. Finally, of course, China looms large in any discussion of the global trade slowdown. Not only is China's trade being affected by all of the factors just discussed, but on-going structural changes within the Chinese economy, including rebalancing toward domestic demand, are exerting an independent effect on world trade flows. So, let's look next at China in more detail. 7 China After years of rapid export-led growth, China is now among the world's leaders in both exports and imports. China's exports now account for 14 percent of the world's total, compared with only 4 percent 15 years ago. At the same time, China's industrialization and export model has greatly increased its own demand for imports of raw materials, intermediate inputs, and parts and components. In recent years, however, growth in both Chinese imports and Chinese exports has slowed markedly. These developments have had a significant effect on global trade. One simple way to measure that effect is to consider what would have happened if China's trade had not decelerated. As shown in slide 7 , under a counterfactual in which China's trade growth had not slowed relative to its GDP since 2011, global trade would still be growing as a share of GDP. 8 China has, of course, been subject to many of the forces I have already discussed. One notable trend, shown by the black line in slide 8 , is that Chinese processing exports--that is, re-exports from assembled imported parts and components--as a share of China's total exports have been falling steadily for several years. This trend in part reflects weak global demand, as weaker demand for final goods and services from the advanced economies should have led Chinese processing exports to fall disproportionately. It is also consistent with the deceleration of global supply chain formation. Although global factors have undoubtedly played a role, however, the evidence suggests that a substantial part of the slowdown in Chinese trade reflects developments that are specific to the Chinese economy and that are likely to exert a lasting imprint on global trade. 9 First, the rapid expansion of China's manufacturing base over the past 15 years--made possible by vast reserves of cheap, rural labor--may simply be reaching its natural limit. Accordingly, we would expect China's manufacturing exports to slow. Second, China is moving up the sophistication ladder by producing some higher value-added parts and components itself, instead of importing them. One manifestation of this phenomenon is the higher domestic value-added in Chinese exports in recent years, shown by the gray bars in this slide, relative to the period before the Global Financial Crisis. Another manifestation can be seen in slide 9 , which shows the decline in the share of parts and components in China's total manufactured imports from about 65 percent in 2005 to under 50 percent in 2014. 10 These two pieces of evidence suggest that the shift away from parts and components in Chinese imports is not just due to lower orders tied to weak import demand in the advanced economies, but also due to the rising productivity and sophistication of the Chinese labor force, which is enabling China to move to higher value-added exports. As China moves up the sophistication ladder, you would also expect other countries to take a greater role in the lower steps of the ladder. We do have evidence that some other countries with cheaper labor, such as Vietnam and Bangladesh, are playing more of a role as exporters in the low-value added parts of the Asian supply chain. Anecdotal evidence suggests, though, that some of this shift is also taking place within China, as low-value-added production shifts to low-wage areas in China's interior. 11 The third important structural change affecting Chinese trade is the progress China is making in moving away from its export-led model of economic growth and rebalancing its economy toward domestic demand. As shown in slide 10 , investment, which in much of the pre‑crisis period was supporting high exports, has been falling as a share of the economy in recent years while the consumption share has been rising. Note, though, that the consumption share remains well below its value in the early 2000s. In addition, as can be seen in slide 11 , as part of its rebalancing, Chinese production has been shifting away from manufacturing to services. Thanks in part to these developments, China's current account surplus (not shown here) has fallen sharply as a share of its GDP over the past several years. 12 These are welcome developments as China's huge trade surplus created an unsustainable situation, contributing both to internal imbalances within the Chinese economy and to global imbalances. But the rebalancing toward domestic demand will likely put a damper on China's trade for some time as resources shift away from trade-intensive manufacturing. In principle, this drag on China's trade could be partly or even completely offset by stronger imports by Chinese consumers. Evidence of a shift toward imports of consumer goods, however, is limited thus far, and further substantial progress depends on the Chinese authorities' ability to remove distortions that currently depress consumption and boost saving. It may well be, however, that the rising power of the Chinese consumer will in time propel another long round of rapid increases in world trade. Implications for Growth in the Region Having examined developments in world and Chinese trade, let me turn to the implications of these trends for economic growth in the emerging Asia region. There is little doubt that for many years China and other emerging Asian economies have benefited from rapid expansion of trade. 13 Greater trade can provide a host of economic benefits, including enabling the pursuit of comparative advantage, fostering more competition (which leads to more efficiency), generating technological and knowledge spillovers, and facilitating import of key capital goods. These factors enhance productivity and growth and result in the availability of a greater variety of goods to consumers at lower prices. It is safe to say that over the years, the Asian economies have benefited from their high degree of export orientation through all of these transmission mechanisms. 14 A number of academic studies have found a causal link between openness and growth. 15 A simple scatter plot of economic growth across countries over the period from 2000 to 2007 against their export orientation, presented in slide 12 , is telling: More trade-intensive economies have grown significantly faster over this period, and the fast-growing emerging Asian economies shown by the red dots have generally been among the most export-oriented. How did greater focus on trade develop in Asia? At first, increased export orientation in Asia was achieved by taking advantage of low-cost, low-skilled labor to produce low value-added products for foreign markets. Over time, countries such as Japan and South Korea moved up to higher value-added exports, in part through technological and knowledge spillovers. Later, with the rise of China, many emerging Asian economies became integrated into global supply chains, with China acting as the endpoint of a giant Asian assembly line. Given that trade benefited the Asian economies on the way up, it seems natural that the slowdown in global trade, whatever its causes, could lead to some loss of dynamism and growth in the region. For China, the shift away from trade dependence is partly a reflection of policy choice, with rebalancing seen as a way to sustain growth in the face of some exhaustion of the heavy export/investment model. But many other Asian economies' fortunes are tied to those of China, so developments in China will have important implications for growth in these economies. One natural question is how the rise in domestic content of Chinese exports is affecting countries that rely heavily on supplying parts and components to China. To document this reliance, your next slide shows that the share of parts and components in other Asian economies' exports to China (the middle green bars) is much greater than their share in exports to the rest of the world (the right blue bars). Over time, this share has fallen from about 70 percent in 2005 to 60 percent in 2014, without the share of parts and components in exports to the rest of the world increasing. This evidence, combined with the evidence I presented earlier on trends in Chinese processing exports, suggests that other economies in Asia are being adversely affected both by less final global demand for Chinese exports and by less use of imported parts and components by China in the production of any given amount of final goods exports. And the effects of these shifts in supply chains are being offset only very slowly and to only a very limited extent by China importing more goods for domestic consumption. 16 Accordingly, it is doubtful that, at least so far, China is fully replacing advanced-economy demand as an engine of growth for the rest of emerging Asia. One way to look more concretely at this issue is to estimate an equation for the growth for emerging Asia ex. China that separately controls for the effects of Chinese growth and advanced-economy growth. This approach lets us see the direct contribution of Chinese growth to that of its neighbors at the margin, apart from the indirect effect due to China's exports to advanced economies. The results of such an exercise, based on 10-year rolling regressions, are presented in slide 14 . Note that in the first half of the 2000s, the effect of advanced-economy growth on emerging Asia ex. China (shown on the left) steadily rises from near zero to a one-to-one effect by 2005, whereas the coefficient on Chinese growth (on the right) hovers around 0.25 and is statistically insignificant. These results suggest that the effect of the rise in China on the rest of emerging Asia in the 2000s mainly reflected China's role as a "conduit" for trade with the advanced economies. However, after the Global Financial Crisis, we see the coefficient on advanced-economy growth move down some, whereas the coefficient on China's growth rises to 0.5 and becomes statistically significant. But the direct effect of advanced-economy growth is still larger than the direct effect of Chinese growth, consistent with the idea that it is still early days for the rebalancing of China's economy and that China will only slowly supplant the role of advanced economies as drivers of emerging Asian growth. Rethinking the "Export-Led Growth" Paradigm That brings me to the final topic of my remarks today, which is how emerging Asia can respond to the global trade slowdown and the structural changes taking place in China. Some of the structural changes I have discussed suggest that the recent deceleration of trade relative to GDP will likely persist and that we may expect global trade to grow perhaps about as fast as, but not substantially faster than, global GDP growth for the foreseeable future. Under these circumstances, emerging Asian countries may not be able to look to their export sectors as the key source of dynamism for their economies. So what's an Asian economy to do? I would argue that, instead of trying to restore growth through enhancing external surpluses, under the circumstances it makes more sense for emerging Asia to focus on domestic demand as an engine of its growth, and to allow their trade and current account surpluses to shrink. When looking at these economies in aggregate, as shown in your next slide , current account surpluses narrowed greatly after the Global Financial Crisis but rebounded substantially thereafter. 17 However, as you can see in slide 16 , we have seen some narrowing of current account balances as a share of GDP in several emerging Asian economies, although in some others, such as South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand, the surpluses have increased. Encouraging domestic demand and allowing for downward adjustment of these surpluses in emerging Asia, with more balances turning into deficits, would provide a much-needed injection of demand into the global economy and also support economic growth in the region by providing another source of growth in place of the lessened impetus from external demand. A shift toward external deficits in Asia would be advantageous, considering the low level of external financing costs at present. Many observers are raising the possibility of a "new normal" for the global economy, in which moderate global demand, low productivity growth, and slow trade may persist for some time, keeping interest rates in the advanced economies "low for long." To be sure, bond yields have moved up recently, but they remain quite low by historical standards. Accordingly, the cost of external finance to Asian economies has fallen, which should support strong private capital flows to emerging markets. Normally, we would worry about volatility of these flows and how they might exacerbate risks of financial instability, particularly as U.S. monetary policy normalizes. But we should also bear in mind that many emerging market economies (EMEs), particularly in Asia, have improved their macroeconomic fundamentals over the past two decades; that they have built an adequate war chest of reserves, with no pending need to further reserve accumulation for precautionary purposes; and that their currencies are much more flexible, which acts as an adjustment mechanism to shocks and also lessens the possibility of fluctuations in reserves due to currency intervention. These factors have made the emerging Asian economies much less vulnerable. Given all this, dare we imagine a world in which private capital inflows to EMEs could prove self-sustaining, are not offset by reverse flows of official capital, and would finance long-term profitable investment that would help support growth in these economies while also supporting global growth? In essence, these capital inflows would finance the shift from export-led growth to domestic-led growth required by the slowdown in global trade. And, with little or no official outflows, EMEs would have total capital net inflows as well, consistent with running current account deficits instead of current account surpluses. As pointed out recently by former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke, the availability of profitable capital investments in one part of the world can help defeat secular stagnation in another part. 18 Of course, these developments may take time. The point is that at this current juncture of the global economy, it is all the more important for emerging Asian economies--and, indeed, emerging market economies more broadly--to enhance domestic demand while pursuing prudent policies. It would be good to do this for the sake of the global economy, but emerging Asian economies should do this for their own sakes as well. (Thank you.I would be happy to take a few questions.) References Athukorala, Prema-Chandra, and Nobuaki Yamashita (2006). "Production Fragmentation and Trade Integration: East Asia in a Global Context," North American Journal of Economics and Finance, vol. 17 (3), pp. 233-56. Baldwin, Robert E. (2004). " Openness and Growth: What's the Empirical Relationship? (PDF) " in Robert E. Baldwin and L. Alan Winers, eds., Challenges to Globalization: Analyzing the Economics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, February, pp. 499-525. Bernanke, Ben (2015). " Why Are Interest Rates So Low, Part 2: Secular Stagnation ," Brookings Institute, March 31 . The Economist (2015). "A Tightening Grip: Rising Chinese Wages Will Only Strengthen Asia's Hold on Manufacturing," The Economist, March 14, www.economist.com/news/briefing/21646180-rising-chinese-wages-will-only-strengthen-asias-hold-manufacturing-tightening-grip. European Central Bank (2016). " Understanding the Weakness in Global Trade. What is the New Normal? (PDF) " European Central Bank Occasional Paper Series No. 178, September. Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer (1999). "Does Trade Cause Growth?" American Economic Review, vol. 89 (June), pp. 379-99. Gaulier, Guillaume, Walter Steingress, and Soledad Zignago (2016). "The Role of China in the Trade Slowdown," Rue de la Banque, Banque de France, No. 30 (September). Glick, Reuven, and Ramon Moreno (1997). "The East Asian Miracle: Growth because of Government Intervention and Protectionism or in Spite of It?" Business Economics , vol. 32 (April), pp. 20-5. Haltmaier, Jane T., Shaghil Ahmed, Brahima Coulibaly, Ross Knippenberg, Sylvain Leduc, Mario Marazzi, and Beth Anne Wilson. (2007). " The Role of China in Asia: Engine, Conduit, or Steamroller? (PDF) " International Finance Discussion Papers 904. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Hoekman, Bernard, ed. (2015). The Global Trade Slowdown: A New Normal? (PDF) VoxEU.org eBook. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, June. International Monetary Fund (2016a). World Economic Outlook, chapter 2: Global Trade: What's behind the Slowdown? Washington, D.C.: IMF, October. ------ (2016b). World Economic Outlook , chapter 4: Spillovers from China's Transition and from Migration . Washington, D.C.: IMF, October. Lewis, Logan, and Ryan Monarch (2016). " Causes of the Global Trade Slowdown ," IFDP Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). Lui, Silvia, Rebecca Riley, Dawn Holland, Ali Orazgani, and Pawel Paluchowski (2013). " Long Run Income Elasticities of Import Demand (PDF) ," BIS Research Paper No. 144. London: National Institute of Economic and Social Research. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016). " Cardiac Arrest or Dizzy Spell: Why Is World Trade So Weak and What Can Policy Do about It? (PDF) " OECD Economic Policy Papers, No. 18. Washington, D.C.: OECD, September. Page, John (1994). "The East Asian Miracle: Four Lessons for Development Policy," in Stanley Fischer and Julio Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomic Annual , vol. 9 (January), pp. 219-82. Setser, Brad (2016). " The Return of the East Asian Savings Glut ," CFR Discussion Paper. Council on Foreign Relations, October. World Bank (1993). The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy . New York: Oxford University Press. 1. The World Economic Outlook's headline growth numbers aggregate global growth, using PPP-based GDP weights. They also compute growth using GDP weights based on market exchange rates, according to which global growth this year is projected to be even lower, at 2.4 percent. Return to text 2. The views I express here are my own. Return to text 3. In principle, data on either world exports or world imports could be used to study global trade, though the two differ in practice. My remarks here focus on import data, which are generally regarded as more reliable at the country level. Return to text 4. The share of nominal world imports to nominal GDP has actually been declining since 2011, with a particularly sharp drop in 2015, reflecting steep declines in commodity prices. Return to text 5. International Monetary Fund (2016a); see also Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016), European Central Bank (2016), and Hoekman (2015). Return to text 6. See, for example, European Central Bank (2016), Hoekman (2015), Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016), and Lewis and Monarch (2016). Return to text 7. Another explanation that has been put forward for much of the decline in world trade relative to world GDP is an increased weight of EMEs in the contribution to global growth together with the property that EMEs have lower income elasticities of trade than advanced economies do. (See European Central Bank, 2016.) However, more broadly, the literature does not seem to suggest that income elasticities are significantly lower for EMEs (for example, Lui and others, 2013). Also, while trade financing constraints--another potential explanation--played some role during the severe trade slowdown during the Global Financial Crisis, trade financing does not appear to have become more difficult since 2011 and likely has not been a significant factor in the slowdown in recent years. Return to text 8. See Lewis and Monarch (2016) for more details. Return to text 9. A recent note from the Banque du France--Gaullier, Steingress, and Zignago (2016)--argues that the long run elasticity of world trade to income is unity, and that structural changes in China go a long way in explaining both the sharp rise in the elasticity in the years before the Global Financial Crisis and the subsequent decline in the post-crisis years as China rebalances toward domestic demand. Return to text 10. This share has been computed by updating the methodology followed in Haltmaier and others (2007), which, in turn, extended the methodology of Athukorala and Yamashita (2006). Return to text 11. See, for example, The Economist (2015). Return to text 12. Over the past couple of years, though, China's current account surplus has turned up again, especially as a share of world GDP. Return to text 13. See, for example, Glick and Moreno (1997), Page (1994), and World Bank (1993). Return to text 14. Some--Page (1994), for example--have argued that industrial policies favoring certain export industries have also played an important role in Asia's success, but it seems to be generally agreed that industrial support was only maintained conditional on successful performance on world markets. Return to text 15. See, for example, Frankel and Romer (1999) and Baldwin (2004). Return to text 16. The arguments laid out here are consistent with the findings in the chapter on spillovers from China's transition presented in the latest IMF World Economic Outlook (2016b). This chapter concludes that for many countries the effect of China's transition and rebalancing toward a more sustainable growth model will entail short-run negative spillovers, but there will be potential gains to the global economy over the longer term. Return to text 17. See Setster (2016) for a detailed discussion of the return of the East Asian savings glut. Return to text 18. See Bernanke (2015). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: November 18, 2016 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the The Economic Club of Indiana, Indianapolis, Indiana Share Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today. My plan is to discuss the U.S. economy from three different perspectives. I will start by taking stock of the current expansion--a business cycle point of view. Then I will shift the focus to some of the longer-term challenges we face in coming years. I will conclude with a discussion of monetary policy. As always, the views I express here today are mine alone. The Current State of the Economy As you know, the Congress has tasked the Federal Reserve with achieving stable prices and maximum employment--the dual mandate. Today, we are not far from achieving those goals. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has an objective of 2 percent for inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures. The Committee sees this objective as symmetrical, so that minor deviations above or below 2 percent are treated alike. 1 Inflation has consistently run below 2 percent since 2011, and is now at 1.2 percent over the past 12 months (figure 1) . This headline measure of inflation has recently been held down by falling energy and food prices. We also monitor core inflation, which excludes the volatile energy and food components because they often send a misleading signal about underlying inflation pressures. Core inflation is running at 1.7 percent over the past 12 months. Both measures have gradually moved upward toward 2 percent. U.S. inflation trended steadily lower after the Volcker disinflation of 1981 to 1982 and has been low and reasonably stable for many years. In fact, for the past several years inflation has run below policy targets in many parts of the world, including here in the United States. Many of us are old enough to remember when the only challenge was to keep inflation low. But too-low inflation can also be a serious problem. Below-target inflation increases the real value of debts owed by households and businesses and reduces the ability of central banks to respond to downturns. The public's expectations about inflation are thought to be an important driver of actual inflation. Many measures of U.S. inflation expectations--both from surveys and from market-based readings--are still well below their pre-crisis levels, although some have moved up as of late. The only way to ensure that inflation expectations remain safely anchored near the FOMC's target is to keep inflation close to that target on a consistent basis. So, while the current shortfall may seem small, it is important that inflation continue to move up to 2 percent, as I expect it will. The FOMC does not have a numerical goal for maximum employment because the long-run sustainable level of employment changes over time and is determined mainly by nonmonetary factors that are outside the Fed's control, such as evolving labor market practices, demographics, social change, and fiscal and regulatory policies. Nonetheless, four times each year FOMC participants write down their estimates of the longer-run normal level of the unemployment rate (the natural rate); at the September FOMC meeting the median estimate was 4.8 percent, very close to the current unemployment rate of 4.9 percent. Other labor market measures are also healthy, including payroll job creation and labor force participation. Employers have been adding roughly 180,000 jobs per month so far this year--a pace a little below that of the past several years but significantly higher than underlying growth in the labor force (figure 2) . Despite these strong job gains, the unemployment rate has flattened out this year after several years of sharp declines, thanks to welcome developments in labor force participation (figure 3) . The labor force participation rate represents the percentage of adults aged 16 and over who are in the labor force, which is defined to include only those who are employed or actively looking for work. When people enter or reenter the labor force and begin to search for a job, that is generally a good thing even though at the margin their entry tends to increase the unemployment rate (or prevent it from declining). Beginning in the 1960s, labor force participation rose steadily as women entered the paid workforce (figure 4) . That trend ran its course as participation peaked around 2000 and has declined steadily since then as a result of the aging of our population and other longer-run trends, notably the decline in participation by men in the heart of their working-age years. Going forward, many analysts expect labor force participation to decline at a trend rate of roughly 0.3 percent per year as a result of these factors. However, participation fell much more sharply than that after the financial crisis. Some of those who left the labor force went back to school, but others moved onto disability, took early retirement, or just became discouraged and stopped seeking work. The sharp drop raised fears that the crisis might leave behind permanent damage to our labor force. Fortunately, since late 2013, the participation rate has remained about flat and thus has gradually moved back close to its estimated longer-term trend. 2 On net, people have been entering and remaining in the labor market as job prospects have brightened, offsetting the natural decline from population aging. Surveys of households and firms also suggest that we are near full employment (figure 5) . For example, respondents are now more likely to say that jobs are plentiful than that they are hard to get--a response that has generally been seen when the economy is near full employment. Job vacancies are running at high levels, and firms report that it is getting harder to find employees to fill open positions. Moreover, wages are now rising faster than inflation, and faster than output per hour. Taken together, labor market indicators show an economy that is on solid footing and close to our mandate of maximum employment. It is interesting to compare this expansion to past U.S. expansions, and also to recoveries of other countries since the end of the Global Financial Crisis. The picture is a mixed one. The current recovery has been under way since June 2009--nearly seven and a half years. It will soon be the third longest of the 20 recoveries since the founding of the Federal Reserve in 1913. GDP, or output, is now 11 percent higher than its pre-crisis peak. Employment is now 6.5 million higher than its pre-crisis peak. But this expansion has also had the slowest pace of GDP growth of any postwar recovery (figure 6) . Given steady but modest growth, we have seen surprisingly large gains in employment and, until this year, a rapid reduction in the unemployment rate. Even though GDP growth has been slow, job gains during this recovery have been stronger than those during the previous expansion--the so-called jobless recovery of the early 2000s. The combination of weak growth and strong hiring in this expansion implies small increases in output per hour, or productivity. In fact, productivity has been increasing at a dismal pace, compared with virtually any period in the postwar era. I will return to productivity and growth in a moment. More positively, our current recovery compares fairly well with those of other advanced economies (figure 7) . Output has increased faster, and unemployment has declined faster, in the United States than in other major advanced economies. And the Fed's challenges in getting inflation back up to 2 percent are similar to, but not as severe as, those faced by some other major monetary authorities. Turning to the near-term outlook, after a slow patch in the first half of this year, growth has clearly strengthened. I expect that the economy will continue on its path of the last few years, with real GDP growth of about 2 percent, strong job gains, a tightening labor market, and inflation moving up toward our 2 percent objective. The main risks I see to that outlook are from abroad. Growth and inflation are low around the world. With interest rates so low, we are not well positioned to respond to negative shocks, whatever the source. Longer-Run Challenges Productivity and Growth Let's turn to longer-run challenges, and start by asking why growth has been so slow, and how fast we are likely to grow going forward. This next slide shows the five-year trailing average annual real GDP growth rate (figure 8) . By this measure, growth averaged about 3.2 percent annually through the 1970s, the 1980s, and the 1990s. But growth began to decline after 2000 and then nose-dived with the onset of the Global Financial Crisis in 2007 and the slow expansion that followed. Since the financial crisis ended in 2009, forecasters have gradually reduced their estimates of long-run trend growth from about 3 percent to about 2 percent--a seemingly small difference that would make a huge difference in living standards over time. 3 How much of this decline is just a particularly bad business cycle, and how much represents a long-run downshift? To get at that question, let's take a deeper look at the growth slowdown. We can think of economic growth as coming from two sources: more hours worked (labor supply) or higher output per hour (productivity). Hours worked mainly depends on growth in the labor force, which has been slowing since the mid-2000s as the baby-boom generation ages. As you can see, the labor force is now growing at only about 0.5 percent per year (figure 9) . Another way to see this is through the sustained increase in the ratio of people over 65 to those who are in their prime working years (figure 10) . This long-expected demographic fact has now arrived, and it has challenging implications for our potential growth and also for our fiscal policy. 4 The unexpected part of the growth slowdown reflects weak productivity growth rather than lower labor supply. Labor productivity has increased only 1/2 percent per year since 2010--the smallest five-year rate of increase since World War II and about one-fourth of the average postwar rate (figure 11) . The slowdown in productivity has been worldwide and is evident even in countries that were little affected by the crisis (figure 12) . Given the global nature of the phenomenon, it is unlikely that U.S.-specific factors are mainly responsible. A portion of the productivity slowdown is undoubtedly due to low levels of investment by businesses. The financial crisis and the Great Recession left firms with excess capacity, reducing incentives to invest. If businesses expect slower growth to continue, that will also hold down investment. The other important factor is the decline in what economists call total factor productivity, or TFP, which is the part of productivity that is not explained by capital investment or increases in the skills of the labor force. TFP is thought to be mainly a function of technological innovation and efficiency gains. There is no consensus about the future direction of productivity. 5 The pessimists argue that the big paradigm-changing innovations, such as electrification or the advent of computers, are behind us. If that is so, then our standard of living will increase more slowly going forward. The optimists think that this slowdown is only a passing phase and that the age of robots and machine learning will transform our economy in coming decades. Still others argue that we are currently underestimating productivity and output because of the real difficulties we face in measuring GDP in a modern economy. For example, how do we measure the value-added of free digital services like Facebook or Twitter? 6 The future is, as always, uncertain. But I would sum up the growth discussion as follows. Growth in the labor force has slowed, and we can estimate it with reasonable confidence to be only about 0.5 percent. Growth in productivity is both more important and much harder to predict. Productivity varies significantly over time, as figure 11 showed. If productivity growth returns to, say, 1.5 percent, then the U.S. economy could grow at about 2.0 percent over the long term. Actual growth may turn out to be weaker or stronger, and the choices we make as a society will have something to say about that. Why Are Long-Term Interest Rates So Low? Let's turn to the related question of why long-term interest rates are so extraordinarily low in advanced economies around the world. The yield on our own benchmark 10-year U.S. Treasury security has increased lately, but at 2.3 percent it is still far below what was normal before the financial crisis. In fact, this next chart shows that, as growth and inflation have fallen, longer term interest rates have fallen as well over the past 35 years (figure 13) . So why are long-term interest rates so low? Many of you will no doubt be thinking, "They are low because you people at the Fed set them low!" While there is an element of truth there, that is not the whole story. The FOMC has considerable control over short-term interest rates. We have much less influence over long-term rates, which are set in the marketplace. Long-term interest rates represent the price that balances the supply of saving by lenders and demand for funds by borrowers, such as businesses needing to fund their capital expenditures. Lenders expect to receive a real return and to be compensated for inflation and for the risk of nonpayment. Meanwhile, borrowers adjust their demand for funds based on their changing assessment of the risks and expected returns of their investment projects. When desired saving rises or investment demand falls, then long-term interest rates will decline. Today's very low level of long-term rates suggests that both of these factors are at play. Both expectations of slower growth and the aging of our population are having significant effects on desired saving and investment and are thus important causes of lower interest rates. If the economy is expanding more slowly, then the level of investment needed to meet demand will be lower. The lower path of growth reduces future income prospects of households, and they will tend to raise their saving. The pending retirement of baby boomers means higher saving, because people tend to save the most in the years just before their retirement. In addition, the lower rate of return on capital owing to lower productivity growth will lead to less investment and lower interest rates. As with productivity, the factors behind the fall in U.S. interest rates include an important global component, as rates are low around the world. Indeed, although our rates are near historical lows, U.S. Treasury rates are among the highest among the major advanced economy sovereigns (figure 14) . Is This the New Normal? What can we do to prevent low growth, low inflation, and low interest rates from becoming the new normal? We need to focus on ways to increase our long-term growth and spread that prosperity as broadly as possible. I hasten to add that these policies are, for the most part, outside the purview of the Federal Reserve. We need policies that support productivity growth, business hiring and investment, labor force participation, and the development of skills. We need effective fiscal and regulatory policies that inspire public confidence. Increased spending on public infrastructure may raise private-sector productivity over time, particularly with the growth of the stock of public infrastructure near an all-time low. 7 Greater support for public and private research and development, and policies that improve product and labor market dynamism may also be fruitful. 8 Monetary policy can contribute by supporting a strong and durable expansion in a context of price stability. Monetary Policy The low interest rate environment presents special challenges for monetary policy. In setting our target for the federal funds rate, a good place to start is to identify the rate that would prevail if the economy were at 2 percent inflation and full employment--the so-called neutral rate. "Neutral" in this context means that the rate is neither contractionary nor expansionary. If the fed funds rate is lower than the neutral rate, then policy is stimulative or accommodative, which will tend to raise growth and inflation. If the fed funds rate is higher than the neutral rate, then policy is tight and will tend to slow growth and reduce inflation. But we can only estimate the neutral rate, and those estimates are subject to substantial uncertainty. Before the crisis, the long-run neutral rate was generally thought to be roughly stable at around 4.25 percent. Since the crisis, estimates have steadily declined, and the median estimate by FOMC participants stood at 2.9 percent in September. Many analysts believe that the neutral rate is even lower than that today and will only return to its long-run value over time. 9 The low level of the neutral interest rate has several important implications. First, today's low rates are not as stimulative as they seem--consider that, despite historically low rates, inflation has run consistently below target and housing construction remains far below pre-crisis levels. Second, with rates so low, central banks are not well positioned to counteract a renewed bout of weakness. Third, persistently low interest rates can raise financial stability concerns. A long period of very low interest rates could lead to excessive risk-taking and, over time, to unsustainably high asset prices and credit growth. These are risks that we monitor carefully. Higher growth would increase the neutral rate and help address these issues. Turning to the outlook for monetary policy, incoming data show an economy that is growing at a healthy pace, with solid payroll job gains and inflation gradually moving up to 2 percent. In my view, the case for an increase in the federal funds rate has clearly strengthened since our previous meeting earlier this month. Of course, the path of rates will depend on the path of the economy. With inflation below target, relatively slow growth, and some slack remaining in the economy, the Committee has been patient about raising rates. That patience has paid dividends. But moving too slowly could eventually mean that the Committee would have to tighten policy abruptly to avoid overshooting our goals. Conclusion To wrap up, since the end of the Great Recession in 2009, our economy has recovered slowly but steadily. Today, we are reasonably close to achieving full employment and our 2 percent inflation objective. But we face real challenges over the medium and longer terms. Our aging population will mean slower growth, all else held equal. If living standards are to continue to rise, we need policies that will support productivity and allow our dynamic economy to generate widespread gains in prosperity. 1. See the FOMC's " Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF) ," FOMC, January 26, 2016. Return to text 2. The current participation rate is within the range of estimates cited in Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), " Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , Fall, pp. 197-275. Return to text 3. See Jerome H. Powell (2016), " Recent Economic Developments, the Productive Potential of the Economy, and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C., May 26. Return to text 4. Congressional Budget Office (2016), The 2016 Long-Term Budget Outlook (PDF) , (Washington: CBO, July). Return to text 5. On the pessimistic end of the spectrum are analysts such as Robert Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War (Princeton University Press, 2016). Among the optimists are Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (W. W. Norton & Company, 2014). Return to text 6. See David M. Byrne, John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016), " Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or Measurement Problem? " Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, March 4. Return to text 7. See, for example, Abdul Abiad, Davide Furceri, and Petia Topalova (2014), " IMF Survey: The Time Is Right for an Infrastructure Push ," World Economic Outlook (Washington: International Monetary Fund, October). Return to text 8. See, for example, International Monetary Fund (2016), " Acting Now, Acting Together ," Fiscal Monitor (Washington: IMF, April); Ryan A. Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2016), " Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward ," American Economic Review , vol. 106 (May), pp. 203-07; Steven Davis and John Haltiwanger (2014), "Labor Market Fluidity and Economic Performance," NBER Working Paper Series 20479 (Cambridge, Mass: National Bureau of Economic Research, September); The Department of the Treasury Office of Economic Policy, the Council of Economic Advisers, and the Department of Labor (2015), " Occupational Licensing: A Framework for Policymakers (PDF) " (Washington: The White House, July). Return to text 9. See, for example, Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John Williams (2016), " Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-11 (August); Benjamin K. Johannsen and Elmar Mertens (2016), " The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound ," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9), http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.1703. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version of Figures Last Update: November 29, 2016 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the "Understanding Fedspeak" event cosponsored by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution and the Center for Financial Economics at Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C. Share Watch on-demand Thanks to David Wessel and the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution for putting together this event. 1 Today I will share my own views on the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) public communications, which are designed to serve three important purposes. The first is to provide the transparency that enables the Congress and the public to hold the Committee accountable for its decisions on monetary policy. The second is to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy. If the public understands the central bank's views on the economy and monetary policy, then households and businesses will take those views into account in making their spending and investment plans; policy will be more effective as a result. And the third is to show the full range of FOMC participants' views, even if doing so may sometimes make it difficult for the public to identify a consensus view. In my view, acknowledgment of this diversity of views is important in sustaining the public's support over time for the Federal Reserve as an institution--what Jon Faust refers to in his paper as our "democratic legitimacy." 2 In my comments, I will also react to Jon's thought-provoking and well-reasoned paper. The Modern Era I will start with a brief tour of the modern era of FOMC communications, beginning with the issuance of the first postmeeting statement in February 1994. 3 That statement contained four sentences and noted that the policy action was being announced immediately "so as to avoid any misunderstanding of the Committee's purposes." 4 The Committee took additional steps to enhance transparency over the next two decades by putting its target for the federal funds rate into the statement (July 1995); releasing statements after every meeting rather than only after meetings at which the Committee had changed its policy (May 1999); including voting information along with an explanation of dissents in the statement (March 2002); adding the first explicit forward-guidance language to the statement--the "considerable period" language (August 2003); and accelerating the release of the minutes after an FOMC meeting (December 2004). 5 The pace of change accelerated notably after Ben Bernanke became Chairman in 2006. At that time, the Fed was said to be a bit of a communications laggard compared with some other central banks. Chairman Bernanke's agenda would move the FOMC to the forefront of transparency and accountability in modern central banking. In October 2007, after extensive discussions and internal trial runs, the FOMC published its first Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which built on the macroeconomic forecasts from the semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress . Since then, SEP projections have been expanded to include longer-run values for real gross domestic product growth, the unemployment rate, headline PCE (personal consumption expenditures) price inflation, and the federal funds rate; assessments of uncertainty and risks to the economic outlook; and, of course, the federal funds rate projections, or "dot plot," added in January 2012. 6 An extensive write-up of the projections is included as an addendum to the meeting minutes. Finally, and perhaps most important, since April 2011, the Chair has held a quarterly press conference following the FOMC meetings at which SEP projections are collected. In January 2012, the Committee first released its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which is reaffirmed annually. This consensus statement serves as a quasi-constitutional document that clarifies that the Committee's inflation objective is 2 percent as measured by the annual change in the PCE price index, that this objective is symmetric, that the maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors affecting the structure and dynamics of the labor market, and that the Committee will take a balanced approach to promote its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation under circumstances in which the Committee judges that those objectives are not complementary. Compared with a decade ago, FOMC participants express their views more frequently through speeches and interviews, and our communications vehicles reveal a greater diversity of viewpoints. In FOMC meetings, as readers of our transcripts know, FOMC participants now speak longer than they did before 2006, and they typically make their remarks prior to hearing the policy views of the Chair. Since September 2010, the minutes have included paragraphs that reflect the views on monetary policy expressed by all meeting participants, not just those who vote on the policy decision. These changes, taken together with the SEP and the dot plot, have given greater emphasis to the diversity of views of Fed policymakers. Discussion The large size and unique structure of the FOMC have important implications for our communications. The Committee has seats for up to 19 participants, up to 12 of whom hold votes at any given time. Governors are appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate. Reserve Bank Presidents are appointed by the Banks' private-sector board members who are not affiliated with commercial banks, subject to approval by the Board of Governors. This unique federated structure was designed to ensure a diversity of views, among other purposes. My strong view is that this institutionalized diversity of thinking is a strength of our System. My own experience is that the best outcomes are reached when opposing viewpoints are clearly and strongly presented before decisions are made. The Committee's diversity shows through most clearly at times such as these, when economic conditions have been particularly challenging and when there have been significant policy disagreements. Our communications are intended to enable the public to better understand how the Committee sees the economic situation and outlook, as well as what the Committee is likely to do if incoming data differ from that outlook--the Committee's "reaction function." My sense is that market participants and other members of the public focus instead mainly on the timing of the next policy change or on how many policy moves will occur in a given year. It also seems that the public may not fully appreciate the uncertainty that surrounds the outlook. In addition, market participants often say that there are too many voices saying too many different things about policy--the cacophony problem. The dot plot has been a poor predictor of the Committee's actual policy path, and some have questioned its usefulness. However, markets do not appear to be unusually uncertain about FOMC decisions. 7 In theory, our communications about monetary policy can be roughly divided into those that express the consensus and those that show the diversity of views. Today I will focus on the latter. Specifically, are communications that illustrate the diversity of views about the likely policy path--particularly the dot plot and public commentary by FOMC participants other than the Chair--currently serving us well? And if not, how can we make improvements? Questions of how much to say about the likely path of policy were extensively debated in the public sphere in the years leading up to the Bernanke era, and by the FOMC while Ben was Chairman. 8 The benefits of greater transparency are typically thought to include more efficient pricing of financial assets and a closer alignment between the market's views and those of the Committee. 9 Transparency should allow asset prices to respond immediately to incoming economic data, which would foster progress toward the Committee's objectives. Those who supported the publication of some form of policy rate path generally saw it as part of a forecast-based approach to policymaking, in which policy plans depend in a complex way on policymakers' outlooks, risk assessments, and objectives. 10 The whole forward interest rate curve matters for financial conditions, not just the overnight rate. Monetary policy was therefore thought to be made more effective by communication of the full expected path of policy, which could then be incorporated into private-sector expectations and longer-term interest rates. But all along, there have been other voices urging caution and asking, in effect, "How much transparency is too much?" As Don Kohn noted in 2005 remarks, "more is not necessarily always better" when it comes to Fed communication. 11 Critics have often argued that too much discussion of the likely path of policy could be taken as a commitment to a particular path and timing and could ultimately constrain the Committee from pursuing what it views to be the optimal path. Indeed, to the extent that the Committee's talk about the path of policy is given weight, that talk may leave "too little scope for private assessments of economic developments to show through" in market prices. 12 Jon notes in his paper that communications about monetary policy generally received high marks from 2008 through early 2013, and he focuses his analysis on the challenging period since mid-2013. I am also going to skip over the years 2013-14, which included the "taper tantrum" and the relatively uneventful taper itself. I will focus instead on the years 2015-16, which seem to me to be the most relevant to the challenges the Committee faces today. I will pay particular attention to the dot plot, the cacophony issue, and the need to do a better job of explaining uncertainty. The Dot Plot The dot plot is not a consensus forecast of the Committee. Rather, the dots represent each individual participant's assessment of the appropriate policy path. The Committee considered the use of a consensus forecast in 2012 but abandoned the effort after struggling to reach agreement on its parameters. 13 As you can see from figure 1 , the median dots have moved down from SEP to SEP. The December 2014 SEP median dots showed increases of 350 basis points over the years 2015-2017. In the event, there was one 25 basis point rate increase in 2015, and the September 2016 SEP median shows one more in 2016 and two in 2017--for a total of 100 basis points. Figures 2 and 3 display rate expectations derived from financial market prices and forecasts made by financial market participants, respectively. These market paths have also declined significantly over the period. And the path estimated from overnight index swaps (figure 2) has been substantially below the SEP median. It does not appear that markets have uncritically accepted the dots, let alone taken them as a commitment. 14 Some argue that the downward march of the dots has damaged the Committee's credibility. For me, the story is both more complicated and more interesting. Like Jon, I do not think of the dot plot as a useful predictor of near-term policy moves. But that is not to say that the dot plot is without value. Indeed, changes in the SEP and the dot plot over time have been quite revealing about the evolution of policymakers' views about the path of policy. In recent years, FOMC participants have significantly revised their views about the values to which key economic variables will converge over the longer run. The same is true of many other economic forecasters. Since the beginning of 2012, participants' views about the longer-run annual growth potential of the economy have dropped from 2.45 percent to 1.85 percent (figure 4) . 15 Much of the downward revision in estimates of longer-run potential growth reflects the implications of demographic trends and the slowdown in productivity growth. 16 These structural factors have also weighed on participants' assessments of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate--the rate that would be neither expansionary nor contractionary if the economy were operating near its potential. 17 The median assessment of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate declined from 4.25 percent in 2012 to 2.90 percent in September of this year, with 60 basis points of that shift occurring just since September 2015 (figure 5) . The persistence of low inflation despite faster-than-expected reductions in unemployment has also led participants to lower their estimates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate; the median estimate has declined from 5.60 percent in January 2012 to 4.85 percent in September 2016 (figure 6) . Taken together, these revisions explain a good part of the downward movement of the dots. One way to see that is through the application of a policy rule, such as a Taylor rule. 18 Simple policy rules, as they are sometimes called, incorporate key factors for monetary policy, including the natural rate of unemployment, the neutral rate of interest, and deviations of inflation and unemployment from their long-run values. As they prepare for FOMC meetings, FOMC participants routinely see policy recommendations from a variety of rules, including several Taylor rule variations. While these rules are useful as benchmarks, in my view they should not be excessively relied on for policy decisions. 19 The red solid line in figure 7 shows the policy prescription using the original 1993 Taylor rule together with the September SEP dots for the federal funds rate. 20 The Taylor rule prescription has been derived using the median value for core PCE price inflation, the unemployment rate, and the longer-run normal unemployment rate from the September 2016 SEP. The intercept in this Taylor rule represents the longer-run real interest rate--or r*--which is set to 2 percent. If we replace that intercept with the median of the longer-run r* implied by the most recent SEP, which is 0.9 percent, we see that the rule prescribes much lower settings for policy interest rates than the unadjusted rule (the blue dashed line in figure 7). The lower intercept does not completely close the gap between the Taylor rule prescription and the dots. However, many observers believe that the neutral real interest rate is currently well below its longer-run value. The language that has appeared in the Committee's postmeeting statement since December 2015 that "the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run" is consistent with this view. 21 We can estimate a short-run, time-varying r* using a standard reduced-form IS (investment and saving) equation that relates the unemployment gap to its own lagged value and the lagged real interest rate gap. We use the median of FOMC participants' projections from the September SEP in this exercise. The IS specification employed here is similar to that used in Laubach-Williams (2003) and is shown in figure 8 . 22 Using these short-run, time-varying estimates of r* as intercepts in our Taylor rule gives us the purple dashed-dotted line in figure 9 . This rule now tells us that the median dot remains slightly below the adjusted rule's prescription at the end of 2016 and 2017 but is back in line by the end of 2018. As Don Kohn recently noted, "We have been in uncharted waters with unreliable anchors." 23 The downward march of the dots shows that policymakers have been learning, and our understanding of the economy has been evolving, as we navigate the treacherous shoals of the post-crisis economy. The revisions in the longer-run values and the short-run, time-varying r* estimates provide a framework for understanding policymakers' evolving views of the economy and of appropriate monetary policy. And the dots for 2016 and 2017 lie below the purple dashed-dotted line in figure 9, showing that FOMC participants see an even more gradual path of rate increases than suggested by the short-run r* estimates. This lower path may be related to global economic weakness and risk-management considerations at the effective lower bound. Of course, all of this would have happened in the absence of an SEP or a dot plot. The new communications tools have made the process more transparent to the public. In this sense, the dot plot is more messenger than message. Cacophony I often hear that there are too many voices offering too much diversity of views about the likely path of policy--the cacophony problem. Reserve Bank Presidents and Governors are expected to publicly discuss their views on the economy and policy. Indeed, our policy on the external communications of FOMC participants states that "the Committee's public accountability is strengthened by open discussion of Committee participants' views about the economic outlook as well as their judgments about the appropriate course of monetary policy." 24 Central banking often comes across as obscure and complicated, and we try to help the public understand what we do. But there is more to it than that. Jon Faust's paper captures well the framers' vision of an institutionalized diversity of perspectives. In my view, the public expression of our diverse views helps sustain public support for the Federal Reserve as a public institution. Those members of the public who disagree with our policy should know that their concerns are given voice in our deliberations. But there is a tradeoff here that needs to be managed: On the one hand, the effectiveness of policy is thought to depend on the public's understanding of the Committee's consensus. On the other hand, the expression of diverse views may sometimes make it difficult for the public to see that consensus. Jon sees this public discussion about policy as mainly a form of negotiation. In my view, motivations are simpler and more obvious. Many of us enjoy getting out of the office to speak to outside groups. We appear to enjoy talking to print journalists, and some of us like going on television. With the proliferation of media of all kinds, there is a need for content, and we have been willing suppliers. In my view, these public appearances are mostly not about gaining leverage in a negotiation. There is a single FOMC participant who has most of the leverage in our policy discussions. Observers would be well advised to listen carefully to what she says. I strongly agree with Jon that it is wise not to read too much about the path of policy into all of this communication. FOMC participants other than the Chair speak only for themselves and customarily make that clear at the beginning of their remarks. Their commentary is not intended to express the consensus or to predict its evolution. As Jon notes, during the Greenspan era, there was very little discussion of the likely path for the policy rate by FOMC participants, including the Chairman. The proliferation of forward policy guidance during the crisis utterly broke that equilibrium. Many of us seem to be trained to a new habit, which is to offer one's views about the near-term path for policy, typically at the end of a speech on the outlook. While such communication can serve a useful purpose, I have come around to the view that focusing too much on the precise timing of policy moves may be adding to confusion and frustration about our communications. I am trying to avoid this problem in my own remarks. Uncertainty All economic forecasts are subject to considerable uncertainty. There is always a wide range of plausible outcomes for important economic variables, including the federal funds rate. In her remarks at Jackson Hole in August, Chair Yellen showed the median path for the federal funds rate from the June SEP surrounded by a 70 percent confidence interval based on the historical accuracy of private and government forecasts. 25 I reproduce that figure here (figure 10) , updated for the September 2016 SEP. 26 Note that the tan confidence interval in the figure is much wider than the disparity of views as represented by the central tendency of the projections (the black dashed lines). This uncertainty is a fundamental aspect of our world, and it should probably feature more prominently in our communications. Conclusion To sum up, the FOMC and individual participants communicate a great deal these days--much more than in the past. Some of those communications are designed to express the consensus, and some are designed to show the diversity of views. In my view, communications should do more to emphasize the uncertainty that surrounds all economic forecasts, should downplay short-term tactical questions such as the timing of the next rate increase, and should focus the public's attention instead on the considerations that go into making policy across the range of plausible paths for the economy. 1. The views I express here are my own. Return to text 2. See Jon Faust (2016), "Oh, What a Tangled Web We Weave: Monetary Policy Transparency in Divisive Times," paper prepared for "Understanding Fedspeak," an event cosponsored by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution and the Center for Financial Economics at Johns Hopkins University, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 30. Return to text 3. For a review FOMC communications, see Mark A. Wynne (2013), " A Short History of FOMC Communication (PDF) ," Economic Letter, vol. 8 (Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, September). Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (1994), FOMC statement , press release, February 4, paragraph 3. Return to text 5. The expedited release shortened the lag between an FOMC meeting and the publication of the meeting minutes between two and five weeks. See Deborah J. Danker and Matthew M. Luecke (2005), " Background on FOMC Meeting Minutes (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 91 (Spring), pp. 175-79. Return to text 6. The "dot plot" is a figure that provides individual policymaker assessments of appropriate monetary policy as defined by the value of the federal funds rate target or the midpoint of the federal funds rate target range at the end of each calendar year of the SEP forecast. Return to text 7. See, for example, David Mericle (2016), US Daily: The Fed and the Markets: A Failure to Communicate? (New York: Goldman Sachs, September 20). Return to text 8. See Alan S. Blinder, Michael Ehrmann, Marcel Fratzscher, Jakob De Haan, and David-Jan Jansen (2008), "Central Bank Communication and Monetary Policy: A Survey of Theory and Evidence," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 46 (December), pp. 910-45. Return to text 9. See Ben S. Bernanke (2004), " Central Bank Talk and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Japan Society Corporate Luncheon, New York, October 7. Return to text 10. See Ben S. Bernanke (2004), " The Logic of Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the National Economists Club, Washington, December 2. Return to text 11. See Donald L. Kohn (2005), " Central Bank Communication ," speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, Philadelphia, January 9, paragraph 5. Return to text 12. Quote taken from Kohn, "Central Bank Communication," paragraph 12, in note 10. This point has been emphasized in work by Stephen Morris and Hyun Shin. See, for example, Jeffery D. Amato, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin (2002), "Communication and Monetary Policy," Oxford Review of Economic Policy , vol. 18 (December), pp. 495-503. Return to text 13. According to the minutes from the October 22-23, 2012, FOMC meeting, "In their discussion, participants agreed that FOMC communications could be enhanced by clarifying the linkage between participants' economic forecasts, including the underlying policy assumptions, and the Committee's policy decision as expressed in the postmeeting statement. However, most participants judged that, given the diversity of their views about the economy's structure and dynamics, it would be difficult for the Committee to agree on a fully specified longer-term path for monetary policy to incorporate into a quantitative consensus forecast in a timely manner, especially under present conditions in which the policy decision comprises several elements." See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, October 23-24, 2012 ," press release, November 14, paragraph 52. Return to text 14. The expected policy rate paths shown in figures 1, 2, and 3 are not entirely comparable. The SEP paths are median values of the modal projections of individual participants for the end of the calendar year. The overnight index swap (OIS) paths are estimated using a spline approach; each line corresponds to the estimated path on the day before the release of SEP projections. OIS paths are mean forecasts of market participants and may be influenced by variations in risk premiums over time. The primary dealer survey paths are medians of modal forecasts, and the survey responses are collected about a week before the SEP projections are released. Return to text 15. Other forecasters--for instance, Blue Chip and the Survey of Professional Forecasters--have also revised down their estimates for longer-run real gross domestic product (GDP) growth. See Jerome H. Powell (2016), " Recent Economic Developments, the Productive Potential of the Economy, and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, May 26. In making these comparisons, I use the midpoint of the central tendency for real GDP growth and the unemployment rate. Return to text 16. See John G. Fernald (2015), "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, vol. 29 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 1-51; and Etienne Gagnon, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016), " Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October). Return to text 17. For further discussion of the neutral nominal federal funds rate, see Janet L. Yellen (2015), " The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2. Return to text 18. See Fernanda Nechio and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2016), " Has the Fed Fallen behind the Curve This Year? " FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-33 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November). Return to text 19. For example, FRB/US simulations using the Taylor (1993) rule for the period 2010-15 show substantially higher unemployment and lower inflation than was actually realized. For more information about the Taylor (1993) rule, see John B. Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy , vol. 39 (December), pp. 195-214. Return to text 20. The SEP policy projections are for the midpoint of the federal funds rate target range at the end of a calendar year. The Taylor (1993) rule is defined as R t = 2 + π t + 0.5(π t – 2) + 0.5Y t . In this expression, R is the federal funds rate, π is the percent change in the core PCE price index from four quarters earlier, and Y is the output gap. The rule used here is in terms of the unemployment gap instead of the output gap. The output gap is approximated using Okun's law; specifically, Y t = 2.0(U* – U t ), where U is the unemployment rate and U* is the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, or NAIRU. Return to text 21. See, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, November 2, paragraph 4. Return to text 22. For a discussion of the short-run, time-varying estimates of r* using projections from the SEP, see Michelle Bongard and Benjamin K. Johannsen (2016), " The Neutral Rate and the Summary of Economic Projections ," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 28). These authors combine the IS specification used here with SEP projections to calculate implied values for r*. See also Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams (2003), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70. Return to text 23. See Donald Kohn (2016), " How Should Central Bankers Talk about Future Monetary Policy? Lessons from the Crisis and Beyond (PDF) ," (Washington: Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, November). Return to text 24. The FOMC Policy on External Communications of Committee Participants was adopted in June 2011 and is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_ExtCommunicationParticipants.pdf ; for the quoted text, see p. 1. Return to text 25. The reason for the confidence interval is that the economy is frequently buffeted by shocks and thus rarely evolves as predicted. See Janet L. Yellen (2016), " The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future ," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26. Return to text 26. The confidence interval equals the median SEP path for the federal funds rate plus or minus average root mean squared prediction errors of the three-month Treasury bill rate (subject to a lower bound of 12.5 basis points), for horizons from zero to three years ahead, based on forecast errors made over the past 20 years. For general information on the methodology used to construct confidence intervals using historical forecasting errors, see David Reifschneider and Peter Tulip (2007), " Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook from Historical Forecasting Errors ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-60 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: November 30, 2016 Back to Top
