Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Utah Bankers Association 110th Annual Convention, Sun Valley Inn, Sun Valley, Idaho Share Watch Live Good afternoon. It is a particular honor for me be here to address the Utah Bankers Association, which is like coming home in two ways: First, to Sun Valley, which is our family's deeply rooted second home--my wife's great grandfather established the first sawmill in the Wood River Valley near Hailey almost 150 years ago--and second, to Utah, the place that, like all of you, I dearly love and where I have always lived, despite a career that seems determined to keep taking me elsewhere. One of those elsewheres is Washington, and as a Utahan who has spent most of his career in the private sector advising and investing in the banking industry, I think I have a pretty good idea of how things look, from your vantage point, when someone from Washington shows up to give a speech. Since the financial crisis, bankers have had to adjust to challenging and evolving economic conditions and to many new regulations. At times, smaller and regional banks have been left wondering how actions in Washington focused on systemic vulnerabilities and the largest institutions were relevant to how they fund their businesses and in turn finance the aspirations of families, farmers, ranchers, and other entrepreneurs. I'll start today by trying to address those questions and provide a brief update on steps the Congress and the Federal Reserve are taking related to financial regulation. A decade after the crisis, implementation of the major post-crisis reforms is largely complete, and we have entered a new phase that is aimed at reviewing and improving regulations to ensure that they are achieving their aims in the most effective and efficient manner. I will explain more about that approach, and, relevant to your businesses, efforts to tailor regulation so it is appropriate for the size and business model of different institutions. I will also briefly describe pending regulatory changes passed last month by Congress, which I believe will further tailor regulations for banks, with particular benefit to community and regional banks. But I want to devote much of my time today to a broader message about the connection between these improvements in post-crisis regulation and the fundamental purpose of those regulations: to do what must be done to protect our economy from another severe financial crisis. Banks of all sizes have a shared interest in ensuring that regulation is efficient and appropriately tailored to promote a strong, fair, and competitive market for financial services. Likewise, banks have a shared interest in ensuring that regulation overall promotes a strong and stable financial system that keeps credit flowing to households and businesses in the communities you serve. Among the truths revealed by the financial crisis, one of the most important was the recognition that the vulnerabilities that had developed in the financial system were global in nature and that the problems our institutions and markets faced in the United States were inextricably connected to conditions and decisions outside our borders. Other governments likewise found that problems in the United States spilled over to their financial systems and economies. To cite just one example, it is well known now that the rapid growth of securitization of residential mortgages in the United States was a prominent factor driving up home lending and driving down lending standards. I think it is not as well known that a large share of those securities were being created, traded, and held by entities outside the United States. Some of the most important steps taken since the crisis to make our financial system more resilient have involved collecting information, identifying and monitoring stresses in the global financial system, and establishing and raising international standards. As I have noted, the improvements the Federal Reserve is making to financial regulation here in America, including tailoring, will help level the playing field for banks and help ensure you are able to continue to compete and serve your customers. The benefits of this for Utah banks are clear. But banks in Utah and elsewhere also benefit from a strong and stable global financial system, and as history has demonstrated, this in turn depends on strong international standards that help level the playing field. A strong and stable financial system depends also on transparency that helps both the private sector and regulators detect and deter vulnerabilities that could harm the U.S. economy. So I'd also like to talk to you today about one of the important international bodies created since the crisis to promote global financial stability, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and tell you why I believe America's active participation in the FSB is important to our nation, and even, as remote as it might seem, relevant to your businesses. But let me begin with a topic of more immediate interest and offer a brief overview of legislation and regulatory action by the Federal Reserve that I know is important to you and your institutions. First, a little context: like our economy, the condition of the U.S. banking industry is strong. First quarter profits for all banks hit a new record of $56 billion. Banks are well capitalized and positioned to increase lending to finance investment in a strengthening economy. Community banks are also doing well. According to Federal Reserve data on more than 5,000 community-based holding companies, community banks reported net income of $20.6 billion during 2017, up 4 percent from the year before. Like larger banks more recently, this result was the product of particularly strong loan activity, with recent year-over-year loan growth of 7.7 percent, which was substantially above the increase last year in the banking industry as a whole. Turning to recent regulatory developments, the big news, of course, is the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act sponsored by Senator Crapo, passed by Congress at the end of May and signed by the President. Before I get to that, let me briefly mention some things the Federal Reserve and other agencies have done--in some cases presaging steps taken in the new legislation--to reduce the regulatory burden on community and regional banks. One supervisory improvement is a Federal Reserve program called Bank Exams Tailored to Risk, or the BETR program. It uses financial metrics to differentiate the level of risk between banks before examinations and assist examiners in tailoring examination procedures to minimize the regulatory burden for firms that engage in low-risk activities, while subjecting higher-risk activities to more testing and review. Another initiative has been to shift a significant amount of the Federal Reserve's examination activity offsite. Additionally, the Federal Reserve, along with other agencies, took action to simplify the reporting responsibilities of smaller banks with a new streamlined Call Report form in 2017. Based on feedback from community banks, we and other regulators also increased the threshold for requiring an appraisal on commercial real estate loans from $250,000 to $500,000. Looking ahead, the Federal Reserve is developing a revised approach to determining "control" under the Bank Holding Company Act that could help banks raise capital and facilitate nonbank investments. I will now discuss the new law, which preserves the most important post-crisis reforms for the largest firms while directing the Federal Reserve and other agencies to make numerous changes that should reduce the regulatory burden for community and regional banks. On the Volcker rule, the legislation calls for exempting the vast majority of banks with $10 billion or less in assets from reporting requirements, which the Federal Reserve supported, due to the lack of trading activity that community banks engage in. This overtook efforts by the Fed and other regulatory agencies to refine the Volcker rule, but the bottom line is that this broad exemption is law and in the process of being implemented. Another change in the new legislation raises the asset threshold for bank holding companies eligible for the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement from $1 billion to $3 billion. The law also exempts bank holding companies with $50 billion to $100 billion in assets from enhanced prudential standards and exempts banks with less than $100 billion in assets from future stress testing. The lifting of this threshold importantly allows the Federal Reserve to tailor its rules for these firms moving forward while retaining the ability to protect the safety and soundness of the system. I mentioned steps related to Call Report streamlining, and the legislation addresses this topic also, allowing reduced Call Report requirements for certain banks with less than $5 billion in assets. For banks that are well managed and well-capitalized, the asset threshold was raised for a longer, 18-month examination cycle from $1 billion to $3 billion. The legislation would also exempt from an appraisal requirement rural properties for loans of less than $400,000, under certain circumstances. A common theme in the legislation and the Fed's steps to improve our regulation and supervision is tailoring. As the Fed continues to evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of regulations, I expect tailoring will be a guiding principle. Let me now address international efforts to promote financial stability, specifically those centered in the Financial Stability Board. In the run-up to the crisis, as I'm sure you all know, decades of relative stability in the United States had left both the financial industry and government agencies complacent about potential threats. And even though financial crises had occurred during that time in some advanced economies, it is fair to say that the United States and other nations did not place a high probability on a crisis that could be global in nature. As a result, international coordination and collaboration on financial stability was limited, and there was a shortage of detailed and standardized information about financial conditions and vulnerabilities in different countries. As the crisis descended and the global nature of the problems became clear, the United States and other major economies, working through the Group of Twenty nations, created the Financial Stability Board to coordinate their efforts to stabilize the global financial system, reform international financial regulation, and share information. 1 The FSB includes central banks, finance ministries and regulators from 24 nations, the European Union, and also international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund and important global financial standard-setting bodies. Unlike other global organizations, the FSB includes multiple agencies from each government in recognition of the fact that financial stability is a responsibility shared across many parts of any government. From the United States, the Federal Reserve, the U.S. Treasury Department, and the Securities and Exchange Commission are members. Some of you may reasonably be wondering, at this point of the speech, how we got from rural appraisals in Utah to the Financial Stability Board in Switzerland. How are the conditions in 2008 and 2009 that led to creation of the FSB relevant to community banking? Let us remind ourselves how that global financial crisis and ensuing recession looked to communities in Utah and the bankers who serve them. Community banks, as we all know, engaged in little of the risky activity that was the basis of the crisis. But few community banks, I think, were unaffected by the competitive forces that were unleashed in the years leading up to 2008. When short-term wholesale funding froze up, and securitizing loans became impossible, and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac effectively failed, community banks were affected. And when your customers were hit hard by the crisis, community banks were affected too. In two years, from 2007 to 2009, the unemployment rate in Utah more than tripled. As it usually does, Utah weathered the Great Recession better than most places, but it was still the toughest economic times our state has faced in many decades, and of course, this profoundly affected banks and their customers. While that was occurring, the Federal Reserve and governments in other countries affected by the crisis were tackling several challenges in trying to strengthen financial regulation and oversight. One fundamental problem was information, specifically the lack of information about risks and vulnerabilities both within and across jurisdictions. The Federal Reserve and other U.S. agencies had some tools to help assess prudential risks for U.S.-based firms when the crisis hit. Information sharing about systemic financial vulnerabilities was more limited, particularly for conditions outside the United States. For one, we did not understand the importance of some financial vulnerabilities or had only limited information on them, such as interconnectedness across financial firms, and therefore we were unable to share information. We also failed to appreciate the ways in which the shadow banking system that had grown up outside the institutions we oversaw had become interconnected with those institutions. The existing global forums for discussion of these issues were considered less important or were focused on just one financial sector, and membership was often limited to a handful of industrial countries. We now understand the importance of taking a global view on financial vulnerabilities, and we are learning from each other about how to fill the gaps in understanding and data that exist. An additional challenge that the United States faced, in responding to the crisis and establishing more effective oversight and higher standards was the inability to enforce such rules in a global financial system without common, more uniform standards. If some of the activities threatening financial stability occurred outside the United States and in jurisdictions with lower standards, raising standards in the United States would be both ineffective in fully stabilizing the financial system, and could put U.S. firms at a competitive disadvantage, which would be only an added disincentive to embrace effective standards. Every nation, of course, seeking to make its financial system more resilient faced these same challenges and disincentives, an example of the problem of collective action that points nations toward international cooperation. If the FSB had been in place before the crisis and working on identifying and assessing vulnerabilities to financial stability, that may have allowed us to take action at an earlier stage, frame our response with more information, and possibly mitigate some of the devastating consequences. I can attest to the FSB's improvement over the pre-crisis discussions that took place internationally because during the first Bush Administration I was a delegate to the informal and more limited group that preceded the FSB. An important part of the FSB's work is to endorse minimum standards in different areas; for example, identifying the key attributes of effective resolution planning for systemically important firms. In addition, the FSB is in the early stages of some critical work that examines the effects that reforms and standards are having. Are they doing what we intended them to do? Have there been unintended consequences? Can we make the reforms more efficient; that is can we achieve the same effects while lowering the burden on institutions and supervisors? Once again, you might be wondering why something like resolution regime-planning should matter to community bankers. You might be hoping that I get back to the good news I delivered earlier, about steps being taken in Washington to tailor regulation and reduce the regulatory burden on community banks. But, of course, these are two sides of the same coin. Appropriately reducing the regulatory burden for community banks is possible when we can get an accurate picture of the risks and vulnerabilities in the broader financial system, which Utah's banks are part of and depend on. Tailoring does not mean abandoning our responsibility to promote a stable financial system, but embracing it, assisted by FSB efforts to ensure that reforms are having the intended effects and supported by the global standards that the FSB and other international standard-setting bodies are able to establish and promote. In closing, I want to address an issue relevant to any international organization, which is sovereignty. More specifically, we sometimes hear concerns that international bodies such as the FSB threaten our sovereignty by imposing rules on the United States, which would be a concern. Let me be clear: the FSB has no enforcement powers, no legal authority to command its members to do anything, and not even authority, as in some international organizations, to induce action based on contractual obligations. The FSB does not impose obligations, it addresses problems--problems that are of great importance to the United States and which, because of the global nature of the financial system, we cannot address alone. The United States and other governments created the FSB and participate in it because it is in our national interests to do so, and that is really the basis of its effectiveness. The United States is not weaker or less independent by participating in the FSB or other standard-setting bodies. On the contrary, when rightly structured our participation in these groups makes our financial system significantly stronger by ensuring that the U.S. perspective is part of the discussions and reflected in standards agreed to. Our consumers and businesses are more secure and prosperous because the FSB helps make sure that all countries are doing their share in promoting financial stability and not gaining an unfair advantage. Like some other effective organizations, a source of the FSB's power is that it functions by consensus. That can make reaching decisions more difficult, but it also yields decisions that can be truly effective solutions because all participants feel a stake in them. It is useful when the credibility and commitment of the decisions are especially important, such as when my Fed colleagues and I set monetary policy. At the FSB, relying on consensus helps 68 agencies and other members from two dozen countries with different perspectives and agendas come together around our shared interest in a stable global financial system. International negotiations and standard-setting is not the best approach to all problems, but in my past experience as a Treasury Department official, it is often the best way to tackle problems that are global in scope. By actively participating in the FSB and engaging with its members at a high level, the United States is supporting high international standards that are equal to those in the United States. Our standards will be most effective when other major economies embrace them in a consistent manner. The goal is to limit the risks of another financial crisis and do what we can to promote prosperity and a bright future for the people you serve so faithfully in the great state of Utah. 1. The FSB was created in April 2009 and was the successor of a less-formal group known as the Financial Stability Forum. See www.fsb.org/about/ . Return to text Last Update: June 27, 2018 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At American Bankers Association Summer Leadership Meeting, Salt Lake City, Utah Share I want to thank the American Bankers Association for inviting me to speak. 1 This is an era of relatively rapid evolution in banking regulation, an area of human endeavor that is not commonly known for its speedy metamorphoses. But in the time since I became the Vice Chairman for Supervision at the Federal Reserve, we have seen agreement on the final pieces of the international framework for post-crisis regulation--the so-called Basel III endgame. The Federal Reserve has issued a number of proposed rule changes that would improve our capital and stress testing regime. And in late May, the Congress enacted the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA), which, among other things, directs us to further tailor our supervision and regulation of large banks with more than $100 billion in assets. In other words, the Congress wants to see action and has, to a certain degree, specified some of the steps we need to take. How we respond to that task, especially as it applies to large banks, will be the focus of my remarks today. But before I delve into those details, I want to provide an overview of what I hope you'll take away. First, I want to underscore that I believe tailoring of financial regulation is good public policy. The Federal Reserve Board is a firm adherent of the recent legislation's underlying principle that regulation should be tailored to risk. To an extent, as I will later describe, this principle is already embedded in several aspects of our supervisory framework. Second, the Federal Reserve will need to revise its framework to allow for a greater differentiation in the supervision and regulation of large firms. To date, our tailoring of regulations has been based largely‑‑but not exclusively‑‑on asset size, which reflects an unduly one-dimensional approach. We have been evaluating additional criteria that may provide for greater regulatory differentiation across large banks, and the recent legislation is consistent with the goals of that initiative. Specifically, the legislation recognizes that large banks have a variety of business models and risk profiles; supervision should be flexible enough to incorporate this heterogeneity. Third, I believe we already have a good start on a path forward for tailoring regulation. In my remarks today, I will touch upon some potential factors we have identified for tailoring the supervision and regulation of large banks. Tailoring: A Primary Component of Post-Crisis Supervision and Regulation I think everyone in this room would agree that--while there are important ways it can be improved--the body of post-crisis regulation adopted by the Federal Reserve and its fellow banking agencies has, taken as a whole, clearly made the U.S. financial system stronger and more resilient. In implementing these reforms, the Fed sought to achieve two parallel goals: (1) promoting the safety and soundness of individual banking organizations and (2) enhancing the stability of the broader U.S. financial system. A certain amount of tailoring was reflected from the beginning in how the Fed sought to achieve these goals. As the Board built its post-crisis framework, supervision and regulation were designed to increase in stringency in tandem with a firm's size and systemic footprint. This can be seen in stricter requirements in various elements of the regulatory capital framework that apply only to larger or more complex banks, including certain buffers and surcharges, the application of the supplementary leverage ratio, and the application of the qualitative objections as part of the Board's capital planning framework, among others. In April, the Board proposed the stress capital buffer, which would simplify its regulatory capital requirements for the largest banks by integrating the stress test results with the Board's non-stress capital requirements. Further, the Board recognized that the failure of one of the largest banking organizations could create spillovers that would undermine U.S. financial stability and harm consumers and the broader economy. To offset this risk, the Board has required these firms to internalize the cost of their potential failure in a tailored manner that corresponds with their importance to the U.S. financial system. These efforts include the Board's capital surcharge for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) and total loss-absorbing capacity requirements. The EGRRCPA and Tailoring But while the concept of tailoring is inherent in how the Board thinks about supervision and regulation, reasonable people can disagree on the sufficiency of tailoring to date. In my view, we've made a good start in improving the efficiency of our regulatory regime. But we still have more to do to streamline our framework in a manner that more directly addresses firm-specific risks. The recent legislation requires us to reevaluate how we regulate banks that have between $100 billion and $250 billion in total assets. In particular, we need to make a tailoring-related decision in the near term: How will we decide which enhanced prudential standards should apply to which firms with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion? In applying enhanced prudential standards for firms with total assets of more than $100 billion, the Congress requires the Board to consider not only size but also capital structure, riskiness, complexity, financial activities, and any other factors the Board deems relevant. While we use similar factors to calibrate the largest firms' G-SIB surcharges, we have not used them more holistically to tailor the overall supervision and regulation of large banks that do not qualify as G-SIBs. Further, consistent with the legislation's tailoring requirements, the Board must proactively consider how firms with more than $250 billion in assets that do not qualify as G-SIBs may be more efficiently regulated by applying more tailored standards. In conjunction with changing regulations, we also need to consider how such changes would be reflected in supervisory programs, guidance, and regulatory reporting. As supervisors, we need to balance providing appropriate relief to firms with ensuring that firms are maintaining resources and risk‑management practices so they can be resilient under a range of conditions. We must also ensure we receive the right information in a timely manner so we can identify emerging risks. A Path Forward Banks with Assets between $100 Billion and $250 Billion I want to spend the balance of my time focusing on the question I previously posed: On what basis will we decide to apply enhanced prudential standards to firms with total assets in the $100-billion to $250-billion range? The recent legislation directs the Board to consider factors other than size for differentiating supervision and regulation of large banking organizations. Before I talk about the "other" factors, let me acknowledge the merits of size as one relevant factor to include on the list. We know that the effect of a large bank's failure on the economy is greater than when a smaller bank fails, even though the two banks might be engaged in similar business lines. The recent financial crisis in 2008-09 saw a much more severe recession than other financial crises, such as the savings and loan crisis in the late 1980s that preceded the relatively mild recession of 1990-91, and this appears at least in part related to the size of the affected institutions. In fact, empirical research done at the Federal Reserve shows that stress among larger banks does more significant harm to the economy than stress at smaller banks, even after controlling for the aggregate size of bank failures. 2 We also know that larger banks are more operationally complex--even when not engaged in complex business lines--with a broader geographic scope and more layers of management than smaller banks. Therefore, it seems appropriate to me that a path forward for tailoring supervision and regulation of large banks should not ignore size, but consider it as one factor--although only one factor--along with other factors. Before the enactment of the recent legislation, we had begun work on considering additional factors that capture large firms' degree of complexity and interconnectedness that‑‑in conjunction with size‑‑may provide a better basis for tailoring supervision and regulation than size alone. The systemic effect of a bank's failure or distress is positively correlated with that organization's business, operational, and structural complexity. Generally, the more complex a banking organization is, the greater the expense and time necessary to resolve it. Similarly, financial institutions may be interconnected in many ways, as large banks commonly engage in transactions with other financial institutions that give rise to a wide range of contractual obligations. Financial distress at a large bank may materially raise the likelihood of distress at other firms given the network of contractual obligations throughout the financial system. So how do we gauge the degree of complexity and interconnectedness of large firms? Rather than formulating new and untested measures of these factors, I believe we would be well served to begin by looking to our body of post-crisis regulation as a source. I will highlight a few factors that already reside in various areas of our regulatory framework that I am considering. The G-SIB surcharge indicators are likely to be a helpful source in this effort. For example, one factor from that framework that we might consider for purposes of tailoring is cross-border activity. This would measure assets and liabilities related to transactions with foreign banks, individuals, and companies, among others. This factor measures both a firm's complexity and resolvability, as foreign operations add operational complexity in normal times and complicate the ability of the firm to undergo an orderly resolution in times of stress. Another factor from the G-SIB surcharge framework that could be useful is a firm's use of short-term wholesale funding, which may serve as a proxy for liquidity vulnerability. Historically, reliance on short-term, uninsured funding from sophisticated funding sources has created vulnerability to large-scale funding runs and increased risks related to financial sector interconnectedness. Specifically, this can lead to "fire sale" effects that may affect broader financial stability--which occurs when banks that fund long-term or illiquid assets with short-term deposits from financial intermediaries like pension funds and money market mutual funds need to rapidly sell less-liquid assets to maintain their operations. Outside of the G-SIB surcharge framework, the Board has employed a measure of nonbank activities in certain rulemakings. These activities, which are conducted outside of a regulated depository institution, represent another source of complexity for large banks. For example, some nonbank entities engage in complex trading that is not permitted in depository institutions because of their risk. Banks with Assets Greater Than $250 Billion In addition to thinking about how we will tailor our regulation and supervisory programs for firms with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion, I believe the Board should also review the requirements applicable to the firms with more than $250 billion in total assets but below the G-SIB threshold. This review should ensure that our regulations continue to appropriately increase in stringency as the risk profiles of firms increase, consistent with our previously stated tailoring goals and the new legislation. The supervision and regulatory framework for these firms should reflect that there are material differences between those firms that qualify as U.S. G-SIBs and those that do not. For example, we know that non-G-SIBs with more than $250 billion in assets are generally less complex and less interconnected than U.S. G-SIBs and thus pose relatively less risk to financial stability. G-SIBs, on the other hand, have more complex activities, are more interconnected, and pose a far greater risk to financial stability should they fail. Yet at the moment, many aspects of our regulatory regime treat any bank with more than $250 billion in assets with the same stringency as a G-SIB. I believe there should be a clear differentiation. Next Steps from the Federal Reserve In my view, the Board should make it a near-term priority to issue a proposed rule concerning tailoring of enhanced prudential standards for large banking firms. This proposal, of course subject to notice and comment, would address our statutory obligations under the recent legislation by proposing to tailor enhanced prudential standards in a manner that recognizes relative complexity and interconnectedness among large banks. The statute sets an 18-month deadline for this regulatory process, but we can and will move much more rapidly than this. In terms of capital requirements, both risk-based and leverage capital requirements should remain core components of regulation for large firms with more than $100 billion in total assets. Stress testing should continue to play an important role in assessing potential losses that large firms would suffer under a severely adverse economic scenario; the recent legislation recognized the importance of stress testing by requiring a supervisory stress test for these large firms. Therefore, the Board's proposed stress capital buffer, if finalized, would be critical for these firms. However, we could consider a number of changes for less complex and less interconnected firms related to their capital requirements. For example, such firms, even if above $250 billion in assets, could have less frequent company-run stress tests. For those below $250 billion in assets, the statute requires supervisory stress tests to be conducted "periodically", which suggests the legislature wanted us to at least consider a rhythm other than annually. Additionally, less complex and less interconnected firms could be exempted from requirements to calculate risk-weighted assets under the models-based advanced approaches to capital. I continue to strongly believe that liquidity regulation should be a primary component of supervision and regulation of large banks. We all saw the central role that liquidity risk played in the recent financial crisis. Minimum standardized liquidity measures and internal liquidity stress tests remain critical at firms with more than $100 billion in total assets. However, for less complex and less interconnected firms with assets greater than $100 billion, there may be opportunities to modify aspects of the standardized liquidity requirements as well as expectations around internal liquidity stress tests and liquidity risk management. Similarly, banks with more than $250 billion in assets that are not G-SIBs currently face largely the same liquidity regulation as G-SIBs. As I've said previously, I believe it would make sense to calibrate the liquidity requirements differently for these firms relative to their G-SIB counterparts. Resolution planning is especially critical to ensure that the largest banking firms structure their operations in ways that make it more possible for them to be resolved upon failure without causing systemic risks for the broader economy. But most firms with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion do not pose a high degree of resolvability risk, especially if they are less complex and less interconnected. Therefore, we should consider scaling back or removing entirely resolution planning requirements for most of the firms in that asset range. Further, we should consider limiting the scope of application of resolution planning requirements to only the largest, most complex, and most interconnected banking firms because their failure poses the greatest spillover risks to the broader economy. For firms that would still be subject to resolution planning requirements, we could reduce the frequency and burden of such requirements, perhaps by requiring more-targeted resolution plans. Conclusion In conclusion, I believe we have a unique opportunity to further tailor our supervision and regulation framework for large banks in a manner that allows us to be more risk-sensitive while still meeting our core goals of promoting safety and soundness and enhancing financial stability. The recent legislation requires the Board to tailor its framework of supervision and regulation of large firms in a manner that continues to recognize size as one risk factor, but also more holistically incorporates other risk categories. In implementing this legislation, we should consider tailoring regulation further to take into account large banks' complexity and interconnectedness. Of course, the details of how we implement a tailored framework will be subject to debate, and you can expect the Federal Reserve to be highly engaged in the public feedback process. Implementing the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act is a high priority for the Board, and we look forward to hearing the range of views as we make progress. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. Pending research to be published by Federal Reserve Board staff in the near future suggests that an increase in bank stress results in poorer economic performance in a way that scales with bank size. Put another way, staff estimate that stress at a single bank with $250 billion in deposits would result in roughly an 84 percent decline in quarterly GDP growth, while stress among five banks each with $50 billion in deposits would result in roughly a 24 percent decline in quarterly GDP growth. Although both scenarios have $250 billion in total failed deposits, the negative impact is greater when the largest bank is stressed. Return to text Last Update: July 18, 2018 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Roundtable, The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video) Share Watch Live Good morning. I am sorry that I cannot be with you in person for this third roundtable hosted by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC), but I wanted to tape these remarks to make clear the Federal Reserve's full commitment to mitigating the risk to financial stability should a key reference rate cease to be available. We support the ARRC and its work. And support for the ARRC is not limited to the Federal Reserve System: the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Agency, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Financial Research, Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Treasury Department are all ex officio members of the ARRC. Since many have only recently begun to pay more attention to these issues, let me remind you of our reasons for convening the ARRC four years ago. The Federal Reserve began its role in co-chairing the Financial Stability Board's working group on interest rate benchmarks and joined in international efforts to strengthen LIBOR following reports that employees at several banks sought to manipulate these rates. We have served on the ICE Benchmark Administration's (IBA's) LIBOR Oversight Committee as an observer and actively worked with IBA in developing the reforms set out in IBA's Roadmap for LIBOR. Thanks in part to this, and thanks much more to the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority's (FCA's) efforts as the regulator of LIBOR, the safeguards against that type of manipulation happening again have been greatly and appropriately tightened. But as part of this process, we also examined data that we had begun to collect on the markets that underlie LIBOR and found that those markets had become extraordinarily thin. On most days, the banks that submit to LIBOR have been forced to rely on their own judgement and models in submitting to LIBOR rather than actual transactions. Many of them have become justifiably uncomfortable with a system that pins hundreds of trillions of dollars' worth of financial contracts to that type of judgement call. People may have some general sense of this, but because IBA does not release data on the transactions that actually underlie LIBOR, many may not be aware of how truly thin these markets have become. At the last roundtable, Jay Powell showed data on the volume of borrowing in wholesale unsecured U.S. dollar markets. That chart can be found in the ARRC's Second Report, which estimated that on a typical day the volume of three-month funding transactions was about $500 million. On many days there is much less. By way of comparison, we estimate that there are roughly $200 trillion of financial securities referencing U.S. dollar LIBOR. To help provide some further transparency, I will show data that we have on the number of transactions involved. These data are based on the information available to the Federal Reserve, which is fairly comprehensive but still may differ in some respects from that available to IBA, so I should caution that this is merely an informed estimate of the number of transactions underlying U.S. dollar LIBOR and may not be exact. As you can see in the slide , there are a few more transactions at the shorter LIBOR maturities. On average, we observe six or seven transactions per day at market rates that could underpin one- and three-month LIBOR across all of the panel banks. The longer maturities have even fewer transactions. There are two to three transactions each day for six-month LIBOR. On average, there is only one transaction that we see underlying one-year LIBOR, and many days there are no transactions at all. The secured overnight financing rate (SOFR) has only been in existence three months, and SOFR futures have only been trading for two months, but on a daily basis there are already more transactions underlying them than there are underpinning LIBOR. And SOFR itself reflects over $700 billion in overnight repurchase agreement (repo) transactions every day. One of the many benefits of using a rate so firmly anchored in a market of this depth is that no one can question whether SOFR is representative. It clearly is. With LIBOR reliant on expert judgment rather than direct transactions, many banks increasingly uncomfortable providing that judgment, and the official sector unable to compel them to do so indefinitely, it was obvious to us that this structure--which bases so many trillions of financial instruments on such a small number of underlying transactions--was potentially unstable. It was clear that the market needed to develop alternatives in case the worst happened, and this was the reason that we convened the ARRC four years ago. We asked the ARRC to identify a robust alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR and to develop a plan to promote its use. Sandie O'Connor will speak shortly about the ARRC's work, but I want to emphasize that this has been a model of cooperative effort between the private sector and the public sector. When the ARRC started, the interest rate benchmarks that they would eventually narrow their choice down to did not even exist. Those rates have not been easy to create, and as the ARRC expressed interest in a Treasury repo rate benchmark that would span the widest possible scope of the market, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York put great effort in working with the Federal Reserve Board and Office of Financial Research to create SOFR. The result, the rate the ARRC has chosen, reflects the largest and deepest rates market in the world and is a huge accomplishment for all of us. That accomplishment is only the start of what will be many. As I noted, just three months after SOFR has begun production, we have already seen the introduction of futures markets on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. LCH has now begun to offer clearing of SOFR overnight index and basis swaps, and CME Group will begin to do so within a few months. These are steps that the private sector must lead, and they have, but it is important that the public sector encourage the development of SOFR markets where it can. The ARRC has issued a first letter to U.S. regulators asking us to consider exemptions for legacy swaps seeking to incorporate the International Swaps and Derivatives Association's protocol or exemptions for amending to move from LIBOR to SOFR, and these are issues that we should look at seriously; we should avoid placing unintended hurdles in the way of those who may seek to transition from LIBOR. Here is something you don't hear often in the context of any large, complex undertaking involving input from a large number of stakeholders: The effort to implement SOFR is ahead of schedule. The ARRC has recognized that we have to make transitioning to SOFR as easy as it can be. That is the reason that it has added the creation of a forward-looking term rate as the final step in its Paced Transition Plan. As the ARRC has noted and the Financial Stability Board has now reiterated, this kind of forward-looking term rate will be useful in facilitating a transition away from LIBOR in some cash markets, such as corporate loans, but it is not primarily intended for use in derivatives markets. In fact, we have to encourage use of SOFR in derivatives markets to the fullest extent possible if a robust forward-looking term rate is to be created. For that reason, we also have to find ways to encourage uses of SOFR in those cash markets where it is appropriate. The European Investment Bank's recent announcement that it would issue a floating rate note paying a compound average of Sterling Overnight Index Average (SONIA) shows that this can be done. 1 In the spirit of encouraging this type of use of SOFR, I think it is appropriate for the Federal Reserve to consider publishing a compound average of SOFR that market participants could then use. It has been suggested that we could call it SAFR, for secured average financing rate, and this is something that we are encouraging our staff to explore. Publishing a compound average rate that encourages broader use of SOFR would help make our financial system more resilient. Sandie will talk more about the creation of the forward-looking term version of SOFR in her remarks. SAFR would not be a competitor to this forward-looking rate, it would be in alliance with it. If there were a large volume of products referencing the compound average rate, there would likely be related demand for futures contracts to hedge those positions, helping to make the forward rate more robust. It is important that we find ways to make it as easy as possible to use SOFR because the risks to LIBOR are, at this stage, quite considerable. Even as the ARRC and similar currency groups in other jurisdictions were being formed, the FCA was exerting considerable effort to convince banks to continue submitting to LIBOR. We have to be aware that two banks left the U.S. dollar panels despite this encouragement, and that the agreement that the FCA reached with the remaining banks to continue submitting voluntarily through the end of 2021 now has just three-and-a-half years left. And as Andrew Bailey noted last week, there is also the prospect that LIBOR could be judged to be nonrepresentative under the European Union's Benchmark Regulations, which would severely curtail the liquidity of products referencing LIBOR. Apart from the questions as to whether LIBOR will continue or whether IBA or the FCA may judge that it is not representative, market participants should consider whether a rate with so few transactions underlying it is really their best option. Do we really need or want to use other tenors of LIBOR in municipal or financial floating-rate notes? For some, the answer to this may still be yes, but it is then imperative that they work to incorporate safer fallback language into their contracts as quickly as they can. This is something that the ARRC has been working on intensively this year and much of today's roundtable will discuss. But for others, the safest thing you can do would be to move away from using LIBOR. Regardless of your answer to this question, we all have a stake in the ARRC's work, both in promoting SOFR and in promoting better contract language. I want to thank you all for coming to this roundtable, and want to thank Sandie and the ARRC for all the work that has made it possible. 1. See the European Investment Bank's announcement at www.eib.org/investor_relations/press/2018/fi-2018-12-EIB%20issues%20markets%20first%20SONIA%20GBP%20benchmark%20with%20GBP%201bn%205y%20issuance.htm . Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: July 19, 2018 Back to Top
