Governor Lael Brainard At Policy Summit 2019: Connecting People and Places to Opportunity, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cincinnati, Ohio Share Watch Live It is good to be here in Cincinnati. I want to thank my colleague, Loretta Mester, for inviting me to participate today, and it is a pleasure to participate in the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland's Policy Summit. 1 Today's session is part of a series called Fed Listens. The Federal Reserve is reaching out to communities around the country to hear how Americans are experiencing the economy day to day and to make sure we are carrying out the monetary policy goals assigned to us by the Congress in the most effective way we can. 2 The Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve to use monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and price stability. These two goals are what we refer to as our dual mandate. By price stability, we mean moderate and stable inflation. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)—the group at the Fed responsible for determining monetary policy—has announced that our goal is to keep inflation around 2 percent over time. The maximum-employment part of our dual mandate means that the Congress has directed us to achieve the highest level of employment that is consistent with price stability. The Outlook Earlier this week, President Mester and I participated in the meeting of the FOMC, where we had the opportunity to share our views on the economy and policy. My own assessment is that the most likely path for the economy remains solid. The latest data suggest that consumer spending is robust, and consumer confidence is high. Although the pace of payroll gains has moderated recently, unemployment is at a 50-year low, wages are growing, participation in the labor force has expanded, and unemployment insurance claims are at cycle lows. Despite recent volatility, financial conditions overall remain supportive. Recent weeks, however, have seen important downside risks. Crosscurrents from policy uncertainty have risen since early May, crimping business investment plans, raising concerns in some financial market segments, and weighing on global growth prospects. Foreign authorities are seeking additional policy space to address growth and inflation shortfalls. In addition, recent indicators of inflation and inflation expectations have been disappointing, making it all the more important to sustain the economy's momentum. The downside risks, if they materialize, could weigh on economic activity. Basic principles of risk management in a low neutral rate environment with compressed conventional policy space would argue for softening the expected path of policy when risks shift to the downside. 3 Our Review With recent indicators suggesting the expansion is continuing at a solid pace and unemployment at a 50-year low, inflation has not yet moved to our goal on a sustained basis. In many ways, that can be viewed as an opportunity, with the sustained expansion providing critical job opportunities to a broader set of applicants. In parallel, it is also vital that a central bank meets its inflation target on a sustained basis, which will provide more capacity to buffer the economy if it encounters headwinds. We are undertaking our review to ensure we are well positioned to meet our goals for many years to come, especially in light of the way the economy is changing, which I have been referring to as the "new normal." 4 There are a few key features of that new normal. First, interest rates have stayed very low in recent years in the United States and in many other advanced economies, and it seems likely that equilibrium interest rates will remain low in the future. Low interest rates present a challenge for traditional monetary policy in recessions. In the past, the Federal Reserve has typically cut interest rates 4 to 5 percentage points in order to support household spending and business investment. However, when equilibrium interest rates are low, we have less room to cut interest rates and less room to buffer the economy using our conventional tool. Another big change in the economy is that inflation does not move as much with economic activity and employment as it has in the past, which is what economists mean when they say the Phillips curve is very flat. A flat Phillips curve has important advantages: The labor market can strengthen a lot and pull many workers who may have been sidelined back into productive employment without an acceleration in inflation, unlike what we saw in the 1960s and 1970s. On the other hand, today's low sensitivity of inflation to slack, along with the limited ability to cut interest rates in a recession, means it can be more difficult to achieve our 2 percent inflation objective on a sustainable basis. The limited ability to cut interest rates could provide less ability to buffer the economy in a downturn, while the very flat Phillips curve could make it harder to boost inflation during an expansion. And that could further compress policy space in a negative spiral. As we have seen in other countries, if inflation consistently falls short of the central bank's objective, consumers, workers, and businesses start to expect lower inflation to continue. Expectations of low inflation can create a self-fulfilling dynamic with actual inflation, making it even more difficult for the central bank to boost inflation. And because inflation is reflected in nominal interest rates, that, in turn, can reduce the amount of policy space the central bank has available to prevent the economy from slipping into recession. In fact, in recent years, central banks around the world have had to use a larger variety of policy tools than they have traditionally used to support the recovery. Some Issues to Explore Given the new normal of low equilibrium interest rates and low sensitivity of inflation to slack, it is prudent to assess how well various approaches worked both here and around the world, with a view to identifying the best ways to promote the goals the Congress assigned to us. Earlier this month, we held a conference in Chicago where we heard from experts as well as community organizations, small businesses, labor organizations, and retirees. We are looking at our tools and strategies, assessing not just the various approaches that were undertaken, but also approaches that have been proposed but not tried. One of the ideas discussed in Chicago is that the Federal Reserve should explicitly promise to "make up" for misses on inflation during a downturn. The Federal Reserve could hold interest rates lower after a recession is over, perhaps by promising not to raise interest rates until inflation or the unemployment rate have reached particular levels. 5 A related idea discussed in Chicago is average inflation targeting, meaning the Federal Reserve would aim to achieve its inflation objective, on average, over a longer period of time—perhaps over the business cycle. 6 This approach could also have aspects of a makeup policy, depending on how it is designed. While such approaches sound quite appealing on their face, they have not yet been implemented in practice. There is some skepticism that a central bank would in fact prove able to support above-target inflation over a sustained period without becoming concerned that inflation might accelerate, and inflation expectations might rise too high. At the Chicago conference, we also heard how difficult it can be to estimate with any precision the "maximum employment" leg of our dual mandate. 7 There is no fixed destination point for maximum employment—no single number where we can be sure we are "there." Maximum employment is something that we must learn about by seeing how the job market is operating. That is very different from the longer-run level of inflation, which central banks are presumed able to determine over time. At our conference in Chicago, we also asked the panelists about our communications with the public, and the responses were humbling. The Federal Reserve communicates with the public about monetary policy through a variety of channels. At each of our policy-setting meetings, the FOMC issues a statement, and Chair Jerome Powell holds a press conference. Three weeks after the meeting, the minutes of the meeting are published. Twice a year, the Federal Reserve submits a Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. We heard in Chicago that most members of the public care a lot about the job market and the cost of credit, but they are not aware of our communications about monetary policy. 8 Of course, the media plays an important role in communicating our monetary policy actions and how they affect the economy. And the Congress, which plays an important role in overseeing the Fed, is a key audience as well. Nonetheless, considering how we can provide greater visibility to the public about what we do will be one of the issues we will be considering as our policy review continues. Listening Now, how does today's event fit into all of this? Since I arrived at the Fed, I have derived tremendous benefit from visiting communities all over the country to hear from them how they are experiencing the economy. Today President Mester and I want to hear from you. How is your community experiencing today's economy? Is everyone who wants a job able to get one? Can they get the necessary training? Are businesses finding it relatively easy to hire the workers they need? How does price inflation and wage growth affect you? What about the availability and cost of credit—whether to start or expand a small business, buy a car to get to work, or invest in owning a home or getting a degree? And are there ways we can better communicate with you? I look forward to hearing your views on these and other questions. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Richard H. Clarida (2019), " The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices ," speech delivered at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York, February 22; and Jerome H. Powell (2019), " Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead ," speech delivered at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, March 8. Return to text 3. One reason for caution is the risk of building financial market imbalances, such as currently elevated levels of risky corporate debt. In my view, it is better to address such financial imbalances by activation of our countercyclical capital buffer, rigorous use of stress tests, and beefed-up monitoring of leveraged lending than by monetary policy. Return to text 4. See Lael Brainard (2016), " The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois, September 12. Return to text 5. See Sharon Kozicki (2019), " Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve: Discussion of Practical Considerations (PDF) ," presentation at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5. Return to text 6. See Lars E.O. Svensson (2019), " Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve (PDF) ," paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5. Return to text 7. See Katharine G. Abraham and John C. Haltiwanger (2019), " How Tight is the Labor Market? (PDF) " paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategies, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5. Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), " Panel 1: What Does Full Employment Look Like for Your Community or Constituency? " at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), " Panel 2: Transmission of Monetary Policy to the Economy: Beyond the Headlines ," at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5. Return to text Related Content Fed Listens Events Last Update: June 21, 2019 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Community Bankers Roundtable, Scranton, Pennsylvania Share Thank you to my colleague Pat Harker for the invitation to join him here this evening. In my time at the Federal Reserve, I have found that hearing directly from people around the country about how their communities are experiencing the economy is vital to carrying out my responsibilities. It helps me to understand what is working well and what the challenges are, and it provides ideas on how to improve economic opportunities. Today I look forward to hearing your perspective on the economy and the banking business in and around Scranton. Before hearing from you, I was asked to provide my perspective on the national economy. Recent data suggest the economy is growing solidly. Consumer spending is robust, buoyed by the strong labor market and continued strong confidence. Last week's strong jobs report provided reassurance that employment has continued to expand at a healthy pace. Payrolls have risen at a 170,000 monthly pace over the past three months—more than enough to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. The unemployment rate remains near a 50-year low, wages are growing at a moderate pace, the percentage of prime-age adults who are employed is close to its pre-crisis peak, and claims have been hovering around historic lows. Furthermore, financial conditions overall remain quite supportive of continued employment and output growth. By contrast, capital spending by businesses has been lackluster, and indicators of business sentiment have been soft. The recent G-20 summit provided a constructive change in tone about trade discussions, but business sentiment and investment plans will likely remain sensitive to uncertainty around trade and the global outlook. Fiscal policy is also a source of uncertainty, with both the debt ceiling and the federal budget needing to be resolved. Over the past year, inflation has fallen short of the Federal Reserve's 2 percent objective, and that has been the case more often than not in recent years. On the one hand, that means the economy can continue to grow without pushing inflation too high. On the other hand, inflation that runs too low for long periods can pose difficult challenges. Below-target inflation reduces the amount of room the Federal Reserve has to cut the federal funds rate to cushion the economy from negative developments. And it could lead people to lower their expectations for future inflation, which in turn could lead to an increasing shortfall of inflation from our objective. 1 Indeed, some indicators of longer-run inflation expectations have been on the soft side in recent months. Putting all of the pieces together, it appears the economy has been doing well so far this year, bolstered by confident consumers and a strong job market. And after fluctuations earlier in the year, financial markets currently appear supportive of growth, with borrowing rates low and the stock market at all-time highs. While the modal outlook is solid, the downside risks, if they materialize, could weigh on economic activity. Taking into account the downside risks at a time when inflation is on the soft side would argue for softening the expected path of monetary policy according to basic principles of risk management. Of course, my judgment about the actual path of policy will continue to be influenced by the evolution of the data and the risks. I am mindful that low spreads on corporate credit, together with risky corporate debt at historic highs, suggest financial imbalances are growing. We should be addressing these financial imbalances by activation of the countercyclical capital buffer, more rigorous use of stress tests, and active monitoring of leveraged lending. So what does this mean for you and the families and businesses you serve in and around Scranton? I hope and expect that the progress you have made in transforming the region's economy will continue as the expansion extends into its 11th year. I am well aware of the challenges this area has been working to overcome since the Great Recession. And I am impressed by how much has been accomplished here. You have had important success in attracting new logistics jobs to take advantage of Northeastern Pennsylvania's proximity to major cities. You are making important investments in the forward-looking "eds and meds" (education and health-care) sectors by leveraging the 19 colleges and universities in and around Scranton. There are signs that these investments are paying off. Household incomes in Scranton are growing again. The area's unemployment rate is close to its lowest level in the past 40 years. I look forward to hearing from the community bankers gathered here today about the outlook for families and businesses in Northeastern Pennsylvania and how you are helping the region invest and grow. And I am looking forward to continuing the discussions tomorrow, when I will visit with the Scranton Area Community Foundation to discuss the Northeastern Pennsylvania equitable transportation initiative, NEPA Moves, that is working on transportation solutions to connect residents with opportunity. I look forward to visiting Geisinger Fresh Food Farmacy and meeting with patients to hear about the innovative "food as medicine" program. I also look forward to visiting the Cedar Avenue corridor with the United Neighborhood Centers of Northeastern Pennsylvania to hear about the resident-driven revitalization there. Let me again thank Pat Harker and all of you for having me here today. I look forward to our discussion. 1. The federal funds rate was close to zero for nearly seven years following the financial crisis, and it likely would return to zero in a downturn. When nominal interest rates are zero, a drop in inflation expectations can be especially problematic, making the "real" interest rates that matter for household and business decisions higher than they would otherwise be and therefore less supportive of growth. Return to text Last Update: July 11, 2019 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Town Hall, Kansas City, Missouri Share Watch Live It is a pleasure to be here in Kansas City with Federal Reserve Bank President Esther George to talk about the future of America's payment system. 1 Our payment system is a vital part of America's infrastructure that touches everyone. The choices we make about our payment infrastructure today will affect all Americans many years into the future. Today I am excited to announce the Federal Reserve will invest in a new service to help ensure that real-time payments are available to everyone. The Federal Reserve will develop the FedNow Service SM , a real-time payment and settlement service for the future. 2 Everyone deserves the same ability to make and receive payments immediately and securely, and every bank deserves the same opportunity to offer that service to its community. FedNow will permit banks of every size in every community across the country to provide real-time payments to their customers. Today, whether you are relying on ACH, a debit card, or a check, it can take as much as a few days to get access to your funds. With a Federal Reserve real-time retail payment infrastructure, the funds would be available immediately—to pay utility bills or split the rent with roommates, or for small business owners to pay their suppliers. Immediate access to funds could be especially important for households on fixed incomes or living paycheck to paycheck, when waiting days for the funds to be available to pay a bill can mean overdraft fees or late fees that can compound. Similarly, getting immediate access to funds from a sale in order to pay for supplies can be a game changer for small businesses, potentially avoiding the need for costly short-term financing. Last November, we asked the public about possible actions the Federal Reserve could take to support interbank settlement of faster payments. 3 We received more than 350 comments on a Federal Reserve faster payment service, representing nearly 800 organizations. Fully 90 percent of these comments called for the Federal Reserve to operate a real-time service for faster payments. Support came from a wide range of stakeholders, including individuals, merchants, fintech firms, and banks. 4 Commenters noted that the Federal Reserve would ensure equitable access to banks of all sizes nationwide by operating a real-time service for faster payments alongside the private-sector system. Commenters highlighted the importance of safety in faster payments and noted the Federal Reserve's record of resiliency, especially during periods of stress. Commenters observed that a Federal Reserve real-time retail payment service would increase competition, decrease market concentration, and provide a neutral platform for innovation. This broad support echoes and expands on the conclusions of the Faster Payments Task Force. Similarly, the U.S. Treasury Department recommended that "the Federal Reserve move quickly to facilitate a faster retail payment system, such as through the development of a real-time settlement service that would also allow for more efficient and widespread access to innovative payment capabilities." 5 In determining the path forward, we are building on the Federal Reserve's long history of operating payment systems as a core part of the nation's payment infrastructure. Since they opened for business around the country in 1914, as directed by the Congress, the Federal Reserve Banks have provided payment and settlement services—in healthy competition with private-sector providers—to achieve public benefits ranging from resiliency to innovation to equal access. When you look across the current payment infrastructure, whether in check processing, automated clearinghouse (ACH) services, or funds transfers, you will see a Federal Reserve service operating alongside private-sector providers. The General Accountability Office has concluded that the Federal Reserve's provision of payment services has benefited the U.S. payment system and its users. 6 The Federal Reserve does not have regulatory authority over the pricing set by a private-sector system or to require a private-sector system to extend the service to banks of all sizes, particularly the last mile. In some other countries, central banks have been assigned the responsibility for regulating payment systems. However, this is not the approach that Congress has taken. Instead, the Federal Reserve's role as an operator has long been seen as an effective approach to promote accessible, safe, and efficient payments in the United States. Through the FedNow Service, we will provide a foundation for the future—a modern payment infrastructure that allows innovation and competition to flourish and delivers faster payments safely and securely for all. To ensure fast payments are available to everyone, FedNow will be accessible to all banks, no matter the size. Given our long-standing service connections with more than 10,000 banks across the country, the Federal Reserve is uniquely placed to deliver this outcome. The bar is high when we assess whether the Federal Reserve should provide a new payment and settlement service, as it should be. We have carefully analyzed the criteria of the Monetary Control Act and long-standing Federal Reserve policies, considered the comments provided by a wide range of stakeholders, and studied the experiences of foreign central banks. 7 We are not making this decision lightly. On balance, after carefully weighing important considerations on both sides, we have concluded it is our responsibility to take action in support of a real-time payment infrastructure accessible to all. While we will work hard to stand up the FedNow Service in a timely manner, our most important goal is to achieve nationwide access for all, reflecting our public mission. Building a Modern Payment Infrastructure A key foundation of the payment infrastructure is interbank clearing and settlement—the movement of funds and the associated information between banks. Today, the U.S. retail payment infrastructure lags behind many other countries. Europe, Mexico, and Australia have already implemented real-time interbank clearing and settlement capabilities. In contrast, here in the United States, the gap between the transaction capabilities in the digital economy and the underlying payment and settlement capabilities continues to grow. 8 Early adopters of fast payment services rely on a legacy infrastructure that was not designed to support faster payments. For example, some services offer real-time funds availability to certain consumers, but they conduct interbank settlement on a deferred basis using legacy systems. This type of settlement entails a buildup of obligations—like IOUs between banks—that could present real risks to the financial system in times of stress. These are not resilient long-term solutions for our dynamic economy and the banks that support it. We are seeing some companies looking to establish a payment system that bypasses our banks and our currency. Facebook's Libra project raises numerous concerns that will take time to assess and address. But one thing is clear: consumers and businesses across the country want and expect real-time payments, and the banks they trust should be able to provide this service securely—whatever their size. To provide everyone with the ability to send and receive funds securely on a 24x7x365 basis, banks need to embrace and invest in real-time innovations, and the Federal Reserve needs to provide a safe and efficient real-time interbank clearing and settlement service accessible to all banks. We are proud of our strong record of cooperating with and supporting private-sector services, while fostering competition for public benefit. We have provided vital support to the sole private-sector provider of real-time settlement for faster payments, and we will continue to do so. The Federal Reserve provided a joint account to enable the private-sector operator to offer real-time payments. Moreover, today we are announcing our intent to explore the expansion of Fedwire Funds Service and National Settlement Service operating hours to support the efficiency of the joint account structure for the private-sector real-time gross settlement (RTGS) service and provide broader benefits. That said, the joint account structure, with its requirement of prefunding and settlement on a private ledger, is fundamentally different from the approach the Federal Reserve will use to settle transactions directly between banks. Fostering a Dynamic and Resilient Payment Infrastructure That Serves Everyone The Federal Reserve is committed to fulfilling our public policy goals in a spirit of cooperation and competitive fairness. We are pleased that the private-sector faster payment service is in the market, and we see important benefits from the resilient and competitive market that would result from the FedNow Service providing an alternative consistent with the requirements of the Monetary Control Act. The requirement to consider the best way to make our payment and settlement services accessible to banks across the country, along with long-standing principles including cost recovery over the long run, guides our assessment of when the Federal Reserve should engage in the payment system. 9 In setting fees, the Federal Reserve is required by statute to "give due regard to competitive factors and the provision of an adequate level of such services nationwide." 10 I want to share with you some of the analysis—viewed through the prism of our public policy goals of accessibility, safety, and efficiency—that we considered in making today's decision. Accessibility means serving more than 10,000 banks of varying sizes and missions that are in communities all around the country. It turns out no single private-sector provider of any U.S. payment system has ever achieved nationwide reach on its own, whether it be checks, ACH, cards, or wire transfers. Acting alone, a single private-sector RTGS service will face significant challenges in establishing an accessible infrastructure for faster payments with nationwide reach. In contrast, because of our experience with providing other services, the Federal Reserve already has invested in connections and customer service relationships with nearly every bank, small and large, across the country. Currently, we provide payment services to nearly all banks either directly or indirectly. With our 12 regional Reserve Banks, we have the capacity to meet the needs of banks serving different communities and with different needs and operating models. For that reason, commenters stated that the Federal Reserve is uniquely positioned to offer nationwide access to a new payment and settlement service for faster payments. FedNow will allow faster payments to reach banks of all sizes and their customers across the country, which is especially important for rural communities, who often struggle with access to financial services. Guided by our public mission, the Federal Reserve serves the needs of all banks, no matter how small or challenging to reach, and with competitive fairness. In response to our request for feedback last November, several commenters emphasized how much they value the Federal Reserve's mission of providing nationwide access on fair, transparent terms and expressed concern that a sole private-sector RTGS service provider may be less likely to exhibit the same commitment over the long run. Safety is also vital. If the Federal Reserve does not establish the FedNow Service, there will be a single provider of real-time retail payment services. We are mindful of the serious safety issues associated with a single point of failure, a risk that will rise as faster payments grow. Stakeholders have noted the importance of having access to more than one real-time payment service for back-up purposes in order to provide resiliency through redundancy. In fact, many banks already take advantage of having connections to multiple operators today in check, ACH, and wire services. The Federal Reserve has always had a vital role in promoting the safety and stability of the U.S. payment system by providing liquidity and operational continuity especially in times of stress. The FedNow Service would allow the Federal Reserve to extend this role into the real-time retail payment market. Finally, competition will promote efficiency and innovation. The U.S. real-time retail payment infrastructure stands to gain from competition, including through higher service quality and lower prices over the long run, which in turn should support wider adoption. The FedNow Service will provide a neutral foundation for innovation and competition in end-user faster payment services. In response to the request for feedback, merchants and fintech companies commented that a Federal Reserve real-time retail payment service could broaden the scope for innovation in faster payments. They noted that a single provider that is owned and operated by one segment of the payment industry may focus on a narrow set of use cases that do not reflect the full breadth of possible use cases for faster payments. Recognizing the vibrancy of our payment industry, the addition of the FedNow Service could provide a springboard for broader private-sector participation in the development of innovative end-user services. Looking Forward With the announcement of the Federal Reserve real-time payment service, we are embracing a path that will bring transformative, rather than incremental, change to the retail payment infrastructure in the United States. The FedNow Service will run continuously at all times of the day, every day of the week, consistent with the needs of faster payments and will be designed to process large volumes of payments rapidly. In the months ahead, we intend to explore a variety of approaches to achieving a real-time retail payment infrastructure with nationwide reach. One such approach might be for different payment services to interoperate by exchanging payments among the services directly. Such interoperability is an important goal that we will pursue as standards, technology, and industry practices change over time, although it is not yet clear whether it will be an initial feature. The Federal Reserve plans to devote the necessary resources to deliver the highest quality FedNow Service in a timely manner. We are working to streamline our internal processes to move quickly in the market. President George will play an integral role in this new process, and the Conference of Reserve Bank Presidents has pledged its support. It is important for the Federal Reserve, working with the payment industry, to act quickly in finalizing the initial business requirements of the FedNow Service. We will need to hear the views of payment system stakeholders on the features of the FedNow Service, as discussed in the Federal Register notice announced today. We will engage with the industry through groups and forums to finalize the design and features of the service. We hope that these conversations will provide an opportunity for stakeholders to work together to shape the evolution of the U.S. payment system. Earlier this month, I joined my Reserve Bank colleagues for a visit with bankers and community organizations in Scranton, Pennsylvania, to hear about the biggest challenges they are facing. The head of a bank that has been serving the Scranton area for more than a century told me that for his community bank to remain competitive in its payment offerings, it is vital to be able to rely on the Federal Reserve for real-time payments just as he does for check, ACH, and wire transfer. I appreciate the importance of community banks to the economic health of our communities, and I recognize the role of the Federal Reserve in enabling community banks to offer payment services on a competitive basis. I am confident that by working together with all payment system stakeholders, we can collectively achieve widespread, safe, and efficient faster payments that will benefit all. 1. I am grateful to Susan Foley and Anjana Ravi of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments (PDF) (August 5, 2019). Return to text 3. Lael Brainard, " Supporting Fast Payments for All " (remarks at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, October 3, 2018). Return to text 4. Potential Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments (PDF) , Request for Comments, 83 Fed. Reg. 57,351 (November 15, 2018). Return to text 5. Steven T. Mnuchin and Craig S. Phillips, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunity: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF) (Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, July 2018), 156. Return to text 6. See, e.g., U.S. Government Accountability Office, Federal Reserve's Competition with Other Providers Benefits Customers, but Additional Reviews Could Increase Assurance of Cost Accuracy , GAO-16-614 (Washington: Government Accountability Office, August 2016). Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " The Federal Reserve in the Payments System " (Issued 1984; revised 1990). Return to text 8. FIS Global, " 2018 Flavors of Fast ." Return to text 9. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Principles for the Pricing of Federal Reserve Bank Services " (Issued 1980); and Board of Governors, "The Federal Reserve in the Payments System." Return to text 10. Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980 , Pub. L. No. 96-221 (March 31, 1980). Return to text Related Information Federal Reserve announces plan to develop a new round-the-clock real-time payment and settlement service to support faster payments FedNow Service Last Update: August 05, 2019 Back to Top
