Chair Janet L. Yellen At the University of Baltimore 2016 Midyear Commencement, Baltimore, Maryland Share Watch live: www.ubalt.edu Thank you, President Schmoke, for this award and for the opportunity to be here today to offer my congratulations to the members of the Class of 2016. I would also like to recognize the vital support students have received from family, friends, and others, many of whom are here to share this great occasion. In a moment, I will explain why I am particularly proud and honored to be speaking to the new graduates of this university, but first I'd like to address students on a topic that I expect is on the minds of many of you, which is the job market. The short version of what I have to say is that while I expect workers will continue to face some challenges in the coming years, I believe, for two reasons, that the job prospects and career opportunities for new graduates at this time are very good. First, after years of a slow economic recovery, you are entering the strongest job market in nearly a decade. The unemployment rate, at 4.6 percent, is near what it was before the recession. This is a level that has been associated with good job opportunities. Job creation is continuing at a steady pace; the layoff rate is low; and job openings are up over the past couple years, which is another sign of a healthy job market. There are also indications that wage growth is picking up, and weekly earnings for younger workers have made strong gains over the past couple of years. That is probably one reason why younger workers reported feeling significantly more optimistic about the job market compared with 2013, according to a survey published just today by the Federal Reserve. 1 Challenges do remain. The economy is growing more slowly than in past recoveries, and productivity growth, which is a major influence on wages, has been disappointing. But it also looks like the economic gains of the past few years are finally raising living standards for most people. Median household income grew and poverty fell significantly in 2015, although these measures were still lagging their levels from before the recession. 2 An improving economy may be especially important for you, as new graduates. Those who graduate and enter the workforce during a strong economy are more likely to find employment, remain employed, and enjoy persistently higher earnings. 3 The second reason for optimism is that you have already done the one thing that research shows is most important to a successful and stable working life: earning the degrees you will receive today. Economists are not certain about many things. But we are quite certain that a college diploma or an advanced degree is a key to economic success. Those with a college degree are more likely to find a job, keep a job, have higher job satisfaction, and earn a higher salary. The advantage in earnings is large. College grads' annual earnings last year were, on average, 70 percent higher than those with only a high school diploma. Back in 1980, the difference was only 20 percent. The gap in earnings is significant only a few years after graduation--almost $18,000 a year, according to some recent data. Beyond these advantages, research also shows that a college or graduate degree typically leads to a happier, healthier, and longer life. 4 One explanation for the greater advantage in recent decades conferred by higher education is that it reflects an increase in the demand for educated workers compared with others. The drivers of this increasing demand for those with college and graduate degrees are likely to continue to be important. Let me mention two of the most important factors. First, technology. For decades, technological advances have increasingly allowed simpler, repetitive tasks to be done more cheaply and safely by machines. This kind of work in factories, stores, and offices often required only a high school education. At the same time, technological advances have increased demand for workers with the education necessary to perform the ever-growing share of jobs where technology is important. More recently, further advances are automating increasingly complex tasks and allowing workers with the ability and flexibility to use technology to be more productive. Higher education has also changed in response, and one of the most important things many of you learned at the University of Baltimore was how to learn, adapt, and succeed in the technology-rich environment of most workplaces. The second major development in the job market is globalization, which allows goods and services to be produced wherever it is most economical. Offshoring and trade have profoundly affected the U.S. economy. No one knows which jobs and which industries will thrive as globalization continues or how each of you will be affected, but I can say that the education you have earned will provide an important advantage. Like technological change, globalization has reinforced the shift away from lower-skilled jobs that require less education to higher-skilled jobs that require college and advanced degrees. The jobs that globalization creates in the United States, serving a global economy of billions of people, are more likely to be filled by those who, like you, have secured the advantage of higher education. While globalization will likely continue and technology will continue to advance, we don't know how fast the economy will grow, what new technologies will be developed, or how quickly and consistently employment will expand. What is considerably more certain, however, is that success will continue to be tied to education, in part because a good education enhances one's ability to adapt to a changing economy. One reason for the increasing economic advantage of a college or graduate degree is the very slow growth of earnings in the last few decades for those with only a high school education. It concerns me, as it should concern all of us, that many are falling behind. Improvements in elementary and secondary education can help prepare more people for college and the opportunities college makes available, but for those who do not attend college, we must find other ways to extend economic opportunity to everyone in America. In discussing higher education, you may have noticed that I have spoken in terms of completing your degrees. Research shows that a large share of the benefits I have described from higher education comes only to those who graduate. Even those completing three or more years of college benefit much less when they don't get a degree. 5 For example, some of you may be worried about paying off loans you have taken out to pay for your education. The good news is that the vast majority of student borrowers who complete their degrees find work that allows them to keep up with their payments and pay off their loans. Everything I have said so far could apply to the graduates this year of any college or university. The rest of what I have to say is about you, the 2016 graduates of the University of Baltimore. I have learned a bit about you recently, with the help of the university's staff. Let me tell you a few things about some of your classmates that you may not know. Among you today is a full-time student who found the time each semester to volunteer with non-profit organizations, including one that helps refugees from other countries find their place in this community. Another of your fellow students, who used to doubt that she could ever afford college, has become a student leader. She made the Dean's List every semester after transferring from community college. Like many of you, another of your fellow graduates took day and evening classes to balance work and family demands. She was forced to change jobs to accommodate this schedule. She later decided her future lay in digital communications, which required her to switch majors after taking some required classes. Today she will become the first person in her family to graduate from college. Some of you were born in other countries. One of you lived in four other countries before coming to the University of Baltimore for a master's degree. Many of you have contributed to the sense of community at the University of Baltimore by actively participating in student life. One of you has even decided to seek a career helping other students as a student affairs professional. These are a few of the outstanding people who will join you in walking across this stage today. Let me describe one more. To that student, sitting in the audience, I would say: you deserve a tremendous amount of credit. Based on what I have learned, you did not have all of the advantages that can pave the way to college and graduate school. You overcame obstacles to make it here, and more obstacles to complete your degree. One of the biggest of these obstacles, in fact, was that some people doubted you could or would succeed. But others in your life believed in you. Some of them are here today. They believed in you, and you believed in yourself, and your talent and intelligence and hard work enabled you to earn the degree you are about to receive. If this sounds like you, then you are absolutely right, because I am not describing just one member of the University of Baltimore's Class of 2016--I am trying to describe every one of you. In different ways, I expect all of you have overcome obstacles and demonstrated resilience and determination to succeed. All of you have gained knowledge and used your intelligence and talents to complete your degrees. As impressed as I am with any individual graduating today, I am more impressed with what all of you have achieved. Let me tell you what else I have learned. More than the students of some colleges and universities, I know that many of you have deep roots in this city and in the county. Many of you will start careers, build your lives, and raise your families here. The challenges you have overcome are the challenges faced by many people in Baltimore and in communities throughout America. Your success, which we celebrate today, is also the promise of a brighter future for this city. The degrees you have worked so hard to earn and the opportunities now opening up to you represent the stubborn, earnest hope that anyone and everyone who strives to succeed still can succeed. And that is why I consider it a rare privilege to speak to you today, and a great honor to be associated with the University of Baltimore and the members of the Class of 2016. Thank you, and congratulations. References Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer (2016). "Cashier or Consultant? Entry Labor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success," Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 34 (S1), pp. S361-S401. Bishaw, Alemayehu, and Brian Glassman (2016). " Poverty: 2014 and 2015 (PDF) ," American Community Survey Briefs, ACSBR/15-01. Washington: U.S. Census Bureau, September. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). Experiences and Perspectives of Young Workers (PDF) . Washington: Board of Governors, December. Bound, John, and Sarah E. Turner (2011). "Dropouts and Diplomas: The Divergence in Collegiate Outcomes," in Eric A. Hanushek, Stephen J. Machin, and Ludger Woessmann, eds., Handbook of the Economics of Education , vol. 4. Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 573-613. Council of Economic Advisers (2016). Investing in Higher Education: Benefits, Challenges, and the State of Student Debt (PDF) . Washington: Executive Office of the President of the United States. Kahn, Lisa B. (2010). "The Long-Term Labor Market Consequences of Graduating from College in a Bad Economy," Labour Economics, vol. 17 (2), pp. 303-16. Oreopoulos, Philip, and Uros Petronijevic (2013). "Making College Worth It: A Review of the Returns to Higher Education," Future of Children, vol. 23 (Spring), pp. 41-65. Oreopoulos, Philip, and Kjell G. Salvanes (2011). "Priceless: The Nonpecuniary Benefits of Schooling," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 159-84. Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz (2012). "The Short- and Long-Term Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics , vol. 4 (1), pp. 1-29. Pew Research Center (2014). The Rising Cost of Not Going to College (PDF) . Washington: PRC, February. Posey, Kirby G. (2016). " Household Income: 2015 (PDF) ," American Community Survey Briefs, ACSBR/15-02. Washington: U.S. Census Bureau, September. 1. See Board of Governors (2016). In a survey conducted in 2015, 61 percent of young adults reported feeling optimistic about job opportunities, compared with 45 percent who felt that way in 2013. Return to text 2. For more on median household income adjusted for inflation and the poverty rate, see Posey (2016) and Bishaw and Glassman (2016). Return to text 3. See, for example, Kahn (2010); Oreopoulos, Von Wachter, and Heisz (2012); and Altonji, Kahn, and Speer (2016). Return to text 4. For recent estimates of the college earnings premium over time, see Pew Research (2014) and Council of Economic Advisers (2016). For a discussion of some nonpecuniary benefits of completing college, see Oreopoulos and Salvanes (2011). Return to text 5. For example, see Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2013) and Bound and Turner (2011). Return to text Last Update: December 19, 2016 Back to Top

﻿ Welcoming remarks by Chair Yellen at the Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting - Federal Reserve Board Skip to main content An official website of the United States Government Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Back to Home Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Stay Connected Federal Reserve Facebook Page Federal Reserve Instagram Page Federal Reserve YouTube Page Federal Reserve Flickr Page Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page Federal Reserve Threads Page Federal Reserve X Page Federal Reserve Bluesky Page Subscribe to RSS Subscribe to Email Recent Postings Calendar Publications Site Map A-Z index Careers FAQs Videos Contact Search Submit Search Button Advanced Toggle Dropdown Menu Main Menu Toggle Button Sections Search Toggle Button Search Search Submit Button Submit Home News & Events Speeches Speech PDF January 12, 2017 Welcoming Remarks Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting, Washington, D.C. Share Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar] toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows] seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows] increase/decrease volume; [M] toggles mute on/off; [F] toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The [Tab] key may be used in combination with the [Enter/Return] key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Thank you, and thank you to all the educators who have come to the Board this evening or travelled to one of the Fed's regional Reserve Banks to watch and listen via the webcast. I am very much looking forward to hearing from you about teaching economics, and I am eager to respond to your questions. For that reason, and also because I expect that school starts very early tomorrow for many of you, I will try to keep my remarks brief. But I do have a message to impart about the work you do, which is vitally important not only to your students, but also, I believe, to the world they will soon inherit and even to the mission of the Federal Reserve. First and foremost, of course, like all teachers, you are helping prepare your students for successful and rewarding lives. The knowledge you impart and the intellect and talents you help develop are powerful tools your students can use to build those lives. Like some other subjects students encounter in school, economics teaches analytical and critical thinking skills that can aid in the development and success of anyone. Part of success for your students is economic success--as capable, creative, and productive members of the workforce and as consumers adept at managing their finances. Economics provides knowledge and skills of practical use in college and in the workplace, and it also provides skills to plan and make wise financial decisions, which are some of the most important and consequential that we face in life. Your students benefit very directly from this education, but so does everyone else in society. Everyone is engaged in and depends on the economy, and nothing is more critical to a healthy and growing economy than the capability, creativity, and productiveness of its workforce. Whenever I am asked what policies and initiatives could do the most to spur economic growth and raise living standards, improving education is at the top of my list. In addition to the role you play in preparing students for jobs and careers, you also help prepare them to be responsible consumers. The economy needs productive workers, and it also depends on consumers, whose individual spending decisions, as most of you surely have taught in class, collectively account for two-thirds of economic activity. Consumers skilled in managing their finances are better prepared to weather bad times, and stronger household finances overall can help sustain growth, stabilize the economy, and mitigate an economic downturn. Stabilizing the economy and mitigating a downturn, of course, also happen to be among the Federal Reserve's primary responsibilities. When successful, monetary policy can be a powerful and effective tool to these ends, but its capabilities are dwarfed by larger factors such as the productivity of the workforce and the strength of household finances. By educating students and directly supporting their contributions to the economy as producers and consumers, all teachers, especially teachers of economics, are effectively furthering our mission at the Fed, so let me offer my thanks for making that job a little easier. To help support your important work as teachers, the Federal Reserve Board and the 12 Reserve Banks conduct programs, organize events, and publish books and other materials to spread knowledge of the role of the Fed--and economics in general--and to promote financial literacy. Before I get to those events and programs, let me say a word about what is probably the most important pedagogical aid that the Fed produces--the 182-page book called The Federal Reserve System: Purposes and Functions. The 10th edition of Purposes and Functions, published in October of last year, offers a detailed and comprehensive account of what, why, and how the Fed carries out its different responsibilities. I think it is a wonderful resource for teaching about the Fed, and copies are available via the Board's website. 1 Each of the Fed's Reserve Banks has community outreach and educational initiatives in the areas of the country they serve, and the outreach to economics teachers is coordinated by the group chaired by Amy Hennessy, the Federal Reserve System Economic Education Group. At the Board, we have for some years operated a program called FedEd, which sends Fed employees into schools throughout the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area and sponsors events for students here at the Eccles Building. 2 FedEd's outreach to schools depends on the time and sacrifice of several dozen research assistants, who are typically recent college graduates who work for two or three years at the Board. Research assistants who volunteer for FedEd visit schools; help teach about the Fed, economics, and finance; and answer questions about work opportunities at the Board. The Federal Reserve is committed to promoting diversity in our ranks and in the economics profession, and FedEd has furthered these goals by making sure to include schools with significant numbers of minority students. This past school year, FedEd sent research assistants into nine different schools and FedEd volunteers have visited 38 different schools since 2012. FedEd was back in schools last fall, drawing from 48 research assistants who volunteered to participate. FedEd also sponsors several speaker events a year that bring students into this Board Room. Students recently heard a presentation from Scott Alvarez, who oversees the Board's Legal Division, and, in February, Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer will speak to students at another event. FedEd is overseen by two research assistants, Caroline Shinkle and Jamie Lenney, along with Karen Pence, who is an economist at the Board. All three are with us this evening and prepared to answer further questions about the program. Online resources for teachers can be found on the Board's website at federalreserve.gov , and additional resources available throughout the System are at federalreserveeducation.org . The websites include videos in which policymakers and the staff describe the Fed's functions. Also, the sites include historical materials and a wealth of information related to the financial crisis and the Fed's response. Let me leave it there, and again thank teachers for participating in this town hall, and offer my thanks, on behalf of the Board of Governors, for the valuable work you do every day. I would be very happy to respond to your questions. 1. Purposes and Functions is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/pf/pf.htm . Return to text 2. More information about FedEd is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/educational-tools/fed-education.htm . Return to text Related Content Conversation with the Chair: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting Last Update: January 12, 2017 Back to Top

s Contact Search Submit Search Button Advanced Toggle Dropdown Menu Main Menu Toggle Button Sections Search Toggle Button Search Search Submit Button Submit Home News & Events Speeches Speech PDF January 18, 2017 The Goals of Monetary Policy and How We Pursue Them Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Commonwealth Club, San Francisco, California Share Watch on-demand: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ktBgb4xHKGY Audio Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to join all of you at the Commonwealth Club today, not the least because the club and the Federal Reserve have a few things in common. Both organizations, as it happens, have a board of governors and a chair. And both the club's and the Fed's histories extend back more than a century. The club, as many here know, was founded in 1903, and the Federal Reserve a decade later. Perhaps because of our shared origins in the Progressive Era, a period of reform in American life, we hold certain values in common. According to your website, the club is nonpartisan and dedicated to the impartial discussion of issues important to your community and the nation. At the Fed, we too are nonpartisan and focused squarely on the public interest. We strive to conduct our deliberations impartially and base our decisions on factual evidence and objective analysis. This afternoon I will discuss some challenges we've faced in our recent deliberations and may face in the next few years. Perhaps, though, it is best to start by stepping back and asking, what is--and, importantly, what isn't--our job as the nation's central bank? And how do we go about trying to accomplish it? The Federal Reserve has an array of responsibilities. I'll mention our principal duties and then focus on one--monetary policy, the responsibility that gets the most public attention. In addition to monetary policy, we--in collaboration with other regulatory agencies at both the federal and state levels--oversee banks and some other financial institutions to ensure they operate safely and soundly and treat their customers fairly. We monitor the financial system as a whole and promote its stability to help avoid financial crises that could choke off credit to consumers and businesses. We also reliably and safely process trillions of dollars of payments for the nation's banks and the federal government and ensure that banks have an ample supply of currency and coin to meet the demands of their depositors. And we work with communities, nonprofit organizations, lenders, educators, and others to encourage financial and economic literacy, promote equal access to credit, and advance economic and community development. But, as I noted, monetary policy draws the most headlines. What is monetary policy, exactly? Simply put, it consists of central bank actions aimed at influencing interest rates and financial conditions more generally. Its purpose is to help foster a healthy economy. But monetary policy cannot, by itself, create a healthy economy. It cannot, for instance, educate young people, generate technological breakthroughs, make workers and businesses more productive, or address the root causes of inequality. Fundamentally, the energy, ingenuity, and know-how of American workers and entrepreneurs, along with our natural resources, create prosperity. Regulatory policy and fiscal policy--the decisions by the Administration and the Congress about how much and how the government spends, taxes, and borrows--can influence these more fundamental economic pillars. I've said what monetary policy cannot do. But what can it do? It can lean against damaging fluctuations in the economy. Nearly 40 years ago, the Congress set two main guideposts for that task--maximum employment and price stability. We refer to these assigned goals as our dual mandate. When the economy is weak and unemployment is on the rise, we encourage spending and investing by pushing short-term interest rates lower. As you may know, the interest rate that we target is the federal funds rate, the rate banks charge each other for overnight loans. Lowering short-term rates in turn puts downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, making credit more affordable--for families, for instance, to buy a house or for businesses to expand. Similarly, when the economy is threatening to push inflation too high down the road, we increase interest rates to keep the economy on a sustainable path and lean against its tendency to boom and then bust. But what exactly do the terms "maximum employment" and "price stability" mean? Does maximum employment mean that every single person who wants a job has a job? No. There are always a certain number of people who are temporarily between jobs after having recently lost a job or having left one voluntarily to pursue better opportunities. Others may have just graduated and have started looking for a job or have decided to return to working--for instance, when their child starts school. This so-called frictional unemployment is evident even in the healthiest of economies. Then there is structural unemployment--a difficult problem both for the people affected and for policymakers trying to address it. Sometimes people are ready and willing to work, but their skills, perhaps because of technological advances, are not a good fit for the jobs that are available. Or suitable jobs may be available but are not close to where they and their families live. These are factors over which monetary policy has little influence. Other measures--such as job training and other workforce development programs--are better suited to address structural unemployment. After taking account of both frictional and structural unemployment, what unemployment rate is roughly equivalent to the maximum level of employment that can be sustained in the longer run? The rate can change over time as the economy evolves, but, for now, many economists, including my colleagues at the Fed and me, judge that it is around 4-3/4 percent. It's important to try to estimate the unemployment rate that is equivalent to maximum employment because persistently operating below it pushes inflation higher, which brings me to our price stability mandate. Does price stability mean having no inflation whatsoever? Again, the answer is no. By "price stability," we mean a level of inflation that is low and stable enough that it doesn't need to figure prominently into people's and businesses' economic decisions. Based on research and decades of experience, we define that level as 2 percent a year--an inflation objective similar to that adopted by most other major central banks. 1 Individual prices, of course, move up and down by more than 2 percent all the time. Such movements are essential to a well-functioning economy. They allow supply and demand to adjust for various goods and services. By "inflation," we mean price changes as a whole for all of the various goods and services that households consume. No one likes high inflation, and it is easy to understand why. Although wages and prices tend to move in tandem over long periods, inflation erodes household purchasing power if it is not matched with similar increases in wages, and it eats away the value of households' savings. So, then, why don't we and other central banks aim for zero inflation? There are several technical reasons, but a more fundamental reason is to create a buffer against the opposite of inflation--that is, deflation. Deflation is a general and persistent decline in the level of prices, a phenomenon Americans last experienced during the Great Depression of the 1930s and one that Japan has confronted for most of the past two decades. Deflation can feed on itself, leading to economic stagnation or worse. It puts pressure on employers to either cut wages or cut jobs. And it can be very hard on borrowers, who find themselves repaying their loans with dollars that are worth more than the dollars they originally borrowed. I am sure we all remember learning in school about farm families in the Great Depression who couldn't pay their mortgages and lost their homes and their livelihoods when crop prices fell persistently. Another important reason to maintain a modest inflation buffer is that too low inflation impairs the ability of monetary policy to counter economic downturns. When inflation is very low, interest rates tend to be very low also, even in good times. And when interest rates are generally very low, the Fed has only limited room to cut them to help the economy in bad times. In a nutshell, the Fed's goal is to promote financial conditions conducive to maximum employment and price stability. And I have offered broad-brush definitions of each of those objectives. So where is the economy now, in relationship to them? The short answer is, we think it's close. The economy has come a long way since the financial crisis. As you know, the crisis marked the start of a very deep recession. It destroyed nearly 9 million jobs, and it's been a long, slow slog to recover from it. Unemployment peaked at 10 percent late in 2009, a level unseen for more than 25 years, and didn't move below 8 percent for nearly three years. Falling home prices put millions of homeowners "underwater," meaning they owed more on their mortgages than their homes were worth. And the stock market plunged, slashing the value of 401(k) retirement nest eggs. The extraordinarily severe recession required an extraordinary response from monetary policy, both to support the job market and prevent deflation. We cut our short-term interest rate target to near zero at the end of 2008 and kept it there for seven years. To provide further support to American households and businesses, we pressed down on longer-term interest rates by purchasing large amounts of longer-term Treasury securities and government-guaranteed mortgage securities. And we communicated our intent to keep short-term interest rates low for a long time, thus increasing the downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, which are influenced by expectations about short-term rates. Now, it's fair to say, the economy is near maximum employment and inflation is moving toward our goal. The unemployment rate is less than 5 percent, roughly back to where it was before the recession. And, over the past seven years, the economy has added about 15-1/2 million net new jobs. Although inflation has been running below our 2 percent objective for quite some time, we have seen it start inching back toward 2 percent last year as the job market continued to improve and as the effects of a big drop in oil prices faded. Last month, at our most recent meeting, we took account of the considerable progress the economy has made by modestly increasing our short-term interest rate target by 1/4 percentage point to a range of 1/2 to 3/4 percent. It was the second such step--the first came a year earlier--and reflects our confidence the economy will continue to improve. Now, many of you would love to know exactly when the next rate increase is coming and how high rates will rise. The simple truth is, I can't tell you because it will depend on how the economy actually evolves over coming months. The economy is vast and vastly complex, and its path can take surprising twists and turns. What I can tell you is what we expect--along with a very large caveat that our interest rate expectations will change as our outlook for the economy changes. That said, as of last month, I and most of my colleagues--the other members of the Fed Board in Washington and the presidents of the 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks--were expecting to increase our federal funds rate target a few times a year until, by the end of 2019, it is close to our estimate of its longer-run neutral rate of 3 percent. The term "neutral rate" requires some explaining. It is the rate that, once the economy has reached our objectives, will keep the economy on an even keel. It is neither pressing on the gas pedal to make the car go faster nor easing off so much that the car slows down. Right now our foot is still pressing on the gas pedal, though, as I noted, we have eased back a bit. Our foot remains on the pedal in part because we want to make sure the economic expansion remains strong enough to withstand an unexpected shock, given that we don't have much room to cut interest rates. In addition, inflation is still running below our 2 percent objective, and, by some measures, there may still be some room for progress in the job market. For instance, wage growth has only recently begun to pick up and remains fairly low. A broader measure of unemployment isn't quite back to its pre-recession level. It includes people who would like a job but have been too discouraged to look for one and people who are working part time but would rather work full time. Nevertheless, as the economy approaches our objectives, it makes sense to gradually reduce the level of monetary policy support. Changes in monetary policy take time to work their way into the economy. Waiting too long to begin moving toward the neutral rate could risk a nasty surprise down the road--either too much inflation, financial instability, or both. In that scenario, we could be forced to raise interest rates rapidly, which in turn could push the economy into a new recession. The factors I have just discussed are the usual sort that central bankers consider as economies move through a recovery. But a longer-term trend--slow productivity growth--helps explain why we don't think dramatic interest rate increases are required to move our federal funds rate target back to neutral. Labor productivity--that is, the output of goods and services per hour of work--has increased by only about 1/2 percent a year, on average, over the past six years or so and only 1-1/4 percent a year over the past decade. That contrasts with the previous 30 years when productivity grew a bit more than 2 percent a year. This productivity slowdown matters enormously because Americans' standard of living depends on productivity growth. With productivity growth of 2 percent a year, the average standard of living will double roughly every 35 years. That means our children can reasonably hope to be better off economically than we are now. But productivity growth of 1 percent a year means the average standard of living will double only every 70 years. Economists do not fully understand the causes of the productivity slowdown. Some emphasize that technological progress and its diffusion throughout the economy seem to be slower over the past decade or so. Others look at college graduation rates, which have flattened out after rising rapidly in previous generations. And still others focus on a dramatic slowing in the creation of new businesses, which are often more innovative than established firms. While each of these factors has likely played a role in slowing productivity growth, the extent to which they will continue to do so is an open question. 2 Why does slow productivity growth, if it persists, imply a lower neutral interest rate? First, it implies that the economy's usual rate of output growth, when employment is at its maximum and prices are stable, will be significantly slower than the post-World War II average. Slower economic growth, in turn, implies businesses will see less need to invest in expansion. And it implies families and individuals will feel the need to save more and spend less. Because interest rates are the mechanism that brings the supply of savings and the demand for investment funds into balance, more saving and less investment imply a lower neutral interest rate. Although we can't directly measure the neutral interest rate, it is something that can be estimated in retrospect. And, as we have increasingly realized, it has probably been trending down for a while now. Our current 3 percent estimate of the longer-run neutral rate, for instance, is a full percentage point lower than our estimate just three years ago. You might be thinking, what does this discussion of rather esoteric concepts such as the neutral rate mean to me? If you are a borrower, it means that, although the interest rates you pay on, say, your auto loan or mortgage or credit card likely will creep higher, they probably will not increase dramatically. Likewise, if you are a saver, the rates you earn could inch higher after a while, but probably not by a lot. For some years, I've heard from savers who want higher rates, and now I'm beginning to hear from borrowers who want lower rates. I can't emphasize strongly enough, though, that we are not trying to help one of those groups at the expense of the other. We're focused very much on that dual mandate I keep mentioning. At the end of the day, we all benefit from plentiful jobs and stable prices, whether we are savers or borrowers--and many of us, of course, are both. Economics and monetary policy are, at best, inexact sciences. Figuring out what the neutral interest rate is and setting the right path toward it is not like setting the thermostat in a house: You can't just set the temperature at 68 degrees and walk away. And, because changes in monetary policy affect the economy with long lags sometimes, we must base our decisions on our best forecasts of an uncertain future. Thus, we must continually reassess and adjust our policies based on what we learn. That point leads me to repeat what I said when I began: Like the Commonwealth Club, the Federal Reserve was created more than a century ago during an era of government reform to serve the public interest. The structure established for the Federal Reserve back then intentionally insulates us from short-term political pressures so we can focus on what's best for the American economy in the longer run. I promise you, with the sometimes imperfect information and evidence we have available, we will do just that by making the best decisions we can, as objectively as we can. Thank you. I welcome your questions. 1. Our objective is 2 percent inflation as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures published by the Commerce Department's Bureau of Economic Analysis. Return to text 2. Other factors depressing the neutral rate include housing construction and lackluster exports. Housing still hasn't fully recovered from the financial crisis, in part because mortgage-qualification standards remain tight. Weak growth abroad in Europe, China, and elsewhere, some of which is related to their own productivity challenges, has hurt sales of U.S. goods. Return to text Last Update: January 18, 2017 Back to Top

s Contact Search Submit Search Button Advanced Toggle Dropdown Menu Main Menu Toggle Button Sections Search Toggle Button Search Search Submit Button Submit Home News & Events Speeches Speech PDF January 19, 2017 The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy Chair Janet L. Yellen At the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California Share Watch live It is a privilege to be here today to discuss how the Federal Reserve is conducting monetary policy to promote a healthy economy. For more than 30 years, research from the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research has informed economic policy, and events such as this one have helped foster debate among scholars, policymakers, business leaders, and members of the public on critical economic issues facing our nation. I appreciate the opportunity to participate. In my remarks today, I will review the considerable progress the economy has made toward the attainment of the two objectives that the Congress has assigned to the Federal Reserve--maximum employment and price stability. The upshot is that labor utilization is close to its estimated longer-run normal level, and we are closing in on our 2 percent inflation objective. I will then discuss the prospects for adjusting monetary policy in the manner needed to sustain a strong job market while maintaining low and stable inflation. Determining how best to adjust the federal funds rate over time to achieve these objectives will not be easy. For that reason, in the balance of my remarks, I will discuss some considerations that will help inform our decisions, including the guidance provided by simple policy rules. I will conclude by touching on some key uncertainties affecting the outlook. Progress to Date My assessment of progress to date will begin with the labor market. Since the depths of the Great Recession, about 15-1/2 million jobs have been added to the U.S. economy, on net. In 2016, job gains averaged about 180,000 per month, well above the pace of 75,000 to 125,000 per month that is probably consistent with keeping the unemployment rate stable over the longer run. 1 The unemployment rate is now close to estimates of its longer-run normal level, and other measures of labor utilization have improved appreciably. As shown in figure 1 , a broader measure of labor underutilization--the U-6 measure, which includes not only the unemployed but also people working part time who would like full-time employment and those who would like a job but are not actively looking--has retraced nearly all of the steep run-up that occurred as a result of the recession. 2 Other indicators also support the view that the labor market has largely recovered from the severe downturn that occurred in the wake of the financial crisis. As illustrated by the red dashed line in figure 2 , the quits rate--an indicator of workers' confidence about leaving an existing job to pursue new opportunities--is nearly back to its pre-recession level. And some indicators, such as small businesses' assessments of the difficulty of hiring, shown by the solid black line, as well as the average length of time it takes firms to fill vacancies and the job openings rate, even suggest that the labor market is a bit tighter than before the financial crisis. Of course, both the labor force participation rate and the employment-to-population ratio are still much lower than they were a decade ago. But the cyclical element in these declines looks to have largely disappeared, and what is left seems to mostly reflect the aging of the population and other secular trends. 3 Based on this array of labor market indicators, I judge labor utilization to be reasonably close to its normal longer-run level while also recognizing that estimates of the sustainable levels of the unemployment rate and the employment-to-population ratio are inherently imprecise. 4 In the coming months, I expect some further strengthening in labor market conditions as the economy continues to expand at a moderate pace--a view that is shared by most of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 5 Overall economic growth has been driven by consumer spending, which has been bolstered by substantial gains in household income and wealth. Business investment, in contrast, has been soft. But recent readings on business sentiment and new orders for equipment are consistent with the view that capital spending will likely strengthen modestly this year; another positive factor is that oil drilling, which plummeted after oil prices fell sharply back in late 2014, has recently begun to pick up. As we look to broader trends, gross domestic product (GDP) growth has been restrained in recent years by a variety of forces depressing both supply and demand, including slow labor force and productivity growth, weak growth abroad, and lingering headwinds from the financial crisis. Although I am cautiously optimistic that some of these forces will abate over time, I anticipate that they will continue to restrain overall growth over the medium term, likely holding down the level of interest rates consistent with stable labor market conditions. Turning to inflation, we are now much closer to the FOMC's 2 percent objective than we were just a year ago. Prices, as measured by the index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), rose nearly 1-1/2 percent in the 12 months ending in November, as compared with only 1/2 percent during 2015. Moreover, core PCE inflation--a better indicator of the underlying inflation trend--picked up 1/4 percentage point, to a little over 1-1/2 percent. This rise in inflation was anticipated and largely represents a fading of the effects of earlier declines in energy prices and the prices of non-energy imports. In addition, slack in labor and product markets is no longer placing downward pressure on inflation, in contrast to the situation only a few years ago when the unemployment rate was still quite elevated. Barring future major swings in oil prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar, inflation is likely to move up to 2 percent over the next couple of years, aided by a strong labor market. In light of the progress that has been achieved toward our employment and inflation objectives and the Committee's assessment of the outlook, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate at its December meeting by 25 basis points, to between 50 and 75 basis points. The Committee judges, however, that the stance of monetary policy remains modestly accommodative, and so policy should support some further strengthening in labor market conditions and thus the return of inflation to our 2 percent goal. Maintaining Sustainable Growth in a Context of Price Stability With the unemployment rate near its longer-run normal level and likely to move a bit lower this year, a natural question is whether monetary policy has fallen behind the curve. The short answer, I believe, is "no." It is true that many employers report difficulties in finding qualified workers in selected occupations, and that more workers are comfortable quitting jobs to take or look for better positions. But this is to be expected in a healthy labor market and not evidence that the economy as a whole is experiencing a serious worker shortage. The recent behavior of wages provides additional evidence pertaining to the degree of labor market slack. As shown in figure 3 , increases in average hourly earnings, the employment cost index, and compensation per hour remain subdued, picking up only modestly of late. 6 Again, these data do not seem consistent with an overheated labor market. Moreover, signs of overheating in the broader economy are also scarce. For example, capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector is well below its historical average. Most importantly, although core inflation is rising gradually from a low level, this increase mainly reflects the waning of the effects of earlier movements in the dollar, not upward pressure from resource utilization. Of course, even if the labor market is not overheated currently, one might worry that overheating could rapidly emerge as labor market conditions strengthen further, causing inflation to surge. I consider this unlikely for several reasons. First, the pace of labor market improvement has slowed appreciably in the past couple of years: For example, average payroll gains moderated from 250,000 per month in 2014 to 180,000 last year, and the unemployment rate declined 1-3/4 percentage points cumulatively over 2014 and 2015, compared with only 1/4 percentage point last year. 7 Second, economic growth more broadly seems unlikely to pick up markedly in the near term given the ongoing restraint from weak foreign demand and other factors that I mentioned, particularly in an environment in which monetary policy is likely to become gradually less accommodative. Finally, figure 4 illustrates the relationship over the past several decades between labor market pressures and core inflation. Note that during periods when the unemployment rate fell below the Congressional Budget Office's estimate of its normal long-run level, shown by the yellow shaded regions, core inflation, the solid red line, rose little, if at all. This stability is especially marked since inflation expectations became anchored during the mid-to-late 1990s. 8 That said, I think that allowing the economy to run markedly and persistently "hot" would be risky and unwise. Waiting too long to remove accommodation could cause inflation expectations to begin ratcheting up, driving actual inflation higher and making it harder to control. The combination of persistently low interest rates and strong labor market conditions could lead to undesirable increases in leverage and other financial imbalances, although such risks would likely take time to emerge. 9 Finally, waiting too long to tighten policy could require the FOMC to eventually raise interest rates rapidly, which could risk disrupting financial markets and pushing the economy into recession. For these reasons, I consider it prudent to adjust the stance of monetary policy gradually over time--a strategy that should improve the prospects that the economy will achieve sustainable growth with the labor market operating at full employment and inflation running at about 2 percent. Evaluating the Appropriate Stance of Monetary Policy Achieving these goals could prove challenging, however, even if the economy manages to avoid being hit with adverse shocks over the next few years. To sustain a strong job market with inflation at our 2 percent objective, policy must gradually shift toward a neutral stance, where "neutral" is defined as a level of the federal funds rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary when the economy is operating near its potential. But what level of the federal funds rate is neutral at the present time? How quickly should the funds rate target move up to this neutral level? And how will the neutral rate itself evolve over time? To help answer such questions, the FOMC considers a voluminous amount of information concerning many factors, including financial markets and credit availability, labor market conditions and overall economic activity, wages and prices, and foreign economic developments. The FOMC also evaluates forecasts from a range of economic models, assessments of key risks to the outlook, and detailed analyses of how different monetary policy strategies would affect projected outcomes and risks. Among the strategies routinely considered by the Committee are the recommendations of a variety of simple monetary policy rules. In addition, FOMC participants prepare individual projections on a quarterly basis of the most likely paths of key macroeconomic variables under their own assessments of "appropriate monetary policy," together with their estimates of the normal longer-run values of the federal funds rate, the unemployment rate, and GDP growth. 10 Armed with this wealth of information, the Committee as a whole then decides on the most appropriate policy action to adopt at each of its meetings. Such a comprehensive, forward-looking approach to policymaking is similar to that employed at other central banks. 11 Figure 5 shows a plot of FOMC participants' most recent assessments of the appropriate path for the federal funds rate through 2019. The black solid lines show the median value of the federal funds rate at the end of each year. To understand the considerations that likely underlay these judgments, I will contrast participants' assessments with the recommendations of some simple policy rules commonly used to help gauge the appropriate stance of policy. As I noted, the Committee routinely reviews policy recommendations from a variety of benchmark rules, and I believe that their prescriptions can be helpful in providing broad guidance about how the federal funds rate should be adjusted over time in response to movements in real activity and inflation. That said, I will emphasize that the use and interpretation of such prescriptions require careful judgments about both the measurement of the inputs to these rules and the implications of the many considerations the rules do not take into account. Consider first the well-known Taylor rule, which embodies key principles of good monetary policy. The rule calls for systematic adjustments in the federal funds rate relative to its expected longer-run neutral level in response to movements in inflation and the output gap, defined as the percentage difference between actual output and the economy's productive potential. 12 To implement the rule, one must decide on the appropriate definition and measurement of its inputs. Should inflation be defined using the latest noisy quarterly reading on headline PCE inflation or a measure intended to smooth through transitory price movements? What technique should be used to approximate the output gap, given that different approaches often yield materially different estimates? And what assumption should be made about the neutral value of the federal funds rate in the longer run? The Taylor rule is often implemented by assuming that the real, or inflation-adjusted, value of the longer-run neutral interest rate--which I will call R* for convenience--is equal to 2 percent, roughly the average historical value of the real federal funds rate prior to the financial crisis. For inflation, we can use the 12-month change in core PCE prices, a measure of the current underlying rate of inflation. And the output gap can be reasonably approximated as twice the difference between the estimated longer-run normal rate of unemployment and the actual unemployment rate. 13 The dashed red line in figure 5 shows the resulting recommendations for policy over the medium term, based on the medians of the unemployment and inflation projections submitted by FOMC participants in December but assuming--in contrast to the median of participants' December assessments--that R* equals 2 percent. As figure 5 shows, this version of the Taylor rule prescribes a much higher path for the federal funds rate than the median of participants' assessments of appropriate policy. One important factor explaining this divergence is the FOMC's growing recognition that the longer-run neutral level of the real federal funds rate has likely declined below 2 percent, contrary to what is often assumed in implementations of the Taylor rule. As illustrated by the left-hand panel of figure 6 , since 2000, both FOMC participants and respondents to the Blue Chip survey have markedly reduced their projections of the level of real short-term interest rates expected to prevail in the longer run. Presumably, these revisions were made in response to accumulating evidence that lower real interest rates than those seen on average in the past would be needed permanently to keep the economy operating on an even keel. In addition, the right-hand panel shows considerable changes over time in estimates of the normal longer-run rate of unemployment, with corresponding implications for estimates of the economy's productive potential and the output gap. Such revisions would imply shifts in the level of the Taylor rule's prescriptions by as much as 1-1/4 percentage points, holding other factors constant. 14 Clearly, sensible implementation of policy rules requires adjustments to take such changes into account, as a failure to do so would result in poor monetary policy decisions and poor economic outcomes. 15 Figure 7 illustrates the policy implications of alternative revised assessments of the longer-run neutral real rate of interest. As before, the short-dashed red line shows the prescriptions of the Taylor rule using the standard 2 percent assumption for R*. The solid red line, however, shows the rule's prescriptions with R* equal to 1 percent, the median of the longer-run projections of the real federal funds rate made by FOMC participants last month. This adjustment appreciably reduces the rule's policy prescriptions. Even with this downward adjustment of the longer-run neutral rate, however, the Taylor rule's prescriptions are arguably still too restrictive. The problem is that the rule ignores the likelihood that it will likely take many years before the forces now restraining the economy dissipate to the degree envisioned in participants' estimates of the longer-run normal level of the real federal funds rate. Because overall growth has been quite moderate over the past few years despite an accommodative stance of monetary policy, some recent estimates of the current value of the neutral real federal funds rate stand close to zero. 16 If the neutral rate were to remain quite low over the medium term, as would be expected if the global economy does not materially strengthen and productivity growth remains anemic, then the appropriate setting for R* in the Taylor rule would arguably be zero, yielding a yet lower path for the federal funds rate, as shown by the long-dashed red line. These considerations illustrate that there is now no obvious "right" setting for R* because we do not know how rapidly the forces restraining the economy will abate, and there is a significant risk that it could be very slow. When the economy has been hit with unusually persistent shocks, the Taylor rule, for this reason, provides a problematic benchmark. Simple policy rules also typically neglect information with potentially important implications for the economic outlook because they focus only on where conditions are today. For example, simple rules ignore such important factors as fiscal policy, trends affecting global growth, structural developments influencing the supply of credit, and overall financial conditions. One special factor at the moment pertains to the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. The downward pressure on longer-term interest rates that the Fed's asset holdings exert is expected to diminish over time--a development that amounts to a "passive" removal of monetary policy accommodation. Other things being equal, this factor argues for a more gradual approach to raising short-term rates. 17 Lastly, simple rules ignore important risk-management considerations that have influenced the Committee's decisions in recent years. With the federal funds rate still near zero, the Committee recognizes that, should the economy unexpectedly weaken in the next year or two, there would likely be only limited scope to respond by lowering short-term rates. But if the economy instead began to overheat, threatening to push inflation to an undesirably high level, the FOMC would have ample scope to respond through tighter monetary policy. Such asymmetric risks arguably call for a more gradual path of rate increases than indicated by the prescriptions of a simple policy rule. The academic literature on policy rules has studied many alternatives to the Taylor rule, and the FOMC regularly reviews a number of them. 18 These rules embed differing but valuable perspectives, and there is no consensus among central bankers or academics about the relative utility of various rules. One such alternative is the "balanced approach" rule, illustrated by the purple short-dashed line in figure 8 . This rule differs from the Taylor rule by being twice as responsive to movements in resource utilization. 19 The prescriptions of the balanced-approach rule in this figure, as with the solid red Taylor-rule plot, assume that R* equals 1 percent, consistent with the medians of the latest FOMC projections. Because participants on average anticipate a modest undershooting of the unemployment rate below its estimated longer-run level, the balanced-approach rule calls for a slightly faster pace of tightening over the next several years than the Taylor rule. Figure 8 also reports results for a "change" rule, shown as the green long-dashed line. As its name implies, this rule does not prescribe a particular level of the federal funds rate at a given time but rather how the existing rate should change from quarter to quarter based on two gaps--the difference between inflation and its desired level as well as the difference between the unemployment rate and its longer-run normal level. 20 In contrast to the other two rules, the change rule does not take a stand on the value of the longer-run neutral level of the real federal funds rate, thus avoiding a potential source of error. Instead, it moves interest rates up and down until both gaps close, an approach that in theory enables it to perform well when the true value of R* is unknown. Because both gaps are relatively modest at the moment and are projected to remain so, the change rule calls for fairly gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy over the next few years given the current outlook. The FOMC, for reasons that I have discussed, does not base its decisions on the prescriptions of any specific policy rule. Nevertheless, the three benchmarks I have described--the Taylor rule, the balanced-approach rule, and the change rule, appropriately calibrated--have historically provided useful guidance about appropriate adjustments in the general direction of monetary policy over time. This guidance is illustrated by figure 9 , which compares the path of the federal funds rate since 2000 with the prescriptions of the three rules, based on the actual rates of inflation and unemployment observed at each point in time, along with contemporaneous Blue Chip projections of the longer-run unemployment rate and R*. As the figure shows, the rules clearly signaled that a major reduction in the federal funds rate was appropriate in 2008 given the marked deterioration in economic conditions. In addition, all three rules signaled that monetary policy needed to provide more stimulus during the recession and the subsequent recovery than could be provided by keeping short-term interest rates near zero. For this reason, the Committee turned to asset purchases to help make up for the shortfall by putting additional downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. The FOMC also sought to compensate for its inability to push the federal funds rate below zero by indicating that the funds rate would need to stay unusually low for longer than would otherwise be expected and simple policy rules would prescribe. 21 Under this "make up" strategy, and taking into account the reasons for deviating from the Taylor rule that I discussed a moment ago, the Committee kept the federal funds rate near zero for longer than two of the rules would have prescribed. But as labor market conditions continued to improve over time, the rising trajectories for the federal funds rate prescribed by all three rules signaled that the time was drawing near to begin gradually reducing monetary accommodation. Consistent with this advice, the FOMC suspended its asset purchase program in mid-2014 and began raising the federal funds rate in late 2015. 22 To sum up, simple policy rules can serve as useful benchmarks to help assess how monetary policy should be adjusted over time. However, their prescriptions must be interpreted carefully, both because estimates of some of their key inputs can vary significantly and because the rules often do not take into account important considerations and information pertaining to the outlook. For these reasons, the rules should not be followed mechanically, since doing so could have adverse consequences for the economy. Conclusion My remarks have focused on the policy trajectory that the Committee now considers likely to be appropriate to sustain the economic expansion while keeping inflation close to our 2 percent goal. In concluding, it is important to emphasize the considerable uncertainty that attaches to such assessments and the need to constantly update them. In particular, the path of the neutral federal funds rate, which plays an important role in determining the appropriate policy path, is highly uncertain. For example, productivity growth is a key determinant of the neutral rate, and while most forecasters expect productivity growth to pick up from its recent unusually slow pace, the timing of such a pickup is highly uncertain. Indeed, there is little consensus among researchers about the causes of the recent slowdown in productivity growth that has occurred both at home and abroad. 23 The strength of global growth will also have an important bearing on the neutral rate through both trade and financial channels, and here, too, the scope for surprises is considerable. Finally, I would mention the potential for changes in fiscal policy to affect the economic outlook and the appropriate policy path. At this point, however, the size, timing, and composition of such changes remain uncertain. 24 However, as this discussion highlights, the course of monetary policy over the next few years will depend on many different factors, of which fiscal policy is just one. References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). " Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197-255. Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Andrew McAfee (2014). The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies. New York: W.W. Norton. Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2016). " Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward ," American Economic Review , vol. 106 (May), pp. 203-07. --------- (forthcoming). "Where Has All the Skewness Gone? The Decline of High-Growth (Young) Firms in the U.S.," European Economic Review. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). " The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Fernald, John, and Bing Wang (2015). " The Recent Rise and Fall of Rapid Productivity Growth (PDF) ," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-04. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February 9. Golden, Lonnie (2016). Still Falling Short on Hours and Pay: Part-Time Work Becoming the New Normal (PDF) , Economic Policy Institute. Washington: EPI, December. Gordon, Robert J. (2016). The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2016). " Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-073. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Ihrig, Jane, Elizabeth Klee, Canlin Li, Brett Schulte, and Min Wei (2012). " Expectations about the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and the Term Structure of Interest Rates (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-57. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Li, Canlin, and Min Wei (2013). " Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs ," International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 9 (March), pp. 3-39. Nechio, Fernanda, and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2016). " Has the Fed Fallen behind the Curve This Year? (PDF) " FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-33. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 7. Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). " Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 32 (4), 936-66. Svensson, Lars E.O. (2005). " Monetary Policy with Judgment: Forecast Targeting ," International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 1 (May), pp. 1-54. Taylor, John B. (1993). " Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice ," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 39, pp. 195-214. --------- (1999). "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules," in John B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 319-41. Taylor, John B., and John C. Williams (2010). "Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 829-59. Werning, Ivan (2012). " Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy (PDF) ," working paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, March. Woodford, Michael (2012). " Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF) ," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1, pp. 185-288. Yellen, Janet (2016). " The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future ," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26. 1. The sustainable longer-run pace of payroll employment growth depends on a number of a factors, such as the growth rate of the working-age population, trend movements in labor force participation, and the prevalence of self-employment and multiple job holdings, so it cannot be predicted with precision. Return to text 2. The normal level of the U-6 measure may now be somewhat higher than it was prior to the financial crisis because of a trend toward greater reliance on part-time workers in many sectors. See Golden (2016). Return to text 3. See Aaronson and others (2014). Return to text 4. In addition, a persistently strong labor market could potentially lead some firms to rely less on part-time workers, or might encourage some people to rejoin the labor force who would otherwise sit on the sidelines. However, evidence on these sorts of endogenous supply-side effects is rather limited, as I noted in a recent speech (see Yellen, 2016). Return to text 5. A summary of the projections submitted by Committee participants for the December 2016 FOMC meeting can be found at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20161214.htm . Return to text 6. An exception to this pattern is the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker (WGT), which does show a noticeable acceleration in hourly wages as self-reported in the Current Population Survey. Like average hourly earnings, the WGT excludes benefits costs and so is less comprehensive than the ECI or business-sector compensation per hour (CPH). In addition, the WGT is based on a smaller sample than the measures shown in Figure 3 and it only covers a sub-set of the workforce--specifically, employed individuals who were also employed a year ago, and whose earnings are less than $150,000 per year. Finally, because average hourly earnings and business-sector CPH are measured as total wages divided by total hours, an increase in wages for high earners has a larger effect in those measures than a similarly proportioned increase for lower-wage workers, and this is not so for the WGT. Return to text 7. Many other labor market indicators also improved more slowly in 2016 relative to the pace seen in the prior two years, including the U-6 measure of labor utilization, the rates of job openings, hiring and quits, survey readings on net hiring plans and the difficulty of filling vacancies, and the average duration of unemployment. A notable exception to this general pattern is the labor force participation rate, which declined fairly steadily from 2007 through 2015 but then flattened out last year despite continuing downward pressure from the aging of the population and other factors. However, improvements in labor market conditions along this dimension arguably reflect an increase in potential output, and so they are probably not a source of inflationary pressures. Return to text 8. During the late 1960s through the 1970s, however, inflation did rise noticeably whenever the unemployment rate moved below its longer-run normal level, primarily because the Federal Reserve did not adequately check persistent movements in inflation by tightening monetary policy, thereby allowing inflation expectations to drift. This experience illustrates the importance of keeping inflation expectations anchored through systematic policy actions. Return to text 9. The Federal Reserve closely monitors a wide range of indicators of financial stability, which currently provide little evidence of significant increases in leverage or rapid growth in credit. However, some asset valuations, particularly for commercial real estate, are high. With regard to the linkages between labor utilization and financial stability, my interpretation of the historical evidence is that undesirable increases in leverage or the emergence of asset bubbles are not the inevitable consequence of tight labor markets per se. Return to text 10. These individual projections are published quarterly in the Summary of Economic Projections that accompanies the release of the minutes from the March, June, September and December meetings of the FOMC. Return to text 11. The FOMC's procedures share many of the features of forecast targeting, an approach to monetary policymaking advocated by Svensson (2005), among others. However, while the Committee publishes participants' projections--including policy paths--in the SEP, it does not publish a "consensus" forecast, in contrast to some other central banks. Return to text 12. Formally, the rule originally published by Taylor (1993) can be written as $$ R_{t} = R^{*} + \pi_{t} + 0.5\left(\pi_{t}-\pi^{*}\right) + 0.5Y_{t}$$, where $$ R$$ is the federal funds rate, $$ R^{*}$$ is the level of the real federal funds rate that on average is expected to be consistent with sustaining maximum employment and stable inflation in the longer run, $$ \pi$$ is current inflation, $$ \pi^{*}$$ is the central bank's inflation objective (2 percent, in the case of the Federal Reserve), and $$ Y$$ is the output gap, defined as the difference between the current level of real GDP and what it would be if the economy was operating at maximum employment. Importantly, the rule embodies three key principles that central banks take into account when setting policy to stabilize inflation and the overall economy. First, a persistent movement in inflation requires a more than one-for-one response of the policy rate to stabilize inflation. Second, monetary policy should raise real interest rates above their normal longer-run level whenever inflation is above its desired level and resource utilization is higher than normal, and lower them when the opposite holds. (Note that implementing this latter principle requires estimates of both the economy's productive potential and the longer-run level of the real policy rate that would be consistent with keeping the economy operating on an even keel.) And, finally, policymakers should respond in a systematic manner to changes in economic conditions in order to help financial market participants and others better understand how policy is likely to respond over time to current and future events, thereby influencing expectations in a way that promotes economic stability. Return to text 13. Historically, percent deviations of real GDP from statistical estimates of its long-run trend are roughly twice as large on average as deviations of the unemployment rate from its estimated long-run value--a relationship known as Okun's law. Return to text 14. Additional complications arise in the measurement of economic slack because the difference between the unemployment rate and its estimated normal level is not always a complete gauge of overall labor utilization. Such was the case in the current expansion until recently because the labor force participation rate was unusually low and involuntary part-time employment unusually high, given the level of the unemployment rate. Moreover, although movements in resource utilization for the economy as a whole are generally proportional to changes in labor utilization, the relationship varies somewhat over time. Partly as a result, contemporaneous estimates of the output gap can deviate markedly from subsequent estimates for the same period calculated using revised data. For example, in early 2010, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimated that the output gap in 2009:Q2 was negative 7.7 percent, but the CBO has since lowered it to negative 6.3 percent--a large revision with important implications for assessments of the deviation of actual policy from the prescriptions of simple policy rules. Return to text 15. If monetary policy persistently followed the prescriptions of a Taylor rule that assumed that R* was 2 percent when it was in fact 1 percent, then employment would run persistently below its maximum sustainable level and inflation would run persistently below 2 percent. Under such circumstances, inflation expectations might begin to fall, creating a risk of deflation. Return to text 16. For example, see Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016). Return to text 17. Based on estimates generated using the term-structure model developed by Li and Wei (2013) and the procedure discussed in Ihrig and others (2012) and extended by Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015), the Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities continue to put considerable downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. However, this pressure is estimated to be gradually easing as the average maturity of the portfolio declines and the end-date for reinvestment draws closer. Over the course of 2017, this easing could increase the yield on the 10-year Treasury note by about 15 basis points, all else being equal. Based on the estimated co-movement of short-term and long-term interest rates, such a change in longer-term yields would be similar to that which, on average, has historically accompanied two 25 basis point hikes in the federal funds rate. Return to text 18. For example, prescriptions from seven different rules, calculated using forecasts of economic activity and inflation from different sources, are regularly posted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland at https://www.clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and-data/simple-monetary-policy-rules.aspx . Return to text 19. The balanced-approach rule is $$ R_{t} = R^{*} + \pi_{t} + 0.5\left(\pi_{t}-\pi^{*}\right) + 1.0Y_{t}$$, where all terms are defined as in the Taylor rule. (See note 12 for details.) As noted by Taylor (1999), research suggests that this rule may do a better job than the Taylor rule in stabilizing real activity and inflation. Return to text 20. The change rule is $$ R_{t} = R_{t-1} + 1.2\left(\pi_{t}-2\right) + 2.0\left(U^{*}-U_{t}\right)$$, where $$ R$$ is the federal funds rate, $$ \pi$$ is four-quarter rate of core PCE inflation, $$ U^{*}$$ is the projected longer-run unemployment rate, and $$ U$$ is the current unemployment rate. In computing the prescriptions for the change rule shown in figure 8, the midpoint of the target range for the federal funds rate prior to the December 2016 FOMC meeting, 0.38 percent, is used as the starting point. For a discussion of this rule (and of policy rules in general), see Taylor and Williams (2010). Return to text 21. For example, the FOMC advised in the statement released after its December 2012 meeting that conditions would likely warrant keeping the funds rate near zero at least as long as the unemployment rate was above 6-1/2 percent--a threshold that was not passed until mid-2014. As discussed by Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Werning (2012), and Woodford (2012), this type of lower-for-longer guidance can help compensate for the constraint on monetary policy created by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates. Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015) find that the FOMC's guidance, together with its asset purchases, provided significant economic stimulus in the years following the financial crisis. Return to text 22. For a closer look at the FOMC's policy actions in 2016 and their relationship to previous forecasts and subsequent changes in economic conditions, see Nechio and Rudebusch (2016). Return to text 23. To sample some of the different views about the sources of the recent slowdown in productivity growth and the prospects for faster growth in the future, see Gordon (2016), Fernald and Wang (2015), Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014), and Decker and others (2016, forthcoming). Return to text 24. A related source of uncertainty is the limited ability of economists to predict the effects of specific changes in tax policy or government spending on the overall economy. In part, this uncertainty arises because the net effect depends to some extent on the response of financial markets; in addition, estimates vary considerably on the economic effects of changes in marginal tax rates or different types of spending. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version of Figures Last Update: January 19, 2017 Back to Top

Chair Janet L. Yellen At The Executives' Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Share I am pleased to join you today to discuss the U.S. economy and the Federal Reserve's monetary policy. I strongly believe that my colleagues and I should explain, as clearly as we can, both the reasons for our decisions and the fundamental principles that underlie our strategy. Today I will review the conduct of monetary policy during the nearly 10 years since the onset of the financial crisis. Although the Federal Reserve's policy strategy for systematically pursuing its congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability has not changed during this period, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has made significant tactical adjustments along the way. I will spend most of my time today discussing the rationale for the adjustments the Committee has made since 2014, a year that I see as a turning point, when the FOMC began to transition from providing increasing amounts of accommodation to gradually scaling it back. The process of scaling back accommodation has so far proceeded at a slower pace than most FOMC participants anticipated in 2014. Both unexpected economic developments and deeper reevaluations of structural trends affecting the U.S. and global economies prompted us to reassess our views on the outlook and associated risks and, consequently, the appropriate stance of monetary policy, both in the near term and the longer run. Looking ahead, we continue to expect the evolution of the economy to warrant further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate. However, given how close we are to meeting our statutory goals, and in the absence of new developments that might materially worsen the economic outlook, the process of scaling back accommodation likely will not be as slow as it was in 2015 and 2016. I should note that I will discuss the process of scaling back accommodation mostly from the perspective of our interest rate decisions, which my FOMC colleagues and I see as our primary tool for actively adjusting the stance of monetary policy when our actions are not constrained by the zero lower bound on short-term interest rates. 1 Assessing the Degree of Monetary Policy Accommodation In our monetary policy deliberations, the FOMC always faces two fundamental questions: First, how do we assess the current stance of monetary policy? Second, what are the strategic and tactical considerations that underpin our decisions about the appropriate stance of monetary policy going forward? These questions are difficult because the interactions between monetary policy and the economy are complex. Policy affects the economy through many different channels, and, in turn, many factors influence the appropriate course of policy. Gauging the current stance of monetary policy requires arriving at a judgment of what would constitute a neutral policy stance at a given time. A useful concept in this regard is the neutral "real" federal funds rate, defined as the level of the federal funds rate that, when adjusted for inflation, is neither expansionary nor contractionary when the economy is operating near its potential. In effect, a "neutral" policy stance is one where monetary policy neither has its foot on the brake nor is pressing down on the accelerator. Although the concept of the neutral real federal funds rate is exceptionally useful in assessing policy, it is difficult in practical terms to know with precision where that rate stands. As a result, and as I described in a recent speech, my colleagues and I consider a wide range of information when assessing that rate. 2 As I will discuss, our assessments of the neutral rate have significantly shifted down over the past few years. In the Committee's most recent projections last December, most FOMC participants assessed the longer-run value of the neutral real federal funds rate to be in the vicinity of 1 percent. 3 This level is quite low by historical standards, reflecting, in part, slow productivity growth and an aging population not only in the United States, but also in many advanced economies. Moreover, the current value of the neutral real federal funds rate appears to be even lower than this longer-run value because of several additional headwinds to the U.S. economy in the aftermath of the financial crisis, such as subdued economic growth abroad and perhaps a lingering sense of caution on the part of households and businesses in the wake of the trauma of the Great Recession. It is difficult to say just how low the current neutral rate is because assessments of the effect of post-recession headwinds on the current level of the neutral real rate are subject to a great deal of uncertainty. Some recent estimates of the current value of the neutral real federal funds rate stand close to zero percent. 4 With the actual value of the real federal funds rate currently near minus 1 percent, a near-zero estimate of the neutral real rate means that the stance of monetary policy remains moderately accommodative, an assessment that is consistent with the fact that employment has been growing at a pace--around 180,000 net new jobs per month--that is notably above the level estimated to be consistent with the longer-run trend in labor force growth--between 75,000 and 125,000 per month. 5 As I will explain, this policy stance seems appropriate given that the underlying trend in inflation appears to be still running somewhat below 2 percent. But as that gap closes, with labor market conditions now in the vicinity of our maximum employment objective, the Committee considers it appropriate to move toward a neutral policy stance. My colleagues and I generally anticipate that the neutral real federal funds rate will rise to its longer-run level over the next few years. This expectation partly underlies our view that gradual increases in the federal funds rate will likely be appropriate in the months and years ahead: Those increases would keep the economy from significantly overheating, thereby sustaining the expansion and maintaining price stability. Post-Crisis Period: Same Strategy, New Tactics I will now examine the strategic and tactical considerations that go into FOMC deliberations by discussing past monetary policy decisions in the context of our mandate from the Congress to pursue maximum employment and price stability. The FOMC's monetary policy strategy is based on three basic principles. First, our monetary policy must be goal driven. We must take care to ensure that our decisions over time are consistent with our commitment to achieve the Federal Reserve's congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability, and that the public understands and has confidence in that commitment. Second, our monetary policy must be forward looking because our decisions tend to influence economic activity and inflation with a substantial lag. Among other things, this implies looking through short-term and transitory developments and focusing on the medium-term outlook--roughly two or three years out--when making policy decisions. Third, our monetary policy must be risk sensitive. Because the outlook is uncertain, we must assess appropriate policy with an eye toward the risk that our expectations about the economy turn out to be significantly wrong. We have followed this basic strategy for decades and, in 2012, the FOMC formalized it in our "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy." 6 The Committee has reaffirmed this commitment annually. But the challenges brought about by the financial crisis, and the very deep recession and painfully slow recovery that followed, compelled us to adjust our tactics for carrying out our policy strategy. In particular, once the Committee had cut the federal funds rate to near zero in late 2008, it became necessary to deploy new tools to supply the considerable monetary accommodation required by the extremely weak state of the job market and persistently low inflation. 7 Those tools--especially our large-scale securities purchases and increasingly explicit forward guidance pertaining to the likely future path of the federal funds rate--enabled the Federal Reserve to provide necessary additional support to the U.S. economy by pushing down longer-term interest rates and easing financial conditions more generally. Much has been written and said already about the provision of additional accommodation between 2008 and 2014, when the FOMC completed its latest round of large-scale securities purchases, so I will turn now to our policy stance since 2014, when the FOMC's main focus started to shift from providing additional accommodation to scaling it back. 8 2014: A Turning Point for Monetary Policy By late 2013, the FOMC concluded that the economy had made sufficient progress, and the outlook was sufficiently favorable, that it should reduce the pace of its large-scale securities purchases. But we reiterated that these purchases would continue until the outlook for the labor market had improved substantially. The U.S. economy made notable progress toward the FOMC's statutory goals during 2014, with the unemployment rate dropping to close to 6 percent by mid-year--well below its Great-Recession peak of 10 percent--and other measures of labor market conditions also showing improvement: Payroll gains were solid; job openings had risen significantly; and the number of workers voluntarily quitting their jobs--a sign of confidence in the labor market--was rising back toward pre-crisis levels. We were also seeing progress on achieving our price stability goal: Total inflation as measured by changes in the headline personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index reached about 1-3/4 percent by mid-2014 after hovering around 1 percent in the fall of 2013. Inflation seemed to be moving toward the FOMC's 2 percent objective, a level that the FOMC judges to be consistent with price stability because it is low enough that it does not need to figure prominently into people's and businesses' economic decisions but high enough to serve as a buffer against deflation and provide greater scope for monetary policy to address economic weakness. The progress seen during 2014 indicated to the FOMC that it was no longer necessary to provide increasing amounts of support to the U.S. economy by continuing to add to the Federal Reserve's holdings of longer-term securities. Accordingly, the Committee continued to reduce the pace of asset purchases over the course of the year, ending its purchases in October. That step, however, did not mark an immediate shift toward tighter monetary policy because we also indicated then that we did not expect to raise interest rates for a considerable time after the end of our securities purchases. Moreover, as the Committee explained in a set of "normalization principles" issued that September, the intention was to maintain the overall size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet at an elevated level until sometime after the FOMC had begun to raise its target for the federal funds rate. 9 We decided that maintaining a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy remained appropriate because, while the U.S. economy was stronger and closer to meeting our statutory goals, we saw significant room for improvement. In particular, the unemployment rate still stood above our assessment of its longer-run normal level--that is, the unemployment rate that we expect to prevail when the economy is operating at maximum employment--and inflation remained below the 2 percent objective. Because my colleagues and I expected that labor market conditions would continue to improve and that inflation would move back to 2 percent over the medium term, we anticipated that the time was approaching when the economy would be strong enough that we should start to scale back our support. Indeed, the FOMC's June 2014 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) reported that nearly all FOMC participants saw a higher federal funds rate as appropriate in the next calendar year. In contrast, only two participants in December 2013 thought that it would be appropriate to start raising that rate in the next calendar year. Uneven Progress in 2015 and into 2016 In 2015, the unemployment rate fell significantly faster than we generally had anticipated in 2014. However, a series of unanticipated global developments beginning in the second half of 2014--including a prolonged decline in oil prices, a sizable appreciation of the dollar, and financial market turbulence emanating from abroad--ended up having adverse implications for the outlook for inflation and economic activity in the United States, prompting the FOMC to remove monetary policy accommodation at a slower pace than we had anticipated in mid-2014. U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) growth generally surprised to the downside in 2015, reflecting, in part, weak economic activity abroad, the earlier appreciation of the dollar, and the effect of falling oil prices on business fixed investment. This unanticipated slowing in the pace of the economic recovery caused us to worry about the sustainability of ongoing improvements in employment and, thus, of likely progress toward our maximum employment goal. Our worry was reinforced by our assessment that, with the federal funds rate still near zero, there would likely be only limited scope for us to respond by lowering short-term rates if the weakening in economic activity turned out to be persistent. In contrast, if the weakening proved transitory and the economy instead began to overheat, threatening to push inflation to an undesirably high level, the FOMC would have ample scope to respond through tighter monetary policy. Inflation also was lower than expected, with headline PCE prices rising less than 1 percent over the course of 2015, instead of around 1-3/4 percent as we had anticipated in June 2014. Much of this shortfall reflected the effects of falling oil prices and the appreciation of the dollar. My colleagues and I typically look through the effects on inflation of fluctuations in oil prices and the dollar because these effects tend to be transitory. However, we became concerned in 2015 about the risk that part of the decline in inflation could prove to be longer lasting, especially given that inflation had already been running below our 2 percent objective for quite some time. 10 These various considerations, along with our reassessment of longer-run economic conditions--which I will discuss shortly--explain why the Committee ended up raising the target range for the federal funds rate only 1/4 percentage point in 2015, substantially less than the full percentage point increase suggested by the median projection of FOMC participants reported in June 2014. 2016 also brought some unexpected economic developments that led us to proceed cautiously. During the first half of the year, mixed readings on the job market, along with additional disappointing data on real GDP growth, suggested again that progress toward the achievement of our maximum employment goal could be slowing markedly. Meanwhile, inflation hovered just below 1 percent as dollar appreciation continued to exert downward pressure on import prices, and financial market turbulence emanating from abroad--associated with concerns about the Chinese economy and the Brexit referendum--posed new risks to U.S. economic activity and inflation. Moreover, even as payroll gains turned solid again in the second half of 2016, the unemployment rate remained relatively flat, suggesting that perhaps there was more room for improvement in the job market than we had previously thought. Those unanticipated developments were part of the reason why the Committee again opted to proceed more slowly in removing accommodation than had been anticipated at the start of the year. We ended up increasing the target range for the federal funds rate by only 1/4 percentage point over the course of 2016, rather than the full percentage point suggested by our December 2015 projections. Reassessing Longer-Run Conditions The slower-than-anticipated increase in our federal funds rate target in 2015 and 2016 reflected more than just the inflation, job market, and foreign developments I mentioned. During that period, the FOMC and most private forecasters generally lowered their assessments of the longer-run neutral level of the real federal funds rate. Indeed, at our October 2015 meeting, the FOMC had a comprehensive discussion of neutral real interest rates and was impressed by the breadth of evidence suggesting that those rates had declined both here and abroad, and that the decline had been going on for some time. In response to this growing evidence, the median assessment by FOMC participants of the longer-run level of the real federal funds rate fell from 1-3/4 percent in June 2014 to 1-1/2 percent in December 2015 and then to 1 percent in December 2016. These reassessments reflected, in part, the persistence of surprisingly sluggish productivity growth--both in the United States and abroad--and suggested that fewer federal funds rate increases would be necessary than previously thought to scale back accommodation. Partly in response to persistently slow wage growth, FOMC participants and private forecasters have in recent years lowered their estimates of the normal longer-run rate of unemployment. The median projection of FOMC participants of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate fell from about 5-1/4 percent in June 2014 to approximately 4-3/4 percent in December 2016. Other things being equal, a lower longer-run level of the unemployment rate suggests that the economy has greater scope to create jobs without generating too much inflation. 11 Thus, the downward revisions to FOMC participants' views on the unemployment rate over the longer run contributed to our assessment that monetary policy could stay accommodative longer than we had anticipated in 2014. Further Progress since Mid-2016 The U.S. economy has exhibited remarkable resilience in the face of adverse shocks in recent years, and economic developments since mid-2016 have reinforced the Committee's confidence that the economy is on track to achieve our statutory goals. Job gains have remained quite solid, and the unemployment rate, at 4.8 percent in January, is now in line with the median of FOMC participants' estimates of its longer-run normal level. On the whole, the prospects for further moderate economic growth look encouraging, particularly as risks emanating from abroad appear to have receded somewhat. The Committee currently assesses that the risks to the outlook are roughly balanced. Moreover, after remaining disappointingly low through mid-2016, inflation moved up during the second half of 2016, mainly because of the diminishing effects of the earlier declines in energy prices and import prices. More recently, higher energy prices appear to have temporarily boosted inflation, with the total PCE price index rising nearly 2 percent in the 12 months ending in January. Core PCE inflation--which excludes volatile energy and food prices and, therefore, tends to be a better indicator of future inflation--has been running near 1-3/4 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved up, on net, in recent months, although they remain low. With the job market strengthening and inflation rising toward our target, the median assessment of FOMC participants as of last December was that a cumulative 3/4 percentage point increase in the target range for the federal funds rate would likely be appropriate over the course of this year. In light of current economic conditions, such an increase would be consistent with the Committee's expectation that it will raise the target range for the federal funds rate at a gradual pace and would bring the real federal funds rate close to some estimates of its current neutral level. However, partly because my colleagues and I expect the neutral real federal funds rate to rise somewhat over the longer run, we projected additional gradual rate hikes in 2018 and 2019. Our individual projections for the appropriate path for the federal funds rate reflect economic forecasts that generally envision that economic activity will expand at a moderate pace in coming years, labor market conditions will strengthen somewhat further, and inflation will be at or near 2 percent over the medium term. In short, we currently judge that it will be appropriate to gradually increase the federal funds rate if the economic data continue to come in about as we expect. Indeed, at our meeting later this month, the Committee will evaluate whether employment and inflation are continuing to evolve in line with our expectations, in which case a further adjustment of the federal funds rate would likely be appropriate. Nonetheless, as we have said many times--and as my discussion today demonstrates--monetary policy cannot be and is not on a preset course. As in 2015 and 2016, the Committee stands ready to adjust its assessment of the appropriate path for monetary policy if unanticipated developments materially change the economic outlook. Monetary Policy Is Not a Panacea The U.S. economy has shown great improvement and is close to meeting our congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability, but we of course recognize that important challenges remain. For instance, as we noted in our latest Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, the ongoing expansion has been the slowest since World War II, with real GDP growth averaging only about 2 percent per year. 12 This subdued pace reflects, in part, slower growth in the labor force in recent years--compared with much of the post-World War II period--and disappointing productivity growth both in the United States and abroad. Our report also noted that, despite a notable pickup in 2015, real incomes for the median family were still a bit lower than they were prior to the Great Recession, and the gains during this economic recovery have been skewed toward the top of the income distribution, as has been the case for quite some time. Families at the 10th percentile of the income distribution earned about 4 percent less in 2015 than they did in 2007, whereas families at the 90th percentile earned about 4 percent more. In addition, the economic circumstances of blacks and Hispanics, while improved since the depths of the recession, remain worse, on average, that those of whites or Asians. These unwelcome developments unfortunately reflect structural challenges that lie substantially beyond the reach of monetary policy. Monetary policy cannot, for instance, generate technological breakthroughs or affect demographic factors that would boost real GDP growth over the longer run or address the root causes of income inequality. And monetary policy cannot improve the productivity of American workers. Fiscal and regulatory policies--which are of course the responsibility of the Administration and the Congress--are best suited to address such adverse structural trends. Conclusion To conclude, we at the Federal Reserve must remain squarely focused on our congressionally mandated goals. The economy has essentially met the employment portion of our mandate and inflation is moving closer to our 2 percent objective. This outcome suggests that our goal-focused, outlook-dependent approach to scaling back accommodation over the past couple of years has served the U.S. economy well. This same approach will continue to drive our policy decisions in the months and years ahead. With that in mind, our policy aims to support continued growth of the American economy in pursuit of our congressionally mandated objectives. We do that, as I have noted, with an eye always on the risks. To that end, we realize that waiting too long to scale back some of our support could potentially require us to raise rates rapidly sometime down the road, which in turn could risk disrupting financial markets and pushing the economy into recession. Having said that, I currently see no evidence that the Federal Reserve has fallen behind the curve, and I therefore continue to have confidence in our judgment that a gradual removal of accommodation is likely to be appropriate. However, as I have noted, unless unanticipated developments adversely affect the economic outlook, the process of scaling back accommodation likely will not be as slow as it was during the past couple of years. References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017). Monetary Policy Report (PDF) . Washington: Board of Governors, February. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects," Economic Journal , vol. 122 (November), pp. F415-46. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). " The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2016). " Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-073. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Yellen, Janet (2016). " The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future ," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26. -------- (2017). " The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19. 1. When the federal funds rate was near zero and we felt the economy still needed more support, the FOMC acted, beginning in 2008, to purchase longer-term securities. Although we stopped increasing the size of our securities portfolio in 2014, we have been reinvesting principal payments from our securities holdings ever since. We have said that we expect to maintain this policy until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way. We have also said that, when it becomes appropriate to reduce the size of our balance sheet, we will do so primarily by letting maturing assets run off our balance sheet. Return to text 2. See Yellen (2017). Return to text 3. This estimate of the neutral real federal funds rate is based on the difference between the medians of the longer-run projections for the federal funds rate and inflation submitted by individual FOMC participants for the December 2016 FOMC meeting. The most recent Summary of Economic Projections, an addendum to the minutes of that meeting, is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20161214ep.htm . Return to text 4. See, for instance, Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016). Return to text 5. The estimate of the actual value of the real federal funds rate (around minus 1 percent) is based on the difference between the current value of the effective federal funds rate (close to 0.66 percent) and the latest reading on inflation as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding energy and food items (1-3/4 percent). Return to text 6. The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf (PDF) . Return to text 7. See Yellen (2016). Return to text 8. For a discussion of our monetary policy during the 2008-14 period, see, for instance, Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). Return to text 9. The FOMC's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans are available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm . Several studies support the notion that maintaining the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet at an elevated level is consistent with keeping a highly accommodative policy stance, particularly when short-term interest rates are close to zero, as it was the case in 2014--see, for instance, D'Amico and others (2012) and many of the references in Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). Large Federal Reserve holdings of longer-term securities reduce the total amount of such securities available for purchase by the public, exerting upward pressure on their prices and, thus, depressing their yields and contributing to lower borrowing costs for American families and businesses. Return to text 10. These concerns were reinforced somewhat by a decline in market-based measures of inflation compensation. Return to text 11. The assessment that there was perhaps more room for improvement in the labor market than previously thought was reinforced by data showing that the labor force participation rate remained relatively stable in 2016, rather than declining as many had expected. Return to text 12. See Board of Governors (2017). Return to text Last Update: March 03, 2017 Back to Top
