Perspectives on Cybersecurity, the Financial System, and the Federal Reserve Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2019 Ohio Bankers Day Ohio Division of Financial Institutions Columbus, OH April 4, 2019 1 Introduction I thank the Ohio Division of Financial Institutions for inviting me to be a part of the 2019 Ohio Bankers Day. Bankers have a unique perspective from which to gather information on the health of the economy. I appreciate the insights I gain from speaking with bankers throughout the Cleveland Fed’s District, including those who serve on our Board of Directors and our Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, and I am looking forward to hearing your questions and comments after my prepared remarks. I do not need to tell this audience that banking plays an important role in supporting a strong economy. The credit, savings, and payment services banks provide help to foster economic growth. In offering these financial services, banks have to take on risk, and managing that risk is essential to ensuring that the financial system remains resilient. The financial crisis painfully demonstrated the high costs imposed on households, businesses, and banks – indeed, the entire economy – when the financial system is impaired. Much progress has been made since those dark days. Regulatory changes and the steps bankers themselves have taken to shore up their risk management practices have led to a stronger and safer banking system. The banking system is better capitalized, institutions are in a stronger liquidity position, there is an effective regime for stress testing, and the ability to resolve the largest institutions when they falter has been improved. Regulators are now in the process of tailoring the regulatory regime so that the strictest requirements are imposed on those institutions that pose the largest risks and the regime can continue to support financial system resiliency. Even though progress has been made, we should never forget that the financial system is constantly evolving and there will always be new risks on the horizon to assess and manage. Perhaps the most dynamic risks are those related to cybersecurity, which I will focus on for the majority of my talk. But before that, I would like to spend a few minutes on the economy and monetary policy. Of course, the 2 views I will present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The Economy and Monetary Policy The Federal Reserve’s monetary policy goals, which are mandated by Congress, are price stability and maximum employment. Currently, with respect to these goals, the overall economy is doing well: labor markets are strong and underlying inflation is consistent with our 2 percent goal. But recent data have been mixed and indicate that growth softened in the first quarter compared to last year’s 3 percent pace. In my view, the most likely case is that this weakness will be temporary and that growth for the year will be at or slightly above my estimate of 2 percent trend growth, that labor markets will continue to be strong, and that inflation will stay near 2 percent, aside from the transitory effects of changes in energy prices and the usual volatility in the monthly data. On the positive side, incomes continue to grow, reflecting the strength of the labor market, and recent readings indicate that labor productivity is rising after being quite low over the past five years. In addition, the tightening in financial conditions in the fourth quarter of last year has mostly reversed, and business, consumer, and investor sentiment have improved since the start of the year. The postponement of additional tariffs that were set to be imposed on imports from China has reduced some uncertainty and has given firms more time to reorient their supply chains. A resolution of uncertainty around trade policy could encourage further investment spending. Our District contacts across a number of sectors report that business is good and has picked up after slowing at the end of last year. On the down side, continued uncertainty over trade policy could weigh on investment spending; growth abroad, including in Europe and China, is slowing; and the outcome of Brexit is unclear. In addition, corporate debt is at very high levels; underwriting standards on leveraged loans have been weakening for some time, with a larger share of these loans going to less creditworthy borrowers; and commercial real estate valuations remain lofty. These factors have the potential to amplify an economic downturn, were one to occur. 3 At its March meeting two weeks ago, the FOMC elected not to make any change in its policy rate, the federal funds rate, and I supported that decision. The current target range for the federal funds rate is 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent, which is at the bottom of the range of FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer- run neutral rate, a level that neither stimulates nor restricts the economy and is consistent with maximum employment and price stability. Given the current level of interest rates, and little sign that inflation is poised to rise appreciably despite the strength in labor markets, I see no urgency to change our policy stance. In my view, monetary policy does not appear to be far behind or far ahead of the curve. Before determining any further adjustments in the policy rate, we can take the opportunity to continue to gather information, see how the economy is evolving, and assess our medium-run economic forecast and the risks to that forecast. Could we be done with policy rate increases this cycle? It is possible, but if the economy performs along the lines I think is the most likely case – with growth picking back up to, or slightly above, trend, labor markets remaining strong, and inflation staying near 2 percent – the fed funds rate may need to move a bit higher than current levels. As we continue to assess the outlook, I believe that the economy is going to give us a good sense of whether policy is where it needs to be or whether further action is needed. At its March meeting, the FOMC also released further information regarding our plans for normalizing the Fed’s balance sheet. Our intention is to hold no more assets than the amount necessary to implement monetary policy effectively and efficiently within an abundant reserves framework. The Fed’s balance sheet grew as a result of actions we took to address the financial crisis and Great Recession. Once we had moved our policy rate down to essentially zero, to add further monetary accommodation, we began purchasing agency mortgage-backed securities, agency debt, and longer-term Treasury securities in order to put downward pressure on long-term interest rates. The assets on the Fed’s balance sheet swelled, and bank reserves, one of the liabilities on our balance sheet, rose substantially. Since October 2017, the Fed has been letting these longer-term assets gradually roll off our balance sheet, and bank reserves are now down considerably from their peak level. We will be slowing the asset runoff in May and will cease the 4 runoff at the end of September. At that point, the average level of reserves will still likely be somewhat above the level needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. So we anticipate keeping the amount of assets on our balance sheet roughly constant for a time, and as currency and other non-reserves liabilities continue to gradually rise, reserves will gradually fall. Once the FOMC decides that reserves have declined to the necessary level, assets will begin to rise again to keep pace with the trend growth in demand for our non-reserves liabilities and to maintain the appropriate level of reserves in the system.1 In terms of the composition of the Fed’s balance-sheet assets, the FOMC plans to return to holding mainly Treasury securities and will be making decisions on how best to make that transition at upcoming meetings. That is a brief summary of my views on the economy and monetary policy. Now let me turn to cybersecurity. Cybersecurity Is an Important Part of Financial Stability It would be difficult to determine the level of safety and soundness of an individual bank or of the financial system overall without paying attention to the risks to cybersecurity. While much progress has been made to address more typical banking risks, including credit, liquidity, and operational risks, cyber risks are expanding. As businesses have become more reliant on technology, efforts to disrupt an institution’s operations; to steal, corrupt, or destroy data and intellectual property; or to divert funds have become more prevalent. Although it is hard to come up with firm numbers, the U.S. Council of Economic Advisers has estimated that malicious cyber activity cost the U.S. economy between $57 billion and $109 billion in 2016, and other estimates suggest those costs are rising.2 Firms are spending significant amounts on their cybersecurity, with one estimate at nearly $124 billion globally in 1 Federal Open Market Committee (2019). 2 Council of Economic Advisers (2018) and Kashyap and Wetherilt (2018). 5 2019.3 While all businesses face cyber risks, given the critical role the financial sector plays in the overall health of the U.S. and global economy, the stakes are particularly high in the financial services industry. Cyber risks could be viewed as a form of operational risk, but given the potential for the widespread impact of cyber attacks on the financial sector, I think it pays to put cyber risks into a special category.4 One reason is that cyber risks are becoming increasingly sophisticated. Cyber attacks have become more systematic, maliciously targeting financial firms and playing out over time for maximum effect. So, increasingly creative solutions must be found to address cyber risks. One example is Sheltered Harbor, an industry initiative that provides participant financial institutions a way to store data independent of the bank’s own infrastructure. This can help make recovery quicker after an attack is detected. 5 But a further complication is that detection can be difficult; an institution may believe it has backed up its good data, but those data may already have been compromised by malicious code that has infiltrated the institution’s system. Instead of being idiosyncratic and affecting only a few firms, as many operational risks are, cyber threats are more likely to be correlated across institutions because of the complex interconnections and dependencies among financial firms. This means cyber threats are more likely to have wider spread negative impacts than a typical operational problem that might arise from a failed system or process. Trading platforms, settlement and payments systems, and central securities depositories are all critical infrastructures on which financial firms depend, and if these systems go down, there are few substitutes. In addition, the advent of new technologies like cloud computing creates another concentrated risk, as there are only a handful of third-party providers of these services. 3 See Kashyap and Wetherilt (2018). 4 Kashyap and Wetherilt (2018) and Healey, et al. (2018) discuss how cybersecurity differs from other types of operational risks in the financial sector. 5 See shelteredharbor.org for further information. 6 As much as individual firms are investing in cybersecurity – and it is a lot – as a nation and globally, we are likely underinvesting. This is because cybersecurity is a public good: the overall financial system conveys benefits to us all. Individual institutions certainly have incentives to invest in their own cybersecurity, and banks have been making major investments to monitor and protect their systems against attack. But the social benefit conveyed by a well-functioning and resilient financial system, one in which the public can continue to have a lot of confidence, likely requires a higher level of investment in cybersecurity than what individual firms would decide to do on their own, as they consider the tradeoff between the risk of loss to their firm from a cyber attack versus the cost of that investment. In addition, to the extent that individual firms are relying on shared services, in considering how much to invest in their own cybersecurity, they should be entertaining the possibility that those shared services could be heavily taxed in the event other firms are attacked at the same time they are 6 or that the shared service itself could be the entry point for a system-wide attack. These types of externalities may not be part of any one firm’s investment decision. Moreover, an individual firm may rely on others in the shared network to make investments that make the network more secure, but if every firm thinks this way, there will be underinvestment in security.7 Cybersecurity and the Fed The public good aspect of cybersecurity and the Federal Reserve’s role in ensuring the resiliency of the financial system mean that cybersecurity is a high priority for the Fed. The Fed’s approach builds on techniques that we have successfully applied to other forms of financial system oversight, namely, developing clear and consistent standards for assessing financial institutions’ preparedness; establishing corporate governance best practices with respect to cybersecurity; acquiring and deploying Fed staff with 6 See Kashyap and Wetherilt (2018). 7 Sablik (2017) discusses the underinvestment problem. See, also, the Council of Economic Advisers (2018). The U.S. Department of the Treasury (2013) outlines the role government incentives can play in driving private-sector actions to strengthen defenses against cyber threats. 7 the necessary technical skills to assess risk-management practices; and encouraging and creating avenues for information sharing among financial institutions and regulators. While much of the Fed’s cybersecurity effort focuses on the nation’s largest, most complex banking organizations, we have raised the expectations of cyber preparedness for all of the institutions we supervise, including regional and community banks. In fact, since 2015, the Cleveland Fed has been co- leading the Federal Reserve System’s annual national horizontal review of cybersecurity for banks with assets between $100 billion and $500 billion. Fed examiners assess a bank’s cybersecurity along a number of dimensions. Effective cybersecurity requires effective cyber-risk governance, including leadership’s engagement in oversight of the firm’s cybersecurity programs. The bank needs to have effective programs for identifying risks and vulnerabilities, including those within its own technology infrastructure, those associated with vendors and third-party technology providers, and those posed by new products. The bank is also assessed on its ability to monitor and manage those risks. This includes basics such as adequate technology inventories and timely software patching to more complex processes for incident response and plans for timely recovery and restoration of critical functions. The Fed continues to work with other U.S. financial regulatory agencies and international authorities to harmonize cyber risk-management standards and regulatory expectations. We are looking for ways to coordinate cyber-risk supervisory activities for institutions subject to oversight from multiple regulators. The Fed is also aligning what it expects of banks in terms of identifying, protecting, detecting, responding to, and recovering from cyber attacks with the best-practice standards in the National Institute of Standards and Technology’s (NIST) cybersecurity framework. 8 Given the systemic nature of cyber risks and the potential for widespread disruption, collaboration between the regulators, government, financial institutions, and other private-sector firms is a crucial 8 See Quarles (2018) 8 ingredient for improving our cybersecurity. One form of this collaboration is tabletop exercises, which can improve the readiness of the industry and government to respond to a cyber incident. The Fed participates in the Hamilton Series of tabletop exercises, in collaboration with the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center (FS–ISAC), an important banking industry forum that promotes collaboration on critical security threats. These exercises are intended to improve public- and private-sector management of cyber risks. Participants have told us that they value these exercises because they promote consistent approaches and best practices in event response and recovery, and foster relationships with key regulatory officials. Further development and use of stress testing to assess the financial system’s resilience to cyber risks would be helpful. Just as horizontal stress testing has proven to be a useful tool in assessing the overall resilience of the financial system to credit and liquidity risks, stress testing could be used to assess how prepared individual firms and the overall system are to respond to and recover from a systemic cyber event such as the shutdown of a major clearing or settlement bank. Such a test could help evaluate firms’ plans for data and core systems recovery and their reliance on third parties to implement that plan. The Bank of England is applying these stress-testing techniques to evaluate whether financial firms are able to resume services within the tolerance set by the Bank of England in the face of a system-wide attack or data corruption that affects multiple firms and their service providers.9 Because cyber threats are not restricted by national borders, cross-border collaboration is also being pursued. For example, in November 2015, the U.S. and U.K. governments conducted a joint exercise with leading global financial firms to determine how the two governments would perform in the event of a large cyber attack on the financial systems in both countries.10 The Fed participated in the exercise, which evaluated incident-response handling and recovery, coordination, public communication, and 9 See Kashyap and Wetherilt (2018). 10 See U.S. Department of the Treasury (2015). 9 information handling. Indeed, information sharing is another critical ingredient for improving our cybersecurity. Without firms’ willingness to share information on cyber incidents, it is much harder to develop metrics to evaluate cyber resilience, to assess whether threat levels are rising or beginning to propagate through the financial system, and to determine whether the practices firms have in place actually are working to mitigate the risks. The Fed has been working with FS-ISAC to promote information sharing, and the Cleveland Fed is playing a national role in the collection of threat information. The Fed’s Cybersecurity Analytic Support Team (CAST) was created in 2015 and is based at the Cleveland Fed. This team tracks the latest cybersecurity developments across the financial sector in critical payment, clearing, and settlement systems, allowing it to gain a wide perspective on potential threats to the overall financial system and to better calibrate threat severity and impact. As its name implies, CAST casts a wide net in collecting this information and collaborates with the U.S. Department of the Treasury, other bank regulatory agencies, and the FBI. In addition to Federal Reserve System-level activities, the Cleveland Fed staff is also sharing its expertise on cybersecurity topics at industry and regulatory forums, and last year, the staff organized a regional conference on managing cyber risks from the C-suite, which some of you attended.11 Finally, the Federal Reserve is a provider of both wholesale and retail payment services to the public and the U.S. government. We need to maintain the public’s trust and confidence in our ability to deliver those services, so we are highly engaged in work to enhance the resiliency of our own systems, applications, and data against cybersecurity risks. We continue to be pro-active in looking for emerging threats and testing our systems and processes for vulnerabilities. This is only a brief summary of the work that is being done at the Federal Reserve, in partnership with other financial regulators, government agencies, and financial institutions, to help address the cyber risks 11 More information on the Cleveland Fed’s work on cybersecurity is available on our website at clevelandfed.org. See, for example, Stone (2018), which discusses key cybersecurity risks and implications for the financial sector and consumers. 10 to our financial system. The work includes enhancing systems for detecting and monitoring cyber risks, as well as improving our collective ability to respond to and recover from an attack. The landscape is very dynamic. New cyber risks are emerging; they are becoming more sophisticated and complex. Given the importance of the financial system to our economic health, it is incumbent on us all to continue to work together with some urgency so that we are better prepared for cyber threats to our financial stability. 11 References Council of Economic Advisers, “The Cost of Malicious Cyber Activity to the U.S. Economy,” February 2018. (https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/The-Cost-of-Malicious-Cyber-Activity-to-the- U.S.-Economy.pdf) Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), “Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans,” March 20, 2019. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy-normalization.htm) Healey, Jason, Patricia Mosser, Katheryn Rosen, and Adriana Tache, “The Future of Financial Stability and Cyber Risk,” The Brookings Institution Cybersecurity Project, October 2018. (https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-future-of-financial-stability-and-cyber-risk/) Kashyap, Anil K., and Anne Wetherilt, “Some Principles for Regulating Cyber Risk,” Centre for Economic Policy Research (CEPR) Discussion Paper No. DP 13324, November 17, 2018, and American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, forthcoming. (http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/anil.kashyap/research/papers/Some_Principles_for_Regulating_Cyber_ Risk.pdf) Quarles, Randal K., “Brief Thoughts on the Financial Regulatory System and Cybersecurity,” at the Financial Services Roundtable 2018 Spring Conference, Washington, D.C, February 26, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20180226b.htm) Sablik, Tim, “Cyberattacks and the Digital Dilemma,” Econ Focus, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Third Quarter 2017. (https://www.richmondfed.org/-/media/richmondfedorg/publications/research/econ_focus/2017/q3/ cover_story.pdf) Stone, Sydney, “The Threats, the Criminals, the Motives – Cybersecurity at the Fed,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, November 26, 2018. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/multimedia-storytelling/cybersecurity.aspx) U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Treasury Department Report to the President on Cybersecurity Incentives Pursuant to Executive Order 13636,” 2013. (https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/Documents/Supporting%20Analysis%20Treasury%20Report %20to%20the%20President%20on%20Cybersecurity%20Incentives_FINAL.pdf) U.S. Department of the Treasury, “Joint Statement from the U.S. Department of the Treasury and Her Majesty’s Treasury,” November 12, 2015. (https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/pages/jl0262.aspx)

Improving Our Monetary Policy Strategy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Panel Remarks for “Strategies for Monetary Policy: A Policy Conference” The Hoover Institution, Stanford University Stanford, CA May 3, 2019 1 Introduction I thank John Taylor for inviting me to participate in this conference. It’s a real pleasure to be on a panel moderated by Charles Plosser, whom I worked with at the Philly Fed. Although I learned a lot from Charles, the views I’ll present are my own and are not necessarily shared by my fellow panelists, other colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee, or the Federal Reserve System. The FOMC currently uses what has been called a flexible inflation-targeting framework to set monetary policy. It is briefly described in the FOMC’s statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy.1 In my view, this framework has served the FOMC well in effectively promoting our policy goals. A milestone was reached in January 2012 when the U.S. adopted an explicit numerical inflation goal. I am certain that Charles remembers very well the careful analysis and discussions that helped the FOMC reach a consensus on the explicit 2 percent goal and the statement that describes the FOMC’s approach to setting policy to promote its congressionally mandated goals of price stability and maximum employment. The FOMC is currently reviewing its policy framework. I am very supportive of this initiative. As a matter of good governance, a central bank should periodically review its assumptions, methods, and models, and to inform its evaluation, it should seek a wide range of perspectives, including those from experts in academia, the private sector, and other central banks. Another motivation to undertake the review now is that the post-crisis economic environment is expected to differ in some important ways from the pre-crisis world. Based on the aging of the population and the expected slowdown in population growth, higher demand for safe assets, and other factors, many economists anticipate that the longer-term equilibrium real interest rate will remain lower than in past decades.2 In fact, empirical estimates of the 1 See FOMC (2019). 2 See Mester (2018a). 2 equilibrium real fed funds rate, so-called r-star, while highly uncertain, are generally lower than in the past.3 This means there is a higher chance that the policy rate will be constrained by the zero lower bound, and that nontraditional monetary policy tools will need to be used more often. To the extent that these tools are less effective than the traditional interest rate tool or are otherwise constrained, the potential is for longer recessions and longer bouts of inflation well below target.4 In addition, fiscal policy’s ability to buffer against macroeconomic shocks is also likely to be constrained, given projected large fiscal deficits and high government debt-to-GDP ratios.5 This raises the question of whether changes to our monetary policy framework would be helpful in maintaining macroeconomic stability in this environment. A number of suggestions have been made for alternative monetary policy frameworks that potentially offer some benefits in a low-interest-rate environment. These include setting an inflation target that is higher than 2 percent (an option not being considered by the FOMC in its framework review), using price-level targeting or nominal GDP targeting instead of inflation targeting, targeting average inflation over the business cycle or some other time frame, or using what former Chair Ben Bernanke has called temporary price-level targeting (which is essentially doing inflation targeting in normal times and price- level targeting once the policy rate is constrained by the zero lower bound). An idea that has received somewhat less attention is defining the inflation goal in terms of a range centered on 2 percent rather than a point target.6 Although these alternative frameworks have theoretical appeal, none of them is without implementation challenges. For example, many of them work well in models of perfect credibility and 3 For FOMC projections, see FOMC (2014) and FOMC (2019). For a review of the literature on the equilibrium interest rate, see Hamilton, et al. (2015). 4 Other government policies might also be brought to bear to increase the long-term growth rate and equilibrium interest rate, which would give monetary policy more room to act. Such policies would focus on increasing productivity growth and labor force growth. 5 See Peek, Rosengren, and Tootell (2018). 6 For further discussion of these monetary policy frameworks, see Mester (2018b) and Mester (2018c). 3 commitment, where the public understands the framework and believes future Committees will follow through, and the Committee actually does follow through, implying that the Committee has control of inflation expectations. Whether these assumptions would hold in practice is an open question. One needs to ask whether it is credible for policymakers to commit to keep interest rates low to make up for past shortfalls of inflation from target even when demand is growing strongly or to act to bring inflation down in the face of a supply shock by tightening policy even in the face of weak demand. It is not clear what actually would happen to inflation expectations in these scenarios despite what is assumed in the models. So the FOMC is going to have to evaluate the assumptions that drive the theoretical appeal of each framework and determine whether in practice the net benefits of any of the alternatives will outweigh those of the flexible inflation-targeting framework, and if not, what, if any, enhancements should be made to our current framework. Regardless of the framework the FOMC ultimately decides on, the public’s expectations about future monetary policy are an important part of the transmission mechanism of policy to the economy. This means effective communication will be an essential component of the framework. I believe there are ways we can enhance our communications about our policy approach that would make any framework more effective. Let me touch on three. (1) Clarify how monetary policy affects the economy and which aspects of the economy can be influenced by monetary policy and which aspects cannot. Monetary policy is more effective when the public’s and market participants’ policy expectations are aligned with our policy decisions. Before this alignment can occur, the public needs to have a basic understanding of our monetary policy goals and what monetary policy can achieve and what it cannot. My concern is that this understanding has diminished since the Great Recession. Regardless of the framework, the FOMC’s strategy document should articulate the relationship between monetary policy and our two policy goals of price stability and maximum employment. We should clarify that over the 4 longer run, monetary policy can affect only inflation and not the underlying real structural aspects of the economy such as the long-run natural rate of unemployment or maximum employment. Although this concept is touched on in our current monetary policy strategy document, I do not think that the public fully understands. Indeed, former Chair Janet Yellen had to explain in one of her post-FOMC meeting press conferences that in an earlier speech, she did not mean to imply that she favored running a high- pressure economy as an experiment to affect longer-run growth and unemployment.7 I think we could do a better job of explaining how monetary policy promotes the economy’s growing at potential and operating at maximum employment. In particular, we tend to move our policy rate up when resource utilization tightens and down when resource utilization eases in order to bring our policy rate into alignment with the economy’s natural rate of interest, which changes over the business cycle as the economy adjusts to shocks. There doesn’t need to be an exploitable Phillips curve tradeoff between the unemployment rate and the inflation rate in order for policymakers to want to respond to changes in the unemployment rate, an indicator of resource utilization. 8 The response is not an attempt to actively use monetary policy to affect the longer-run growth rate of the economy or the longer-run unemployment rate. A benefit of explaining things in this way makes it clear that the FOMC is not trying to rob the economy of jobs when it raises interest rates. Another benefit is that it should allay concerns that because the empirical Phillips curve has flattened, monetary policy has become anemic. Improving the public’s understanding of how monetary policy works and what it can achieve would help not only in normal times but also in bad times. The Great Recession was an enormous negative shock, some part of which was likely permanent or very persistent rather than transitory. Monetary policy 7 See Yellen (2016), p. 9. 8 Brainard (2018) discusses the shorter-run neutral rate and longer-run equilibrium interest rate. 5 should not have been expected to make up for that permanent loss. Fiscal policy should have taken on a larger part of the burden. (2) Clarify how uncertainty is accounted for in monetary policymaking and incorporate this uncertainty into monetary policy strategy to avoid giving a false sense of precision. According to Voltaire, “Uncertainty is an uncomfortable position, but certainty is an absurd one.” In our context, this means it is important to convey that monetary policymakers have to deal with uncertainty in several forms. Monetary policy has to be forward looking because it affects the economy with a lag, but the economy is buffeted by shocks that can lead economic conditions to evolve differently than anticipated. Moreover, our view of economic conditions in real time can be cloudy because the data come in with a lag and many economic data are revised over time. In addition, there is model uncertainty. The public needs to understand that given the lags and revisions in the data, incoming information can alter not only the policymaker’s view of the expected future evolution of the economy but also his or her understanding of current and past economic conditions. New information could alter the expected future path of policy and might even result in ex post regret of a recent action. Robert Hetzel says that policymaking has a flavor of “guess and correct.” 9 It is a normal part of monetary policymaking that policymakers will always be learning about whether their policy settings are the appropriate ones to promote their goals. The public has to hold the FOMC accountable for its performance, but it should not hold monetary policymakers to an unrealistic standard. The FOMC took an important step in communicating uncertainty when it began showing 70 percent uncertainty bands around the median projections of FOMC participants, but these are not emphasized. I think they deserve more attention and should be released at 9 See Hetzel (2019). 6 the time of the post-FOMC press conference. They are a good illustration of the reasonable amount of deviation to expect between the projections and outcomes. Some have argued that the FOMC’s projections of appropriate monetary policy, the so-called dot plot, should be dropped because actual policy can differ from the projections. I think that would be a mistake. The dots can change over time because of economic developments, but that’s a design feature, not a flaw. Omitting the dot plot would not eliminate the uncertainty around the projections, the divergence in views across FOMC participants, or the fact that policymaking always entails learning and recalibration, but it would be a significant step back in transparency. We need to recognize uncertainty in our broader monetary policy strategy as well. Consider the FOMC’s inflation target. After much deliberation, the Committee chose a point target instead of a range and a total inflation measure rather than a core measure. While there were arguments on both sides, the Committee was persuaded that a point target would better anchor inflation expectations. Implicit in the choice was that the Committee would tolerate small deviations from target given the precision with which we can measure inflation, the precision with which we can guide the economy, and the typical revisions to the PCE inflation measures, which tend to be revised up over time. 10 It is interesting to think through whether our policy choices or communications since 2012 might have differed had the Committee opted for a range rather than a point target, as some other central banks do, and for a core measure rather than a total measure of inflation. These data revisions and measurement issues, as well as potential difficulties in maintaining anchored inflation expectations during the periods of higher inflation meant to make up for periods of lower inflation, and vice versa, would seem to be amplified in price-level targeting and nominal GDP targeting frameworks. 10 Croushore (forthcoming) finds that the average revision from initial release to first annual benchmark revision to four-quarter PCE inflation over the period 1965Q3 to 2015Q4 was 0.10 percentage point and the average revision to four-quarter core PCE inflation over the period 1995Q3 to 2015Q4 was 0.14 percentage point. 7 (3) Clarify our monetary policy strategy by taking a more systematic approach to our policy decisions and in how we communicate those decisions. Households, businesses, and investors make economic and financial decisions based on their expectations of the future, including the future course of monetary policy, and the FOMC strives to avoid surprising the public with its policy decisions. The communications challenge for the FOMC is to give the public a good sense of how policy is likely to respond conditional on how the economy evolves without implying that policy is pre-committed to a particular policy path regardless of how the economy evolves. Essentially, the FOMC needs to convey the strategy it uses to determine its policy actions over time to promote achievement of its policy goals, i.e., its reaction function. And this will be true regardless of which monetary policy framework the FOMC ultimately adopts. Ironically, the FOMC’s strategy document does not offer much in the way of strategy, and this can lead to a misunderstanding that our policy decisions are discretionary. The term “data-dependent” has been used to explain the FOMC’s policymaking strategy, but this term could be potentially misinterpreted as suggesting that policy will react to every short-run change in the data rather than the accumulation of changes that affect the medium-run outlook. A more systematic approach to setting monetary policy can better align the public’s policy expectations with policy decisions and help to reduce some of the uncertainty around how we conduct monetary policy. It can help insulate monetary policy from short-run political considerations, and it can also offer more policy continuity over time as Committee members change. In a time of rising public skepticism about “experts,” which can undermine public trust in institutions, being systematic will help the public understand how our decisions are actually made, which can enhance the Fed’s credibility. The question is how to ensure that we are setting policy systematically and how to convey this to the public. I have three suggestions. First, while judgment will likely always be a part of policymaking, simple monetary policy rules can play a more prominent role in our policy deliberations and 8 communications.11 The FOMC has been reluctant to relinquish policymaking to following a simple rule, because no one rule works well enough across a variety of economic models and circumstances. But the Board of Governors has begun to include a discussion of rules as benchmarks in the monetary policy report,12 and frameworks that try to build in some commitments and constraints on future policy actions, such as price-level targeting, average inflation targeting, and nominal GDP targeting, are being discussed. This suggests that systematic policymaking is garnering more support. As a first step, selecting a few benchmark rules that have been shown to yield good economic outcomes and using these as reference points to aid policy discussions and communicating why our policy may or may not differ from the rules’ policy descriptions could go some way in ensuring that our decisions are derived in a systematic way and could help us explain our own policy reaction function to the public. A second suggestion is to enhance our own FOMC projections by asking the participants to provide a set of economic projections conditioned on a common policy path, in addition to the current projections, which are conditioned on each individual participant’s view of appropriate policy. This common path might come from a policy rule. This would be a step toward achieving a coherent consensus FOMC forecast, which has been a challenge but which could serve as the benchmark for understanding the FOMC’s policy actions and post-meeting statements, a recommendation I have made in the past. 13 My third suggestion to help communicate systematic policymaking is to make our post-meeting FOMC statement consistent from meeting to meeting and less focused on short-term changes in the data released between FOMC meetings and more focused on the medium-run outlook and a consistent set of indicators 11 The Cleveland Fed provides updates for a set of monetary policy rules and their outcomes across several forecasts on the Cleveland Fed’s website, and the Federal Reserve Board’s Monetary Policy Report now includes a section on policy rules. See Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (March 22, 2019). 12 See Board of Governors (2019), pp. 36-39. 13 See Mester (2016). Hetzel (2019) also proposes a method to determine an FOMC consensus forecast that would entail the Committee’s agreeing to its preferred reaction function at the start of each year, and then using an iterative process among FOMC members based on that rule and the Board staff’s economic model. 9 on inflation, inflation expectations, the unemployment rate, employment growth, output growth, and financial conditions. Each statement could provide the rationale for the policy decision in terms of how accumulated changes in this consistent set of economic and financial conditions have or have not influenced the Committee’s assessment of the factors relevant for policy, i.e., the arguments in our reaction function. The statement would also consistently articulate the Committee’s assessment of risks to the outlook and other considerations that the Committee is taking into account in determining current and future policy. This assessment would be informed by the analysis of alternative forecast scenarios, which are discussed at each FOMC meeting. If we provided more consistency about the conditions we systematically assess in calibrating the stance of policy, the public and market participants would get a better sense of the FOMC’s reaction function over time and their policy expectations would better align with those of policymakers. I note that all of the suggestions I have made today are relevant regardless of the framework the FOMC ultimately decides to use for setting monetary policy. 10 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Monetary Policy Report,” February 22, 2019. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20190222_mprfullreport.pdf) Brainard, Lael, “What Do We Mean by Neutral and What Role Does It Play in Monetary Policy?” Remarks at the Detroit Economic Club, Detroit, MI, September 12, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20180912a.htm) Croushore, Dean, “Revisions to PCE Inflation Measures: Implications for Monetary Policy,” International Journal of Central Banking (forthcoming). Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, “Simple Monetary Policy Rules,” update of March 22, 2019. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/our-research/indicators-and-data/simple-monetary-policy-rules) FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 18-19, 2014,” April 2014. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20140319.pdf) FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 19-20, 2019,” April 2019. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20190320.pdf) FOMC, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” January 29, 2019. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf) Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West, “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future,” U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, February 2015, revised August 2015. (https://research.chicagobooth.edu/-/media/research/igm/docs/2015-usmpf.pdf) Hetzel, Robert L., “Rules versus Discretion Revisited: A Proposal to Make the Strategy of Monetary Policy Transparent,” unpublished manuscript, March 20, 2019. Mester, Loretta J., “Demographics and Their Implications for the Economy and Policy,” Cato Journal 2 (Spring/Summer 2018a), pp. 399-413. (https://www.cato.org/cato-journal/springsummer-2018/demographics-their-implications-economy- policy) Mester, Loretta J., “Monetary Policy Frameworks,” National Association for Business Economics and American Economic Association Session at the Allied Social Sciences Association Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, PA, January 5, 2018b (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20180105-monetary-policy- frameworks) Mester, Loretta J., “Remarks on the FOMC’s Monetary Policy Framework,” panel remarks at the 2018 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, NY, February 23, 2018c. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20180223-remarks-on-the-fomcs- monetary-policy-framework) 11 Mester, Loretta J., “Acknowledging Uncertainty,” Shadow Open Market Committee Fall Meeting, New York, NY, October 7, 2016. (http://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20161007-acknowledging- uncertainty) Peek, Joe, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell, “Some Unpleasant Stabilization Arithmetic,” presentation at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s 62nd Economic Conference, “What Are the Consequences of Long Spells of Low Interest Rates?” Boston, Massachusetts, September 8, 2018. (https://www.bostonfed.org/news-and-events/speeches/2018/some-unpleasant-stabilization- arithmetic.aspx) Yellen, Janet, “Transcript of Chair Yellen’s Press Conference,” December 14, 2016. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20161214.pdf)
