The Macroprudential Implications of the 1990s Japanese Financial Crisis By Eric S. Rosengren June 21, 2019 Eltville, Germany Macroprudential Conference Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Four takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren's June 21 remarks at the 5th Annual Macroprudential Conference held in Eltville, Germany Takeaway: The Japanese financial crisis of the late 1990s had significant implications for both the Japanese and global economies. Excerpt: "…Japan's domestic economy was severely impacted, with lasting effects. In addition, because of the global reach of the largest Japanese banks, the problems were essentially exported, as Japanese banks pulled back on foreign lending in order to bring assets better in line with their shrunken capital. Essentially, Japanese banks reduced their global footprint." Takeaway: Effective use of macroprudential tools – that is, banking regulations aimed at mitigating financial-system risk – could have lessened the crisis in Japan. Unfortunately, it wasn't until the financial crisis of 2008 that countries began to work on improving macroprudential policies. Excerpt: "…my own view is that with effective implementation of macroprudential policies, many of the issues would have been substantially mitigated." Takeaway: Bank stress tests and the use of a countercyclical capital buffer (or CCyB) are two macroprudential tools that emerged from the financial crisis which could have reduced the severity of the banking crisis in Japan. Excerpt: "Rigorous stress tests would have revealed emerging problems, required retention of more bank capital, and discouraged aggressive lending. A CCyB would similarly have brought about a larger capital cushion to absorb shocks, which would have reduced the need for such dramatic shrinkage of lending when asset prices declined." Takeaway: The Japanese banking system is again being affected by adverse economic conditions. Like the U.S., Japan might benefit from considering an expanded set of macroprudential tools. Excerpt: "Despite the passage of time and adoption of better policies, one could argue that the Japanese banking system is now, once again, being threatened by adverse economic conditions. A shrinking population, aging demographics, and very low interest rates provide very little room for Japanese banks to operate profitably. This of course provides an incentive to reach for yield, potentially implying additional risk-taking. …All this raises questions about how resilient the banking system is, or could be, in the face of some future global downturn." collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Payments Innovation Keywords Japanese economy , macroprudential policy , Countercyclical Capital Buffer , stress test , Japanese financial crisis , monetary policy

Central Bank Independence: What It Is, What It Isn’t – and the Importance of Accountability By Eric S. Rosengren July 19, 2019 New York, NY Annual Meeting of the Central Bank Research Association Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Six takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s July 19 remarks at the Annual Meeting of the Central Bank Research Association, held in New York City Takeaway: Central bank independence is not about deciding what overarching goals to pursue, but is rather about allowing the central bank to determine how best to pursue them. Excerpt: “For the Federal Reserve, while long-term goals are determined by Congress, the day-to-day implementation of policies is and should be conducted based on data and technical analysis, independent of short-term political objectives.” Takeaway: Several mechanisms to ensure the Federal Reserve’s accountability to Congress have been enacted since 1977, when the Federal Reserve Act was amended to provide explicit goals for the Fed. The Fed has also taken steps to increase transparency, which improves accountability. Excerpt: “…Increased transparency at the Fed has included clarifying annually our strategy of long-term goals and objectives, and adopting an explicit inflation target of 2 percent. What’s more, increased transparency around goals makes it easier for the public and Congress to evaluate how well the Fed’s actions are performing relative to those goals.” Takeaway: Studies focused on central bank independence have found countries with more independent central banks, such as the U.S., have lower inflation rates than those with less independent central banks. Excerpt: “With greater clarity on goals, and more transparency and communication around how policymakers alter policy to achieve those goals, there has been considerable success in changing the inflation experience. … The high and variable inflation of the 1970s has been replaced by a low and remarkably stable rate of inflation since the early 1990s.” Takeaway: It is possible that the goals of the U.S. central bank (which center on attaining medium-run economic prosperity) can differ substantially from the understandably shorter-term pressures facing elected officials. Excerpt: “Allowing the central bank the independence to alter its instruments as it deems necessary in the short- to medium-run reduces the possibility that political or partisan pressures will divert the central bank from its mandated monetary policy goals.” Takeaway: The Federal Reserve’s monetary policy framework has changed significantly over the past 50 years, in response to evolving conditions. This ability to dynamically change the implementation of monetary policy is a critical aspect of independence. Excerpt: “For a central bank to prove the value of its tactical independence, it needs to evolve with changes in the economy and explain clearly why its policies are consistent with achieving the overarching mandate from the peoples’ elected representatives.” Takeaway: There are many analogies to central bank independence in modern life. We ask people to act our behalf, with independence, all the time. Excerpt: “For example, lots of very smart people leave it to commercial airline pilots to get them to their destination, plotting the best course and flying the plane through any emergencies. But we expect the pilots to keep us informed, too.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords Central Bank Independence , Accountability , Congressional Oversight , monetary policy , Dual mandate

Weighing the Risks to the Economic Outlook By Eric S. Rosengren September 3, 2019 Easton, MA Federal Reserve and Monetary Policy Today Stonehill College Meehan School of Business Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Takeaway: It was an eventful August in the financial markets amid talk of additional tariffs and tax cuts, the falling 10-year Treasury rate, and volatility in stock prices. But the economic data and forecasts indicate a relatively good domestic economy. Excerpt: “Despite these headline-grabbing swings in financial conditions, domestic economic conditions have remained relatively benign. The economy grew by 2 percent in the second quarter. The unemployment rate reached nearly a 50-year low of 3.6 percent in April and currently stands at 3.7 percent. Inflation, as measured by the PCE price index, is running below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target.” Takeaway: The financial market gyrations – during a time of relatively strong U.S. economic conditions – seem to be explained by increased concerns about risks for the U.S. economy from international trade disruptions and other geopolitical situations. Excerpt: “Potential trade disruptions are emerging at a time when many U.S. trading partners are facing mounting economic challenges. … China is heavily reliant on trade, so trade restrictions will take a bite out of the country’s economic activity. … Japan, South Korea, and many European economies are even more dependent on trade than the U.S., and face a number of unusual challenges of their own.” Takeaway: An inverted yield curve – when long-term yields fall below short-term yields – is often seen to portend an economic downturn. But this view is not being echoed in equity markets, bond spreads, or economic forecasts. And this time, the inversion is being driven by the decline in longer-term rates, rather than policy actions to raise short-term rates. Excerpt: “An alternative explanation is that the inverted yield curve reflects challenging economic conditions in other countries … This provides an incentive for foreign investors to buy U.S. government securities. … But such an increase in demand pushes the price of U.S. securities up, and yields down.” Takeaway: Policymakers shouldn’t be overconfident the economy will be just fine or that an economic downturn is inevitable. The data bear watching closely for signs of risks materializing, to determine if any policy adjustments are necessary to achieve the Fed’s mandate. Excerpt: Should those risks materialize, and threaten the U.S. outlook, then “the appropriate monetary policy would be to ease aggressively. However, to date, these elevated risks have not become reality, at least for the U.S. economy.” Takeaway: Economic forecasts and the underlying data are consistent with a U.S. economy growing slightly above its potential rate. Continued strong consumption is key to that outlook – and has been offsetting weaknesses in other components of GDP. Excerpt: “If the consumer continues to spend, and global conditions do not deteriorate further, the economy is likely to grow around 2 percent, in part because the underpinnings of consumption growth – household income growth and household wealth – remain strong, and consumption accounts for about 70 percent of GDP in the U.S.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords Financial Markets , tariffs , Tax Cuts , Data , Financial Forecasts , Economic Conditions , Inverted Yield Curve , monetary policy
