A Perspective on the Economic Outlook Presented to CFA Society of San Diego San Diego, CA May 1, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 A Perspective on the Economic Outlook CFA Society of San Diego May 1, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction Thank you for inviting me to speak to the CFA Society of San Diego today. I have addressed chartered financial analysts in Philadelphia on a number of occasions, and I am pleased that travels to California this week afforded me the opportunity to accept your invitation to present my views on the economic outlook and monetary policy. Last week, I attended the most recent meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, or the FOMC, which is the body within the Federal Reserve responsible for determining monetary policy. As many of you know, according to the Committee’s structure, there are 12 voting members on the FOMC — the seven members of the Board of Governors in Washington always have a vote; currently only five of the seven seats are filled. The other voters include five of the 12 Reserve Bank presidents: the president of the New York Fed, who is a permanent voting member, and four other presidents, who serve one‐year terms on a rotating basis. This year happens to be one in which my colleague John Williams, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, is a voting member, as I was last year. Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee's assessment of the economy and policy options. Each of us prepares for the meetings by gathering information throughout our Districts, around the nation, and, in some cases, internationally. The federated structure draws on the strong roots of decentralized government that our country was founded on and ensures that our national monetary 2 policy has its roots not just in Washington or on Wall Street but also on Main Street and across our diverse nation. So conversations like the ones I’ve had with some of you today and with other individuals from business and community organizations help me gather and share timely information on the economy. This leads to more informed decisions as the Committee seeks to achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us in the Federal Reserve Act. Specifically, Congress has mandated that the Fed should conduct policy to “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long‐term interest rates.” Since moderate long‐term interest rates generally result when prices are stable and the economy is operating at full employment, it is often said that Congress has given the Fed a dual mandate. I believe the diversity of opinion around the FOMC table is one of its great strengths and serves to improve the quality of our decision‐making. Yet, it requires me to note that I speak for myself and not the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Economic Outlook Now let me turn to the state of our economy. We have now seen 11 consecutive quarters of expansion since mid‐2009, when the recession officially ended. In the third quarter of 2011 we finally surpassed the previous peak in real GDP, which occurred in the fourth quarter of 2007. The expansion, as you read about every day and most likely experience in your businesses, has not been particularly robust. To many, it occasionally feels like we take two steps forward only to take one step back. We finished 2011 with GDP growth of just 1.6 percent, compared to 3.1 percent in the prior year. Unexpected shocks early in the year, ranging from the disasters in Japan that led to supply chain disruptions in many industries, to flare‐ups in the Middle East and North Africa that led to a steep rise in oil prices, and the re‐emergence of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe held GDP growth to less than 1 percent in the first half of the year. 3 Yet, the economy persevered, even through our own debt‐ceiling crisis, and grew at an annual rate of 2.4 percent in the second half of the year. In fact, growth accelerated across each of the four quarters, from less than half of a percent in the first quarter to 3 percent in the fourth quarter. The first estimate of first‐quarter GDP growth was reported last week as 2.2 percent. This number was slightly less than many forecasters anticipated, but it was in line with my forecast of moderate growth that will strengthen over time. I anticipate that we will see moderate year‐over‐year growth of about 3 percent in 2012 and 2013. That outlook puts me in a slightly more optimistic camp than some forecasters. For example, my forecast is at the top of the central tendency of the FOMC participants’ forecasts that were submitted last week. And the Philadelphia Fed’s first‐ quarter Survey of Professional Forecasters reported average estimates of real GDP growing 2.3 percent in 2012 and 2.7 percent in 2013. Our second‐quarter survey won’t be released until later this month; however, many private‐sector forecasters have marked up their outlook slightly since the early part of the year based on the somewhat better than expected first‐quarter performance, particularly on the consumption and employment fronts. Growth in manufacturing has proven to be a bright spot for the economy over the last six to nine months, and it continues to be a reason for optimism going forward. The Philadelphia Fed’s monthly Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers has been a useful barometer of national trends in manufacturing over many years. The survey’s general activity index tracked with last year’s summer lull, posting a few negative readings during the late spring and summer, but since then, the survey has reported seven months of positive numbers – indicating a moderate but steady expansion. Moreover, the survey’s indicators of activity six months ahead have remained strong, suggesting that manufacturers are optimistic about the future. 4 Another upbeat indicator can be found in the Philadelphia Fed’s coincident indexes for all 50 states. We produce these indexes monthly to create a state‐by‐state view of the economy. Our latest readings indicate growth in every state for the three months ending in March. A similar set of leading indicators also shows that growth is expected to continue over the next six months in nearly all states, including here in California. Consumer spending, which accounts for about 70 percent of the nation’s GDP, also continues to improve, as the drag from household deleveraging lessens. Despite modest wage growth, retail sales in March grew 0.8 percent from the previous month and 6.5 percent above March 2011. The Bureau of Economic Analysis also reported that first‐quarter personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased at a 2.9 percent annual rate in the first quarter – up from 2.1 percent in the fourth quarter and the most rapid rate of consumption growth since the last quarter of 2010. On the housing front, I expect to see stabilization and maybe slight improvement in 2012. Yet, as the old real estate saying goes: “Location, location, location!” Whereas some regions saw a tremendous build‐up in residential real estate, followed by a sharp decline, other areas, including many parts of my region back east, saw neither the dramatic boom nor the tragic bust. At a national level, though, we must acknowledge that we entered the recession over‐invested in residential real estate, and we are not likely to see a strong housing recovery until the surplus inventory of foreclosed and distressed properties declines. Yet we must realize that even as the economy rebalances, housing and related sectors are not likely to return to those heady pre‐recession highs, nor should we expect them to do so. Those highs were unsustainable, and the housing crash that ensued destroyed a great deal of wealth for consumers and the economy as a whole. The losses are real and the consequences severe for many individuals and many businesses. Moreover, monetary policy does not create real wealth so it cannot eliminate or offset these losses, nor should it try to do so. 5 Nevertheless, households and businesses continue to make progress on restoring the health of their balance sheets by paying down debt and increasing savings. This is a rational reaction and a healthy trend. Most economists, including me, believe that this trend will continue into 2012. Conditions in the labor markets continue to improve modestly, though monthly numbers do bounce around a bit. For example, strong job growth from December through February may have partially reflected the effect of unseasonably mild weather this winter, and the modest pullback in March may represent some payback. Indeed, March’s gain of 120,000 nonfarm jobs came after three months of solid growth of more than 200,000 a month. I prefer to average the quarter’s monthly numbers to infer the underlying trend. Doing so, we see that average monthly gains in the first quarter outpaced those in the fourth quarter by nearly 50,000 jobs per month. So, we continue to make slow, steady progress, as evidenced by an unemployment rate that fell to 8.2 percent in March, down almost a full percentage point from the 9.1 percent in August. I expect further gradual declines in the unemployment rate, with the rate falling to about 7.8 percent by the end of this year. Despite this gradual improvement, we cannot ignore the fact that there are still too many people unemployed. The U.S. lost 8.8 million jobs from the peak of employment in January 2008 to the trough in employment in February 2010. We have gained back 3.5 million lost jobs, or 40 percent, but it will take some time before we, once again, see a truly vibrant labor market. Any forecast is subject to some risks, and today I will discuss two risks on the horizon. The first is the potential effects of the continuing sovereign debt crisis in Europe, and the second is a lesser risk from rising energy costs. Over the past year, U.S. financial markets have been roiled by worries about the European sovereign debt situation. We have often seen good news on the U.S. economy drowned out by the news from Europe. The crisis was a long time in the 6 making and continues despite the efforts of European leaders. Many who thought that preventing sovereign default by a euro country would prevent the crisis from spreading have been proven wrong. A number of the peripheral countries in Europe are unquestionably on fiscal paths that are unsustainable and that must be addressed. I might add that the U.S. is also on an unsustainable fiscal path that must be addressed. Let me stress that these are fiscal issues, not monetary issues. Thus, we should look to the fiscal authorities for solutions, not our central banks. I have come to believe that the European governments and their economies will muddle through this near‐term crisis but at significant cost to the taxpayers all across the euro zone. Nevertheless, the turmoil has resulted in an economic slowdown in the euro zone that will likely cause a small drag on U.S. exports. The other risk facing the U.S. economy has been the rising cost of oil and gasoline. Oil prices have fallen from their recent highs, but they remain over $100 a barrel and gasoline is about $4 a gallon. However, unless the price of oil rises substantially from current levels, this is not likely to derail our recovery. I come to this assessment, in part, because the U.S. economy is less vulnerable to oil price shocks than it was in the 1970s and 1980s, in part because we use about half as much energy to make a dollar of real GDP than we used to in the 1970s. In addition, while oil prices have risen, natural gas prices have been falling, and they are now at their lowest level since 1999. This is a result of both increased production in places like Pennsylvania’s Marcellus Shale areas, as well as reduced demand because of the mild winter. Thus, while energy is still an important factor of production, our economy is less dependent on oil than it used to be. The larger risk from higher energy prices is not to growth but to inflation and expectations of inflation. The Fed recently set its long‐term inflation target at 2 percent, as measured by the year‐over‐year change in the personal consumption expenditures chain‐weighted price index. By that measure, prices rose at a 2.3 percent annual rate over the year ended in the first quarter, which is above our target. While this may prove 7 to be temporary as oil prices stabilize, there is a risk that the oil price increases we’ve seen so far this year will not reverse as anticipated, which could put additional pressure on prices and inflation expectations. Thus, we must continue to monitor these inflation trends with some care and be prepared to take appropriate action as necessary. The public has the right to expect the central bank to keep inflation near its target of 2 percent over the medium to longer term. Inflation often develops gradually, and if monetary policy waits too long to respond, it can be very costly to correct. Measures of slack such as the unemployment rate are often thought to prevent inflation from rising. But the lessons of the 1970s show that is not the case. As you may recall, we ended up with both high unemployment and high inflation, and the sum of those two statistics became known as the misery index. More recently, I note that for nearly three years, the Bank of England has been forecasting that inflation will return to its 2 percent target, but it has failed to do so, even though England’s economy has contracted over the past two quarters and many perceive the level of slack in the British economy as large and increasing. That is not a place we want to find ourselves. Monetary Policy Before discussing where monetary policy might go as economic conditions evolve in the coming quarters, it might be helpful to review just how much accommodation we currently have in place. As you know, the Fed has kept the federal funds rate near zero for more than three years to support the recovery. We have also conducted two rounds of asset purchases that have more than tripled the size of our balance sheet. We continue to implement our maturity extension program, which is lengthening the maturity of our holdings of Treasury securities and the composition of the portfolio has changed from mainly short‐term Treasuries before the crisis to longer‐term Treasuries and housing‐related securities, mostly mortgage‐backed securities, today. Many of these actions were taken at the height of the financial crisis and the ensuing deep recession. Yet, since then, as I have indicated, the economy has been healing, if 8 somewhat more slowly than we would like, and the financial crisis has substantially abated. Of course, problems remain, but things are not nearly as bad or as gloomy as they were in 2009 and early 2010. At its latest meeting in April, the Federal Open Market Committee continued to hold to its statement that economic conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through late 2014.” That follows a structure for forward guidance that the Committee first began last August, when it said conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low rates through mid 2013. Then in January, it pushed back that calendar date another 18 months to late 2014. The FOMC has also announced that the Fed intends to complete the maturity extension program, or “operation twist,” first launched last September and set to end in June. In this program, the Fed is buying $400 billion of longer‐term Treasuries and selling an equal amount of shorter‐term Treasuries, in an effort to reduce long‐term yields from already historically low levels. The FOMC is also continuing to reinvest principal payments from its holdings of agency debt and MBS into MBS in an effort to help mortgage markets. You may know that I dissented from the FOMC decisions in August and September because it was not clear to me that increasing monetary policy accommodation was appropriate then. After all, inflation was higher and unemployment was lower relative to the previous year, as we have been discussing. Since that time, unemployment has decreased further, and inflation is above target. While I believe monetary accommodation is still called for, in the absence of some shock that derails the recovery, we may well need to begin to gradually scale back the level of accommodation well before the end of 2014. Another reason I dissented last year was that I did not favor providing forward guidance in terms of a calendar date. Monetary policy should be responsive to economic conditions, and I believe that we should be providing information on the economic 9 factors that will influence our monetary policy decisions rather than trying to forecast when that time will be. In January, the Committee took a step to enhance the information it includes in its economic projections, which are summarized four times a year in the Survey of Economic Projections, or SEP. I believe such information will prove to be useful in conveying the relationship between changes in economic conditions and monetary policy decisions. In particular, the Committee now summarizes the monetary policy assessments that underlie the economic projections of output, inflation, and unemployment. These assessments are what the individual policymakers view as the policy path that is appropriate in achieving the Fed’s longer‐term goals. This additional information has two benefits. First, having more information on the underlying paths should help the public better understand the projections. For example, they will have a better understanding of whether inflation is expected to return to the long‐term goal as shocks work their way through the economy or whether policymakers anticipate that further monetary policy actions will be needed to achieve the Committee’s objective. Second, as views of appropriate policy evolve over time as economic and financial conditions change, the public will be able to draw better inferences about the relation between current economic conditions, the economic outlook, and appropriate policy. This then informs the public about how policy is likely to react in the future to changes in the economy. For example, in April, the SEP indicated that only four participants now expect the first increase in the federal funds rate will occur after 2014, compared to six in the January projections. These projections of the policy path have changed as the central tendencies of the 2012 projections of growth and inflation were revised up and projections of unemployment were revised down. 10 We know that when monetary policy is conducted in a systematic way — that is, with a systematic relationship between changes in economic conditions and the policy actions taken by the central bank — policy becomes more transparent and easier to communicate. And the better the public and the markets understand how policy is likely to be adjusted as the economy changes, the more predictable policy becomes, which promotes price stability and better economic outcomes. In addition, policy transparency can increase the public’s ability to hold the central bank accountable for its policy decisions. I believe, and have argued for some time, that the FOMC should strive to provide information about the factors that will influence our policy decisions. Some call this a policy rule or reaction function. This will not only enhance transparency but also impose an important discipline on policymaking. If policymakers choose to deviate from the guidelines, they are forced to explain why and when they anticipate returning to more normal operating practices. Requiring this type of transparency raises the bar policymakers face to engage in discretionary policies in the first place. I suspect that the FOMC participants may not be quite ready to agree on a specific policy rule or reaction function because they use different models and have different loss functions. However, I do believe it will be possible to provide assessments of the evolution of the key variables influencing our policy choices and then communicate our policy decisions in terms of the changes in these key variables. If policy was changed, then we would explain that change in terms of how the variables in our response function changed. If we choose a consistent set of variables and systematically use them to describe our policy choices, the public will form more accurate judgments about the likely course of policy – reducing uncertainty and promoting stability. 11 Conclusion In summary, the U.S. economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. I expect annual growth of around 3 percent in 2012 and 2013. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve, with job growth strengthening and the unemployment rate falling gradually over time. I believe inflation expectations will be relatively stable and inflation will remain at moderate levels in the near term. However, with the very accommodative stance of monetary policy that has now been in place for more than three years, we must guard against the medium‐ and longer‐term risks of inflation and further distortions such accommodation can create. Monetary policy should be determined by economic conditions and not by a calendar date. I believe the FOMC should continue to work toward increasing the public’s understanding of how policy will systematically react to changes in economic conditions. Improving the transparency of our monetary policy decision‐making process will help to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy and the Fed’s accountability with the public.

Transparency and Monetary Policy University of California, Santa Barbara Economic Forecast Project 2012 May 3, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Transparency and Monetary Policy University of California, Santa Barbara Economic Forecast Project 2012 May 3, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction I am delighted to be here today and to participate in this event. I first met Peter Rupert nearly 30 years ago. He was a Ph.D. student at the University of Rochester when I was on the faculty there. We were both much younger then. So I was delighted to accept his invitation to come to Santa Barbara. It is also a pleasure to join my fellow presidents from the Atlanta District and from the home‐team District of San Francisco. I guess that means I have to be nice to John so I will be allowed back into the District in the future. I hope you will see that all three of us share many of the same perspectives even though we also have differing views at times. One of the important features of our nation’s central bank is the strength that comes from the diverse views and experiences that the various presidents and Governors bring to the table as we grapple with sometimes very difficult and challenging decisions regarding monetary policy. The give and take of our discussions and the information we share regarding what is happening across our geographically and economically diverse nation lead to better informed and more thoughtful decisions. As we share these views with the public in the spirit of transparency, though, we must caution that we always speak for ourselves and not for the Federal Reserve System or our colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Today, I want to give you my outlook for the economy and then I want to spend time sharing some thoughts on the steps the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, has taken to become more transparent about its goals and objectives. 2 Four times a year, each FOMC participant submits projections for real GDP growth, inflation, and unemployment. These projections are conditioned on the individual’s views of what sort of monetary policy each believes is appropriate over the forecast horizon given current conditions. Last week, the Fed released the newest Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP. Obviously, with 17 different individuals, it is not surprising that there is a range of views. So let me quickly summarize the projections offered for this year and next. The central tendency of annual real GDP growth in 2012 ranged from 2.4 percent to 2.9 percent and for 2013 the range was 2.7 to 3.1 percent. This suggests moderate growth this year, with some pick‐up for 2013. The central tendency of the inflation projections was near 2 percent for 2012 and 2013. The projections for unemployment reflect some differences. Those projections have unemployment ranging from a low of 7.8 percent to a high of 8.0 percent by the end of 2012. Since the unemployment rate currently stands at 8.2 percent, having fallen nearly a percentage point since last August, the most pessimistic forecast says that we will not make much progress this year on further reducing unemployment. The more optimistic view seems to be that unemployment will continue to drift down gradually over the remainder of this year. As for the end of 2013, the central tendency widened somewhat from a low of 7.3 to a high of 7.7 percent. Again, some expect the unemployment rate to continue a moderate downward path while others are less sanguine. I think it is fair to say that the projections in April represented an upgrade in the near‐term outlook compared to the January projections. Indeed, near‐term output and inflation edged up and unemployment edged down. My own views place me in the slightly more optimistic camp. My outlook is for about 3 percent growth in both 2012 and 2013. I predict that inflation will hover near or slightly above 2 percent over much of the period. My optimism is most evident in my 3 projections for the unemployment rate. I believe that it will continue to drift down gradually, reaching 7.8 percent by the end of this year and near 7 percent by the end of 2013. But truth be told, as always, there remains a great deal of uncertainty in the outlook, despite all our models and talented economists. As physicist Niels Bohr once said: “Prediction is very difficult, especially if it is about the future.” Indeed, the Fed has no crystal ball that allows it to see into the future so we have to make policy decisions in the fog of uncertainty, just like everyone else. So I thought I would spend the rest of my time discussing steps the FOMC has taken to become more transparent in the way we conduct monetary policy in this uncertain world. While we cannot predict the future, we can and should clearly communicate our objectives and how we are likely to react to future events. In January, the FOMC took two very important steps on its journey to improve transparency and, ultimately, accountability. The first step involves the information underlying our economic projections. Remember I told you that those projections were based on each policymaker’s view of the appropriate path for monetary policy. Prior to January, we did not reveal what those paths looked like. The Committee now summarizes the monetary policy assessments that underlie the economic projections of output, inflation, and unemployment. These assessments are what each individual policymaker views as the policy path that is appropriate in achieving the Fed’s longer‐ term goals. They are inputs into the policy deliberations that occur at FOMC meetings, but the ultimate policy decisions represent the collective judgment of the Committee members. This addition of the policy assessments to the economic projections has two benefits. First, having more information on the underlying paths should help the public better understand the projections. For example, they will have a better understanding of 4 whether inflation is expected to return to the long‐term goal as shocks work their way through the economy or whether policymakers anticipate that further monetary policy actions will be needed to achieve the Committee’s objective. Second, as views of appropriate policy in the SEP evolve over time as economic and financial conditions change, the public will be able to draw better inferences about the relation between current economic conditions, the economic outlook, and appropriate policy. This, then, informs the public about how policy is likely to react in the future to changes in the economy. For example, in April, the SEP indicated that only four participants now expect the first increase in the federal funds rate will occur after 2014, compared to six in the January projections. These projections of the policy path have changed as the central tendencies of the 2012 projections of growth and inflation were revised up and projections of unemployment were revised down, as I noted earlier. We know that when monetary policy is conducted in a systematic way — with a systematic relationship between changes in economic conditions and the policy actions taken by the central bank — policy becomes more transparent and easier to communicate. And the better the public and the markets understand how policy is likely to be adjusted as the economy changes, the more predictable policy becomes, which promotes price stability and better economic outcomes. In addition, policy transparency can increase the public’s ability to hold the central bank accountable for its policy decisions. I have argued for some time that the FOMC should provide information about the factors that will influence its policy decisions. Some call this a policy rule or reaction function. This will not only enhance transparency but also impose an important discipline on policymaking. If policymakers choose to deviate from the guidelines, they are forced to explain why and when they anticipate returning to more normal operating 5 practices. Requiring this type of transparency raises the bar policymakers face to engage in discretionary policies in the first place. Let me now turn to the FOMC’s second, and perhaps more important, step toward clarity. In January, the Committee issued a statement of its long‐term goals and strategy. The statement made four important points. First, the Committee reaffirmed its commitment to its mandated goals of maximum employment, price stability, and moderate long‐term interest rates. Second, the statement acknowledged what economists have known for over 200 years – that in the intermediate to longer run, inflation is a monetary phenomenon and is thus determined by monetary policy. Therefore, it is appropriate for the Fed to set an explicit long‐run target for inflation. The target selected was 2 percent, as measured by the year‐over‐year change in the personal consumption expenditures chain‐weighted price index. By being explicit about its numerical objective for inflation, the Fed enhances the credibility of its commitment to price stability. This helps anchor inflation expectations, thereby fostering price stability and moderate long‐term interest rates. Another benefit of such an explicit objective is that it provides the public with a numerical metric by which it can, and should, hold the Fed accountable. Of course, articulating an inflation target is now viewed as a best practice in central banking and is a key step in achieving the benefits of transparency. The third important feature of the statement explained why it is not appropriate for the Fed to establish a numerical objective for the maximum employment part of its mandate. This is not because the employment part of the mandate is less important, but because the economic determinants of employment are different from those of inflation. Maximum employment is largely determined by factors that are beyond the control of monetary policy. These factors include such things as demographics, 6 technological innovations, and numerous government policies, including tax policy, minimum wage laws, unemployment benefits, and the like. All of these factors can and do vary over time. Thus, the maximum level of employment will vary. It is also difficult to measure and not directly observable. Moreover, different economic models often lead to different conceptual views of how to define maximum employment. Therefore, it is inappropriate for the central bank to set a numerical objective for something it does not control and cannot measure with any degree of certainty. Finally, the statement pointed out that the goals of monetary policy are complementary over the longer run. Price stability promotes economic efficiency by giving households and businesses more confidence that the purchasing power of the dollar will not erode. This simplifies the decision‐making of economic agents, allowing the economy to function more efficiently and more productively. Conversely, the failure to maintain price stability can often lead to greater instability in output and employment. However, in the short term, it is possible that the maximum employment and price stability parts of the Fed’s mandate could be in conflict. The statement makes clear that in such circumstances the Fed will pursue a balanced approach to promoting its objectives. Admittedly, this statement does not give much guidance as to how policy will be conducted, but I suggest that the public watch the assessments of the appropriate policy as viewed by policymakers in the SEP as an important source of information in this regard. So the FOMC is taking important steps as it seeks to demystify monetary policy. Clarity and transparency are important for achieving our objectives, and I believe that the Committee will continue on this journey as it seeks to improve the clarity and effectiveness of its communications.

Resilient Communities in a Resilient Economy Reinventing Older Communities: Building Resilient Cities May 9, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Resilient Communities in a Resilient Economy Reinventing Older Communities: Building Resilient Cities May 9, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction On behalf of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, I want to welcome you to the Reinventing Older Communities conference. This conference is one of our signature events, bringing together a talented and diverse mix of stakeholders who are committed to addressing the community and economic development needs of older industrial communities. This is our fifth Reinventing conference, and these biennial events have become an important resource for the Federal Reserve System, as they contribute to our research and understanding of the interaction between older communities and the broader economy. Congress created the Federal Reserve System in 1913 with 12 individual Reserve Banks overseen by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. One of the strengths of our nation’s decentralized central bank is that it gives us roots in Main Streets and communities across our diverse nation. We are delighted that several other Federal Reserve Banks share our interest in smaller industrial communities and have partnered with us to sponsor this year’s Reinventing Older Communities conference. So let me recognize and thank the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, New York, Richmond, and St. Louis. The past few years have been an extraordinary period for all of us. We have endured a financial crisis and the worst global recession of the post-war era. This period has served as a striking reminder of how economic forces and decisions – both large and small – can influence events on Main Streets and neighborhoods across our District and our nation. Yet the economy has now grown for 11 consecutive quarters. To be sure, growth is not robust. But growth in the past year has continued despite significant risks and external and internal headwinds. Natural disasters in Japan, a sovereign debt crisis and banking problems in Europe, turmoil in North Africa and the Middle East that led to a steep increase in oil prices, and our own debt ceiling fiasco, all made growth difficult. But I 2 also remind you that the U.S. economy has a history of being remarkably resilient. These shocks held GDP growth to less than 1 percent in the first half of 2011, and many analysts were concerned that the economy was heading toward a double dip. Yet, the economy proved resilient and growth picked up in the second half of the year. Building Resilient Cities What leads to such resilience? That is one of the key questions posed in this conference, and it is an important one for understanding the prospects for the U.S. economy. We know that older manufacturing cities have suffered from secular declines as many of these communities have struggled to find their way in a changing economy. The long-term trends of improved productivity and efficiency in many large-scale manufacturing industries, which are good for the economy as a whole, have led to a secular decline in employment in many of these industries. As a consequence, many older cities with industries that depended heavily on older-style labor-intensive production processes have felt the brunt of shrinking employment and the loss of an industrial base that provided the economic foundation for their communities. If these communities are unable to adapt and change, the fallout can include declining populations and tax bases and deteriorating housing markets. Yet, some of these cities have fared better than others. At least one recent study by the McKinsey Global Institute finds that over the next 15 years, half of worldwide GDP growth is likely to come from so-called “middleweight cities” – those cities with a current population between 150,000 and 10 million. 1 One key to achieving this will be to determine how communities can use their strengths and resources to become resilient cities. But what does it mean to be resilient? One source defines community resilience as “the individual and collective capacity to respond to adversity and change. It is a community that takes intentional action to enhance the personal and collective capacity of its citizens and institutions to respond to and influence the course of social and economic change.”2 My interpretation of community resilience is one that, in part, reflects my personal experiences. I was an economics professor at the University of Rochester in Rochester, 1 Richard Dobbs, Sven Smit, Jaana Remes, James Manyika, Charles Roxburgh, Alejandra Restre , “Urban World: Mapping the Economic Power of Cities,” McKinsey Global Institute (March 2011); available at: http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/mgi/research/urbanization/urban_world . 2 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: http://www.samhsa.gov/dtac/dbhis/dbhis_stress/resilience.htm 3 NY for many years and served as dean of the William E. Simon Graduate School of Business from 1993 to 2003. I think it is fair to say that the Eastman Kodak Corporation was to Rochester what the Big Three automakers were to Detroit. Kodak was the dominant economic force and employer in Rochester for more than three-quarters of a century. More generally, over the last several decades, the solid manufacturing base of Rochester, made up of firms like Kodak, Xerox, and Bausch and Lomb, has steadily shrunk. Yet, Rochester ensured that it was not solely dependent on past technologies. During my time there, Rochester was able to shift its focus from the darkroom to medical imaging and other technologies. New companies were formed around the university and area medical centers. Scientists and engineers from these manufacturing firms became entrepreneurs. So even though Kodak’s local employment fell from a peak of 61,000 to fewer than 7,000 today, Rochester has exhibited remarkable resiliency. In fact, the region has gained 90,000 jobs, on net, over the same period. Challenges, of course, remain, as such transformations take a long time. Rochester is but one example. My hometown of Birmingham, AL, once called the Pittsburgh of the South, was ravaged by a declining steel industry, as was its larger namesake. Yet it has revived and proved its resiliency. Across the nation, countless cities and smaller communities have found ways to use their assets to rebound from economic challenges. The stories and strategies may vary, but there are lessons to be learned. The Research Department at the Philadelphia Fed has begun a research project to measure urban resilience. Resilience is based on the response of local economic activity to an economic shock – whether it be a temporary shock (related to the business cycle or some other temporary factor) or a persistent shock (related to long-run trends in technology, productivity, or preferences). Our researchers are examining two working definitions of resilience that are grounded in economic theory. According to the first measure, an area is considered more resilient to the extent that it experiences milder fluctuations in employment over the business cycle. According to the second measure, resilient areas are those that experience faster employment growth than could be expected based on national growth rates given their industrial structure. The aim of the research project is to combine these two measures into an index that we will then be able to track over time. The project is a work in progress, and it is too soon to share definitive results. However, the results to date are suggestive. Our researchers have found that larger older cities, especially those in the Northeast and Midwest, have seen smaller fluctuations in their employment cycles than other cities. Detroit was a notable exception, having experienced much larger cycles, especially in its declines after 2000. Southern cities score higher on the second resiliency measure, having experienced 4 higher employment growth, reflecting household migration patterns. Combining the two measures, Philadelphia scores in the middle of the group of 25 metropolitan areas the staff examined. The next step in the analysis is to examine how the indexes change over time and see whether there are certain metropolitan area characteristics that are correlated with resilience. Early results suggest that industrial diversity is related to greater resilience. As I said, this is a work in progress, and so far, it does look promising. Our research in this area is going to be informed by what we learn over the next couple of days, as conference participants explore the various ways that these older industrial communities are marshaling their resources to become resilient cities. Noted academics and practitioners from a wide range of disciplines will discuss workforce development, small business creation, urban education, and housing issues. These panelists will share research findings, as well as real-world examples of how various strategies and partnerships have strengthened their communities. Our presenters will engage you in conversations that will challenge your thinking about community development. We encourage you to challenge them as you discuss the role of anchor institutions in the development of cities, education reform, and the pursuit of a creative, entrepreneurial, and resilient economy. This morning, some of you participated in a tour of Philadelphia’s Kensington neighborhood, where you visited two local organizations: Impact Services, an organization that has helped more than 24,000 veterans, ex-offenders, and others find jobs; and the Energy Coordinating Agency of Philadelphia, which provides training so people can pursue jobs in weatherization, energy audits, and lead abatement. Others participated in a tour of nearby Chester, Pennsylvania, where you saw first-hand how a city is trying to redefine itself by creating new office space, developing a top-notch soccer stadium, and opening a casino to attract businesses and consumers. While not every strategy will work in every city or every neighborhood, these strategies highlight the human effort that is driving revitalization efforts and the innovation that is needed to truly be resilient in this economy. I do want to caution you that resilient and vibrant communities are not just about government programs or directed industrial planning by community leaders. Indeed, one can find instances where government and entrenched interests, seeking to restore the “good old days,” actually slow the innovation and change many communities should undertake. The economic strength of our country is deeply rooted in our market-based economy and the dynamism and resilience of its citizenry. As we contemplate strategies for 5 unleashing the potential in our communities, do not underestimate the importance of entrepreneurship and individual initiative to laying the foundations for change and growth. Government regulations on small and emerging companies can have a stifling effect on economic growth, and despite our best intentions, the law of unintended consequences can loom large in any effort to direct or control economic activity. After all, we all now know that small businesses are the engines for employment growth and some become very large and successful businesses. So I urge you to look beyond planning and directed investments, all of which may have a place, and look to people: how do we improve education and equip them for a more knowledge-based economy? And how can we unleash the creative and entrepreneurial spirit of all our citizens? They are our most valuable asset and the ultimate source of opportunity and growth. Thank you and I hope you find the next few days informative and enriching. Introduction of Jeremy Nowak Now I would like to introduce our next speaker, Jeremy Nowak, president of the William Penn Foundation. He has a long history of involvement in community development. Prior to joining the foundation, Jeremy was CEO of The Reinvestment Fund, one of the most innovative and successful community investment funds in the country. Yet, he is here not only as an interested and experienced party to your discussions but also as the chairman of the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors selected in a nonpartisan way to represent a cross-section of banking, commercial, and community interests within a Federal Reserve District. These directors, by law, not only fulfill a governance role in providing oversight for the Bank’s performance but also provide valuable insights on economic and financial conditions in the District and the nation. These insights help me and my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee as we deliberate and seek the best course for monetary policy for the nation. I have valued Jeremy’s insights on community and economic issues over the past few years, and I know you will enjoy his perspectives today.

Macro Models and Monetary Policy Analysis Bundesbank – Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Spring 2012 Research Conference Eltville, Germany May 25, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Macro Models and Monetary Policy Analysis Bundesbank – Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Spring 2012 Research Conference Eltville, Germany May 25, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction Good afternoon. It is indeed a pleasure to be with you today. I want to thank President Weidmann for his hospitality, and Dr. Heinz Herrmann and the staff of the Bundesbank for inviting the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia to co-organize the Bundesbank’s 2012 Spring Conference. The conference papers address a multitude of issues that confront the current state of macroeconomics, and the discussion over the past two days shows that researchers are making important strides in understanding the macroeconomy. After spending over 30 years in academia, I have served the last six years as a policymaker trying to apply what economics has taught me. Needless to say, I picked a challenging time to undertake such an endeavor. But I have learned that, despite the advances in our understanding of economics, a number of issues remain unresolved in the context of modern macro models and their use for policy analysis. In my remarks today, I will touch on some issues facing policymakers that I believe state- of-the-art macro models would do well to confront. Before continuing, I should note that I speak for myself and not the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. More than 40 years ago, the rational expectations revolution in macroeconomics helped to shape a consensus among economists that only unanticipated shifts in monetary policy can have real effects. According to this consensus, only monetary surprises affect the real economy in the short to medium run because consumers, workers, employers, and investors cannot respond quickly enough to offset the effect of these policy actions on consumption, the labor market, and investment. 1 1 See Sargent (1996). 2 But over the years this consensus view on the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to the real economy has evolved. The current generation of macro models, referred to as New Keynesian DSGE models,2 rely on real and nominal frictions to transmit not only unanticipated but also systematic changes in monetary policy to the economy. Unexpected monetary shocks drive movements in output, consumption, investment, hours worked, and employment in DSGE models. However, in contrast to the earlier literature, it is the relevance of systematic movements in monetary policy that makes these models of so much interest for policy analysis. Systematic policy changes are represented in these models by Taylor-type rules, in which the policy interest rate responds to changes in inflation and a measure of real activity, such as output growth. Armed with forecasts of inflation and output growth, a central bank can assess the impact that different policy rate paths may have on the economy. The ability to do this type of policy analysis helps explain the widespread use of New Keynesian DSGE models at central banks around the world. These modern macro models stress the importance of credibility and systematic policy, as well as forward-looking rational agents, in the determination of economic outcomes. In doing so, they offer guidance to policymakers about how to structure policies that will improve the policy framework and, therefore, economic performance. Nonetheless, I think there is room for improving the models and the advice they deliver on policy options. Before discussing several of these improvements, it is important to appreciate the “rules of the game” of the New Keynesian DSGE framework. The New Keynesian Framework New Keynesian DSGE models are the latest update to real business cycle, or RBC, theory. Given my own research in this area, it probably does not surprise many of you that I find the RBC paradigm a useful and valuable platform on which to build our macroeconomic models. 3 One goal of real business cycle theory is to study the predictions of dynamic general equilibrium models, in which optimizing and forward-looking consumers, workers, employers, and investors are endowed with rational expectations. A shortcoming many see in the simple real business cycle model is its difficulty in internally generating persistent changes in output and employment from a transitory or temporary external shock to, say, productivity.4 The recognition of this problem has 2 DSGE stands for dynamic stochastic general equilibrium. 3 See Long and Plosser (1983) and King, Plosser, and Rebelo (1988a, b). 4 See King and Plosser (1994), Rotemberg and Woodford (1995), and Cogley and Nason (1993, 1995). 3 inspired variations on the simple model, of which the New Keynesian revival is an example. The approach taken in these models is to incorporate a structure of real and nominal frictions into the real business cycle framework. These frictions are placed in DSGE models, in part, to make real economic activity respond to anticipated and unanticipated changes in monetary policy, at least, in the short to medium run. The real frictions that drive internal propagation of monetary policy often include habit formation in consumption, that is, how past consumption influences current consumption; the costs of capital used in production; and the resources expended by adding new investment to the existing stock of capital. New Keynesian DSGE models also include the costs faced by monopolistic firms and households when setting their prices and nominal wages. A nominal friction often assumed in Keynesian DSGE models is that firms and households have to wait a fixed interval of time before they can reset their prices and wages in a forward-looking, optimal manner. A rule of the game in these models is that the interactions of these nominal frictions with real frictions give rise to persistent monetary nonneutralities over the business cycle. 5 It is this monetary transmission mechanism that makes the New Keynesian DSGE models attractive to central banks. An assumption of these models is that the structure of these real and nominal frictions, which transmit changes in monetary policy to the real economy, well-approximate the true underlying rigidities of the actual economy and are not affected by changes in monetary policy. This assumption implies that the frictions faced by consumers, workers, employers, and investors cannot be eliminated at any price they might be willing to pay. Although the actors in actual economies probably recognize the incentives they have to innovate — think of the strategy to use continuous pricing on line for many goods and services — or to seek insurance to minimize the costs of the frictions, these actions and markets are ruled out by the “rules of the game” of New Keynesian DSGE modeling. Another important rule of the game prescribes that monetary policy is represented by an interest rate or Taylor-type reaction function that policymakers are committed to follow and that everyone believes will, in fact, be followed. This ingredient of New Keynesian DSGE models most often commits a central bank to increase its policy rate when inflation or output rises above the target set by the central bank. And this 5 See Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouter s (2007). 4 commitment is assumed to be fully credible according to the rules of the game of New Keynesian DSGE models. Policy changes are then evaluated as deviations from the invariant policy rule to which policymakers are credibly committed. The Lucas Critique Revisited with Respect to New Keynesian DSGE Models In my view, the current rules of the game of New Keynesian DSGE models run afoul of the Lucas critique – a seminal work for my generation of macroeconomists and for each generation since.6 The Lucas critique teaches us that to do policy analysis correctly, we must understand the relationship between economic outcomes and the beliefs of economic agents about the policy regime. Equally important is the Lucas critique’s warning against using models whose structure changes with the alternative government policies under consideration.7 Policy changes are almost never once and for all. So, many economists would argue that an economic model that maps states of the world to outcomes but that does not model how policy shifts across alternative regimes would fail the Lucas critique because it would not be policy invariant. 8 Instead, economists could better judge the effects of competing policy options by building models that account for the way in which policymakers switch between alternative policy regimes as economic circumstances change. 9 For example, I have always been uncomfortable with the New Keynesian model’s assumption that wage and price setters have market power but, at the same time, are unable or unwilling to change prices in response to anticipated and systematic shifts in monetary policy. This suggests that the deep structure of nominal frictions in New Keynesian DSGE models should do more than measure the length of time that firms and households wait for a chance to reset their prices and wages.10 Moreover, it raises 6 See Lucas (1976). 7 The Lucas critique does not apply to the forecasting problem. An aim of forecasters is to develop models immune from systematic forecast errors instead of models whose structure is immutable in the face of shifting policy regimes. 8 See Cooley, LeRoy, and Raymon (1984), Sargent (1984), Sims (1982, 1987), and Leeper and Zha (2003). 9 See Leeper and Zha (2003), Cogley and Sargent (2005), Sims and Zha (2006), and Leeper and Davig (2006). 10Economic history is replete with examples of systematic monetary policy interventions creating incentives for consumers, workers, employers, and investors to alter their decision rules and actions , including the German hyperinflation of the early 1920s, the Great Inflation of the 1970s, and the Volcker disinflation; see Sargent (1983, 1999). 5 questions about the mechanism by which monetary policy shocks are transmitted to the real economy in these models. I might also note here that the evidence from micro data on price behavior is not particularly consistent with the implications of the usual staggered price-setting assumptions in these models.11 When the real and nominal frictions of New Keynesian models do not reflect the incentives faced by economic actors in actual economies, these models violate the Lucas critique’s policy invariance dictum, and thus, the policy advice these models offer must be interpreted with caution. From a policy perspective, the assumption that a central bank can always and everywhere credibly commit to its policy rule is, I believe, also questionable. While it is desirable for policymakers to do so — and in practice, I seek ways to make policy more systematic and more credible — commitment is a luxury few central bankers ever actually have, and fewer still faithfully follow. During the 1980s and 1990s, it was quite common to hear in workshops and seminars the criticism that a model didn’t satisfy the Lucas critique. I thought this was often a cheap shot because almost no model satisfactorily dealt with the issue. And during a period when the policy regime was apparently fairly stable — which many argued it mostly was during those years — the failure to satisfy the Lucas critique seemed somewhat less troublesome. However, in my view, throughout the crisis of the last few years and its aftermath, the Lucas critique has become decidedly more relevant. Policy actions have become increasingly discretionary. Moreover, the financial crisis and associated policy responses have left many central banks operating with their policy rate near the zero lower bound; this means that they are no longer following a systematic rule, if they ever were. Given that central bankers are, in fact, acting in a discretionary manner, whether it is because they are at the zero bound or because they cannot or will not commit, how are we to interpret policy advice coming from models that assume full commitment to a systematic rule? I think this point is driven home by noting that a number of central banks have been openly discussing different regimes, from price-level targeting to nominal GDP targeting. In such an environment where policymakers actively debate alternative regimes, how confident can we be about the policy advice that follows from models in which that is never contemplated? 11 See Maćkowiak and Smets (2009) and Alvarez and Burriel (2010). 6 Some Directions for Furthering the Research Agenda While I have been pointing out some limitations of DSGE models, I would like to end my remarks with six suggestions I believe would be fruitful for the research agenda. First, I believe we should work to give the real and nominal frictions that underpin the monetary propagation mechanism of New Keynesian DSGE models deeper and more empirically supported structural foundations. There is already much work being done on this in the areas of search models applied to labor markets and studies of the behavior of prices at the firm level. Many of you at this conference have made significant contributions to this literature. Second, on the policy dimension, the impact of the zero lower bound on central bank policy rates remains, as a central banker once said, a conundrum. The zero lower bound introduces nonlinearity into the analysis of monetary policy that macroeconomists and policymakers still do not fully understand. New Keynesian models have made some progress in solving this problem, 12 but a complete understanding of the zero bound conundrum involves recasting a New Keynesian DSGE model to show how it can provide an economically meaningful story of the set of shocks, financial markets, and frictions that explain the financial crisis, the resulting recession, and the weak recovery that has followed. This might be asking a lot, but a good challenge usually produces extraordinary research. Third, we must make progress in our analysis of credibility and commitment. The New Keynesian framework mostly assumes that policymakers are fully credible in their commitment to a specified policy rule. If that is not the case in practice, how do policymakers assess the policy advice these models deliver? Policy at the zero lower bound is a leading example of this issue. According to the New Keynesian model, zero lower bound policies rely on policymakers guiding the public’s expectations of when an initial interest rate increase will occur in the future. If the credibility of this forward guidance is questioned, evaluation of the zero lower bound policy has to account for the public's beliefs that commitment to this policy is incomplete. I have found that policymakers like to presume that their policy actions are completely credible and then engage in decisions accordingly. Yet if that presumption is wrong, those policies will not 12See Braun, Körber, and Waki (2012), Carlstrom, Fuerst, and Paustian (2012), and Fernández -Villaverde, Gordon, Guerrón-Quintana, and Rubio-Ramírez (2012). 7 have the desired or predicted outcomes. Is there a way to design and estimate policy responses in such a world? Can reputational models be adapted for this purpose? Fourth, and related, macroeconomists need to consider how to integrate the institutional design of central banks into our macroeconomic models. Different designs permit different degrees of discretion for a central bank. For example, responsibility for setting monetary policy is often delegated by an elected legislature to an independent central bank. However, the mandates given to central banks differ across countries. The Fed is often said to have a dual mandate; some banks have a hierarchal mandate; and others have a single mandate. Yet economists endow their New Keynesian DSGE models with strikingly uniform Taylor-type rules, always assuming complete credibility. Policy analysis might be improved by considering the institutional design of central banks and how it relates to the ability to commit and the specification of the Taylor-type rules that go into New Keynesian models. Central banks with different levels of discretion will respond differently to the same set of shocks. Let me offer a slightly different take on this issue. Policymakers are not Ramsey social planners. They are individuals who respond to incentives like every other actor in the economy. Those incentives are often shaped by the nature of the institutions in which they operate. Yet the models we use often ignore both the institutional environment and the rational behavior of policymakers. The models often ask policymakers to undertake actions that run counter to the incentives they face. How should economists then think about the policy advice their models offer and the outcomes they should expect? How should we think about the design of our institutions? This is not an unexplored arena, but if we are to take the policy guidance from our models seriously, we must think harder about such issues in the context of our models. This leads to my fifth suggestion. Monetary theory has given a great deal of thought to rules and credibility in the design of monetary policy, but the recent crisis suggests that we need to think more about the design of lender-of-last-resort policy and the institutional mechanism for its execution. Whether to act as the lender of last resort is discretionary, but does it have to be so? Are there ways to make it more systematic ex ante? If so, how? My sixth and final thought concerns moral hazard, which is addressed in only a handful of models. Moral hazard looms large when one thinks about lender-of-last-resort activities. But it is also a factor when monetary policy uses discretion to deviate from its policy rule. If the central bank has credibility that it will return to the rule once it has 8 deviated, this may not be much of a problem. On the other hand, a central bank with less credibility, or no credibility, may run the risk of inducing excessive risk-taking. An example of this might be the so-called “Greenspan put,” in which the markets perceived that when asset prices fell, the Fed would respond by reducing interest rates. Do monetary policy actions that appear to react to the stock market induce moral hazard and excessive risk-taking? Does having lender-of-last-resort powers influence the central bank’s monetary policy decisions, especially at moments when it is not clear whether the economy is in the midst of a financial crisis? Does the combination of lender-of-last- resort responsibilities with discretionary monetary policy create moral hazard perils for a central bank, encouraging it to take riskier actions? I do not know the answer to these questions, but addressing them and the other challenges I have mentioned with New Keynesian DSGE models should prove useful for evaluating the merits of different institutional designs for central banks. Conclusion The financial crisis and recession have raised new challenges for policymakers and researchers. The degree to which policy actions, for better or worse, have become increasingly discretionary should give us pause as we try to evaluate policy choices in the context of the workhorse New Keynesian framework, especially given its assumption of credibly committed policymakers. Indeed, the Lucas critique would seem to take on new relevance in this post-crisis world. Central banks need to ask if discretionary policies can create incentives that fundamentally change the actions and expectations of consumers, workers, firms, and investors. Characterizing policy in this way also raises issues of whether the institutional design of central banks matters for evaluating monetary policy. I hope my comments today encourage you, as well as the wider community of macroeconomists, to pursue these research questions that are relevant to our efforts to improve our policy choices. 9 References An, Sungbae, and Frank Schorfheide. “Bayesian Analysis of DSGE Models,” Econometric Reviews, 26 (2007), pp. 113-172. Alvarez, Luis J., and Pablo Burriel. “Is a Calvo Price Setting Model Consistent with Individual Price Data?” B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, 10:1, 13 (2010). Braun, R. Anton, Lena M. Körber, and Yuichiro Waki. “Some Unpleasant Properties of Log-linearized Solutions When the Nominal Rate Is Zero,” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Working Paper 12-5 (2012). Carlstrom, Charles T., Timothy S. Fuerst, and Matthias Paustian. “How Inflationary Is an Extended Period of Low Interest Rates?,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 12-2 (2012). Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles I. Evans. “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, 113(February 2005), pp. 1-45. Cogley, Timothy, and James M. Nason. “Impulse Dynamics and Propagation Mechanisms in a Real Business Cycle Model,” Economics Letters, 43(December 1993), pp. 77-81. Cogley, Timothy, and James M. Nason. “Output Dynamics in Real-Business-Cycle Models,” American Economic Review, 85(June 1995), pp. 492-511. Cogley, Timothy, and Thomas J. Sargent. “Drifts and Volatilities: Monetary Policies and Outcomes in the Post-WWII US,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 8(2005), pp. 262-302. Cooley, Thomas F., Stephen F. LeRoy, and Neil Raymon. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: Note,” American Economic Review, 74 (June 1984), pp. 467-70. Fernández-Villaverde, Jesus, Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana, and Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez. “The New Macroeconometrics: A Bayesian Approach,” in A. O'Hagan and A.M. West eds., The Oxford Handbook of Applied Bayesian Analysis. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. Fernández-Villaverde, Jesus, Grey Gordon, Pablo A. Guerrón-Quintana, and Juan F. Rubio-Ramírez. “Non-linear Adventures at the Zero Lower Bound,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 12-10 (2012).. King, Robert G., and Charles I. Plosser. “Real Business Cycles and the Test of the Adelmans,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 33(April 1994), pp. 405-38. 10 King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio T. Rebelo. “Production, Growth, and Business Cycles: I. The Basic Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 33(May 1988a), pp. 195-232. King, Robert G., Charles I. Plosser, and Sergio T. Rebelo. “Production, Growth, and Business Cycles: II. The Basic Neoclassical Model,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 33 (May 1988b), pp. 309-42. Leeper, Eric M., and Troy Davig. “Generalizing the Taylor Principle,” American Economic Review, 97(June 2006), pp. 607-35. Leeper, Eric M., and Tao Zha. “Modest Policy Interventions,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 50 (2003), pp. 1673-1700. Long, John B., and Charles I. Plosser. “Real Business Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 91(February 1983), pp. 39-69. Lucas, Robert E., Jr. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique,” in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 1, 1976, pp. 19-46. Maćkowiak, Bartosz, and Frank Smets. “Implications of Microeconomic Price Data for Macroeconomic Models,” in J. Fuhrer, Y. Kodrzycki, J. Little, and G. Olivei, eds., Understanding Inflation and the Implications for Monetary Policy: A Phillips Curve Perspective. Boston: MIT Press, October 2009, pp. 291-333. Rotemberg, Julio, J., and Michael Woodford. “Real-Business-Cycle Models and Forecastable Movements in Output, Hours, and Consumption,” American Economic Review, 86 (June 1995), pp. 71-89. Sargent, Thomas J. “The Ends of Four Big Inflations,” in Hall, R.E., ed., Inflation: Causes and Effects. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983. Sargent, Thomas J. “Vector Autoregressions, Expectations, and Advice,” American Economic Review, 74 (May 1984), pp. 408-15. Sargent, Thomas J. “Expectations and the Non-neutrality of Lucas,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 37 (1996), pp. 535-48. Sargent, Thomas J. The Conquest of American Inflation). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999. Sims, Christopher A. “Policy Analysis with Econometric Models,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (1982), pp. 107-52. 11 Sims, Christopher A. “A Rational Expectations Framework for Short Run Policy Analysis,” in W.A. Barnett and K.J. Singleton, eds., New Approaches to Monetary Economics: Proceedings of the Second International Symposium in Economic Theory and Econometrics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987. Sims, Christopher A., and Tao Zha. “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Policy?,” American Economic Review, 96 (2006), pp. 54-81. Smets, Frank, and Rafael Wouters. “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” American Economic Review, 97 (June 2007), pp. 586-606.
