Page 1 of 9 Supporting Strong, Steady, and Sustainable Growth Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco To the World Affairs Council of Sonoma Santa Rosa, California April 6, 2018 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY Introduction Good afternoon everyone, and thank you for the kind introduction. I’ve spent this year so far giving “good news” speeches; talking about the strong economy, the long expansion, and robust job growth. And with good reason: We’re in the third – in fact, very soon to be the second – longest economic expansion in American history. We Page 2 of 9 added over two million jobs last year, the unemployment rate is the lowest it’s been since 2000,1 and inflation is closing in on our 2 percent target. The San Francisco Bay Area is a leading example of the growth we’re seeing across the country. Many of the things that drive us crazy—bad traffic, sky-high housing costs, and sidewalks and streets blocked by construction—are signs of a robust economy. It’s easy to blame the gridlock on 101 on all the techies flooding the Bay Area. But it’s not just tech that’s powering the American economy—far from it. This healthy expansion is taking place nationwide and across the full range of sectors. And it’s part of a global trend of stronger-than-expected growth. Today, I will continue to accentuate the positive and highlight the reasons I expect the economy will continue to improve, reaching milestones that we haven’t seen in nearly 50 years. I’ll finish with my views on what this means for monetary policy and how we can keep this economy, strong, resilient, and growing at a steady pace. Before I go any further, it would be best to give the usual Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. What drives sustainable growth? Last year real gross domestic product, or GDP, increased 2.6 percent. This is a solid performance. Importantly, it’s above the trend growth rate, which I peg at about 1¾ percent. 1 This speech was finalized before the release of March employment data on the morning of April 6, 2018. Page 3 of 9 I’m often asked what the trend growth rate is and how it differs from GDP growth. The trend growth rate is the rate of growth that can be sustained by the economy over the long term. It has two main drivers: labor force growth and productivity growth. With more people working, making things and using their income to buy things, the more we can produce. Equally, if innovations in technology mean that companies can make more state-of-the-art microprocessors in an hour than they could before, that will also contribute to higher sustainable growth. An important development of the past decade is that the trend growth rate today appears to be considerably slower than the growth trends we’ve previously seen in our lifetimes. This slower pace of growth is a reflection of a sharp decline in labor force growth and relatively slow productivity growth.2 What’s behind the decline in labor force growth? Two main things: First, the baby boomers are retiring in droves, and second, the fertility rate in the United States has declined to a low level.3 And despite the rampant innovations we’re seeing around us, especially in the Bay Area—robots delivering take-out, driverless cars, and Alexa in every living room— these aren’t yet translating into rapid gains in productivity growth. To give some context, in the 1990s and early 2000s, annual productivity gains in the United States averaged 2 to 3 percent. By contrast, productivity gains over the past decade have averaged only about 1 percent per year. 2 Fernald (2016). 3 Hamilton et al. (2017). Page 4 of 9 Looking ahead, I expect growth to average around 2.5 percent over this year and next. Strong financial conditions, better-than-expected global growth, and fiscal stimulus of lower taxes and higher spending have all created tailwinds that account for growth running above trend. Growth above trend doesn’t necessarily pose a particular risk at this time. But it’s one of the factors I’m assessing when I’m thinking about how to best support economic growth over the medium term. In that regard, a question I’m frequently hearing as the expansion closes in on nine years is: are we “due” for a recession? The short answer is no. Recessions don’t happen because a timer goes off. Research shows that the odds of going into a recession are the same whether you’re in the seventh, eighth, or ninth year of the expansion.4 Instead, recessions generally happen because of some big event: the housing crash of a decade ago or the bursting of the dot-com bubble in the early 2000s. These kinds of events are notoriously hard to predict, and the recessions that often follow don’t happen because the business cycle has a time limit on it. Given that the current pace of growth is above trend, my view is that we need to continue on the path of raising interest rates. This will keep things on an even footing and reduce the risk of us getting to a point where the economy could overheat, and create problems that could end badly. Obviously, growth figures are the ones that many people are focused on. But as President of the San Francisco Fed and a voting member on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), I’m judged on what happens to employment and inflation. The 4 Rudebusch (2016). Page 5 of 9 Federal Reserve has a dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, so my day job is about understanding what’s going on with those figures and then making appropriate monetary policy recommendations. Employment When it comes to the maximum employment goal, we have made enormous strides and I see the labor market continuing to improve. We added about 2.2 million jobs in 2017. That’s about twice the number needed to keep pace with normal labor force growth.5 Based on the data we’ve seen recently, we are set to add even more jobs to the economy this year. With jobs growth being so robust, the unemployment rate has moved down to around 4 percent. Based on my forecast for the economy, I expect the unemployment rate to continue to edge down to 3-1/2 percent by next year. That would be the lowest rate of unemployment recorded in the United States since 1969. What’s happening in the nation as a whole is also happening here in California, where the unemployment rate is already the lowest since 1969. These low unemployment numbers have many people asking why we’re not seeing greater wage growth, but that number actually has been slowly ratcheting up. And this is consistent with the reports I’ve been hearing from business leaders for a while. As talent becomes increasingly scarce, they’re offering higher wages in a bid to compete for employees. I expect this to intensify as the competition for workers gathers steam. 5 Bidder, Mahedy, and Valletta (2016). Page 6 of 9 Inflation Wage growth is the perfect segue to discuss inflation. Six years ago, the FOMC set itself the goal of 2 percent inflation. Admittedly, since then, inflation has been running below that mark most of the time. This underrun of our target reflects a number of influences. These include the weak economy following the recession, a strong dollar that reduced the costs of imported goods and services, and some special factors that had a temporary effect on prices in certain categories. Inflation undershooting its target by a few tenths of a percentage point probably doesn’t sound that concerning to most people. In fact, historically, high and rising inflation has acted as an alarm bell to warn that the economy is on an unsustainable footing. But inflation that’s too low also poses a risk. Very low inflation raises the possibility of deflation – that is, falling prices – which carries with it its own set of problems for the economy. That’s why, as a policymaker, I’m keeping such a close eye on the behavior of inflation, even when the economy is performing so well. The good news is for most of the past year, inflation has been running closer to 2 percent.6 With the economy strong, and strengthening further, I expect that we’ll see inflation reach and actually slightly exceed our longer-run 2 percent goal for the next few years. 6 Over the 9 months ending in February 2018, the annualized rate of core PCE inflation was very close to 2 percent. Page 7 of 9 Monetary Policy I began by describing a very positive economic outlook of strong growth, low and falling unemployment, and inflation that is closing in on our 2 percent long-run goal. Against this background, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate by ¼ percentage point at our most recent meeting.7 We also indicated that we expect further gradual interest rate increases to be appropriate. In particular, our recent projections indicate that the center of the distribution of FOMC projections foresees a total of three to four rate increases this year and further gradual rate increases over the next two years, bringing the target federal funds rate to around 3-1/2 percent by the end of 2020.8 In my view, this is the right direction for monetary policy. We are certainly not “due” for a recession, but it’s equally important we keep growth on a sustainable footing to keep the strong economy going as long as possible. This gradual process of removing the monetary stimulus put in during the recession is designed to keep the healthy expansion on track, maintain inflation near our 2 percent goal, and to minimize the risk that the economy could overheat down the road. Note that the rate increases we have put in place so far have not stalled the economy. In fact, the economy continues to steam ahead. For that reason, I am confident that we can carry on the process of gradually moving interest rates up over the next two years while seeing solid growth and historically low rates of unemployment. 7 Board of Governors (2018a). 8 Board of Governors (2018b). Page 8 of 9 That’s our plan. Of course, even the best-laid plans can go awry when the unexpected happens. Therefore, my approach is to always follow the data very carefully and adjust my recommendations accordingly. If actual growth is paltry, or if there are signs of an economy that’s overheating and inflationary pressures are building too fast, then I’ll reevaluate my position and advocate for adjusting the path of rates accordingly. To sum up: the outlook is very positive. The economy is on course to be as strong as we have seen in many decades and inflation is moving closer to our target. The challenge for monetary policy is to keep it that way. This is never an easy task, but we are well positioned to achieve our goals, and to respond to any unexpected twists and turns that may lie in the economic road ahead. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. Page 9 of 9 References Bidder, Rhys, Tim Mahedy, and Rob Valletta. 2016. “Trend Job Growth: Where’s Normal?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-32 (October 24). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/october/trend-job-growth-where-is-normal/ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2018a. “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement.” Press release, March 21. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20180321a.ht m Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2018b. “FOMC Projections materials, accessible version.” March 21. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20180321.htm Fernald, John. 2016. “What Is the New Normal for U.S. Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-30 (October 11). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/october/new-normal-for-gdp- growth/ Hamilton, Brady E., Joyce A. Martin, Michelle J.K. Osterman, Anne K. Driscoll, and Lauren M. Rossen. 2017. “Births: Provisional Data for 2016.” Vital Statistics Rapid Release 2 (June), National Center for Health Statistics. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/vsrr/report002.pdf Rudebusch, Glenn D. 2016. “Will the Economic Recovery Die of Old Age?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-03 (February 4). https://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/february/will-economic-recovery- die-of-old-age/

Page 1 of 11 The Future Fortunes of R-star: Are They Really Rising? Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco To the Economic Club of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota May 15, 2018 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY Introduction Good afternoon, and thank you for the kind introduction. I know that here, at the Economic Club of Minnesota, you regularly host Fed presidents, so you’re no strangers to speeches on interest rates and monetary policy. Today I’m going to take advantage of that fact and take a step back. Today I’m going to talk about where I see Page 2 of 11 interest rates going, not just over the next few months, but over the next several years, and discuss the economic fundamentals driving the changes taking place. One of the key factors that influences my thinking on monetary policy is something called r-star. Today I hope you’ll indulge me while I describe what r-star is, where it’s headed, and how that affects the direction of interest rates. Now, I’ve already referred to interest rates and monetary policy several times. So before I go any further I should give the usual Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else at the Minneapolis Fed, the San Francisco Fed, the New York Fed, or the Federal Reserve System as a whole! R-star and the new normal So what is this r-star I keep referring to, and why is it so important when it comes to thinking about interest rates? R-star is what economists call the natural rate of interest; it’s the real interest rate expected to prevail when the economy is at full strength. While a central bank like the Fed sets short-term interest rates, r-star is a result of longer-term economic factors beyond the influence of central banks and monetary policy.1 Such is my fascination with interest rates, that r-star is an area I’ve researched extensively. If by the end of this speech you share just a tenth of my passion for r-star, I’ll feel like I’ve done my job! 1 Consistent with this definition, my discussion will focus on the longer-term r-star that will prevail over the next decade, in contrast to a shorter-run concept that may fluctuate from year to year depending on economic developments. Page 3 of 11 My own view is that r-star today is around 0.5 percent. Assuming inflation is running at our goal of 2 percent, that means the typical, or normal short-term interest rate is 2.5 percent.2 When put into a historical context, r-star stands at an incredibly low level—in fact, a full 2 percentage points below what a normal interest rate looked like just 20 years ago. This trend is not unique to the United States: Averaging across Canada, the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom, a measure of global r-star is a bit below 0.5 percent.3 R-star matters a great deal, because it anchors where short-term interest rates will tend to be in the future. In a world of low r-star, policymakers, banks, businesses, and households all need to plan for lower interest rates than they’ve experienced in decades past. Recently some economists and central bankers have pointed to signs that the fortunes of r-star are set to rise. I wish I could join in this optimism, but I don’t yet see convincing evidence of such a shift. The longer-run drivers still point to a “new normal” of a low r-star and relatively low interest rates. 2 For comparison, the median longer-run value of the federal funds rate in the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC’s) most recent economic projections is 2.875 percent (Board of Governors 2018b). 3 Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017) and Fujiwara et al. (2016). Page 4 of 11 What drives the fortunes of r-star? I’ve already mentioned that r-star is driven by longer-run structural factors, beyond the influence of central banks. But what are those factors, and how do they influence the fortunes of r-star? Three key global developments have caused r-star to come down in a number of developed economies over the past two decades: changes in demographics, a slowdown in productivity growth, and heightened demand for safe assets.4 Changes in demographics affect r-star on a number of levels. We are living longer: Over the past three decades, life expectancy in developed economies has risen by nearly five years and is expected to keep rising.5 When people expect to live longer, they tend to save more for retirement, and this increased saving puts downward pressure on interest rates.6 Despite the fact that we’re living longer, labor force growth in the United States has actually slowed, largely due to baby boomers retiring and a lower fertility rate. In fact, the labor force is forecast to grow just ½ percent per year over the next decade, well below past trends.7 Fewer people joining the labor force means fewer people working, producing, and consuming things, which leads to slower growth and less investment, which in turn drives r-star down. The same thing is true of productivity growth, which has also slowed compared with earlier decades.8 In the 1990s and early 2000s, the explosion of the internet and 4 See Williams (2016, 2017) and references therein. 5 Data are from the United Nations (2017). 6 Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016) and Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016). 7 Congressional Budget Office (2018). 8 Fernald (2016). Page 5 of 11 computing power led to annual productivity gains averaging 2 to 3 percent. Productivity gains since the recession have generally hovered around 1 percent. I have a sneaking suspicion it’s because we’re using all that technology to play Candy Crush, instead of increasing productivity! But I don’t have the data to back that up. In all seriousness, productivity growth is influenced by technological innovation, which is notoriously hard to predict. In my home state of California, the world appears to be reinvented every week, but if we look at data from the OECD, there’s no indication that we can expect a leap in productivity growth on an international scale. While I can hope we’re on the brink of another game-changing invention like the internet, for the moment, the data indicate productivity growth is still stuck in low gear. The third and final factor holding down r-star is the high global demand for safe assets we’ve seen develop over the past two decades. This has driven down the returns on Treasury securities and safe short-term loans relative to those on riskier assets like corporate bonds and equities, and thereby depressed r-star.9 A positive outlook All this doom and gloom caused by demographics, productivity growth, and the demand for safe assets may come as a surprise. We’re now in the second-longest expansion in U.S. history, and like most people I feel very positive about the economic outlook, here and abroad. 9 Bernanke (2015) and Del Negro et al. (2017). Page 6 of 11 U.S. GDP increased about 2.5 percent last year, the unemployment rate is the lowest we’ve seen in 18 years, and inflation is nearing the Fed’s 2 percent target. The latest inflation data show that the drop in inflation we saw in 2017 was temporary. It is very reassuring to me, as I spent the latter part of last year making predictions that inflation would start to rise this year. And it’s always a relief when one of your predictions comes true! Looking ahead, I expect the expansion to continue, with growth averaging around 2.5 percent over this year and the next. There are a few tailwinds that account for this solid economic performance. These include strong financial conditions, solid global growth, and the fiscal stimulus. In fact, the International Monetary Fund recently reported that global growth registered an impressive 3.8 percent in 2017, and they expect it to be near 4 percent this year and next.10 The optimism about r-star is (sadly) misplaced It’s these strong tailwinds that are leading some people to believe that we’ll see r-star move back up. But, as I said, this optimism is, sadly, misplaced. It’s time to return to our trio of demographics, productivity growth, and the global demand for safe assets. 10 International Monetary Fund (2018). Page 7 of 11 When it comes to demographics, the thing I hear discussed is that the baby boomer generation is a peculiarity that will slowly work its way out of the data. That’s a polite way of saying that, once my generation has retired, labor force growth will return to the speed of recent decades. But research by my colleagues at the San Francisco Fed reveals that our increased longevity and propensity to save are the key demographic drivers keeping r-star low, and they’re not about to reverse.11 People living longer and saving more are two trends I would like to see continue! But they do both spell bad news for the fortunes of r-star. The second thing I hear discussed is that there’s more cause for optimism around productivity growth because of the fiscal stimulus and, more specifically, the tax cuts. In principle, if businesses have a smaller tax burden, they’ll have a greater incentive to invest in capital equipment and research and development, which will drive productivity growth. Although I agree that lower tax rates on businesses should spur greater investment and productivity, the resulting effect on r-star is likely to be relatively modest. By my own calculations, we can expect the fiscal stimulus to increase r-star over the next decade by no more than 0.25 percentage point. This modest effect is in part because the tax cuts are front-loaded—that is, they have a larger effect on growth in the next few years than in later ones.12 In addition, it’s important to remember that r-star is affected by global economic conditions and not just those in the United States. A bump in U.S. growth improves 11 Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2017). 12 Mertens (2018). Page 8 of 11 global growth, but if other countries don’t follow suit, the effect on r-star will be relatively modest. The third leading factor in terms of a rising r-star is the demand for safe assets. The theoretical argument that, with such strong economic conditions, we should see the appetite for riskier investments increase, pushing up interest rates overall, makes sense. But that’s not what’s played out in the data, at least so far. These three issues—demographics, productivity growth, and the demand for safe assets—all point to an r-star that’s set to hold its position low in the sky for quite some time. Monetary policy If you’re not as passionate as I am about r-star at this point, listen up, because things are about to get more interesting. I’m going to discuss what all this means for monetary policy and the path of interest rates. Following the global financial crisis, the Fed cut interest rates and kept them low to stimulate the economy and get it back on its feet. Now that the expansion is well under way, we’re in the process of normalizing monetary policy and bringing interest rates back up. Based on the center of the distribution of projections from our March meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee has indicated a total of three to four Page 9 of 11 rate increases this year and further gradual rate increases over the next two years will be appropriate.13 I view this to be the right direction for monetary policy. At our most recent meeting at the beginning of May we decided not to change the federal funds rate, consistent with our gradual pace of policy normalization.14 But even as we raise rates, I’m conscious that the fundamental drivers that govern r- star are lower than we’ve seen in the past. With a new normal for short-term rates of around 2½ percent, interest rates are likely to remain low relative to historical experience. Conclusion In conclusion, it’s important to distinguish between the current strong economic conditions and the key longer-run drivers underpinning interest rates. I am always keeping a close eye on both the short-term economic outlook and the longer-term factors that define the more fundamental changes taking place. I don’t have a crystal ball, so it’s always the numbers that inform my opinion. For the moment, r-star continues to shine brightly, guiding monetary policy, but hold steady, low on the horizon. 13 Board of Governors (2018b). 14 Board of Governors (2018a) Page 10 of 11 References Bernanke, Ben S. 2015. “Why Are Interest Rates So Low, Part 3: The Global Savings Glut.” Ben Bernanke’s Blog, Brookings, April 1. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben- bernanke/2015/04/01/why-are-interest-rates-so-low-part-3-the-global-savings-glut/ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2018a. “Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement.” Press release, May 2. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20180502a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2018b. “FOMC Projections materials, accessible version.” March 21. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20180321.htm Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2016. “Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism.” European Economic Review 88, pp. 208–226. Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2017. “Demographic Transition and Low U.S. Interest Rates.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-27 (September 25). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2017/september/demographic-transition-and-low-us-interest-rates/ Congressional Budget Office. 2018. “The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2018 to 2028.” Report, April. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/53651 Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2017. “Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring). https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/safety-liquidity-and-the-natural-rate-of-interest/ Fernald, John. 2016. “What Is the New Normal for U.S. Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-30 (October 11). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/october/new-normal-for-gdp-growth/ Fujiwara, Shigeaki, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo. 2016. “Developments in the Natural Rate of Interest in Japan.” Bank of Japan Review 2016-E-12 (October). https://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/rev_2016/data/rev16e12.pdf Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido. 2016. “Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.080 Page 11 of 11 Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2017. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants.” Journal of International Economics 108(1, May), pp. S59–S75. Working paper version available at http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/working-papers/2016/11/ International Monetary Fund. 2018. World Economic Outlook, April 2018: Cyclical Upswing, Structural Change. April. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2018/03/20/world- economic-outlook-april-2018 Mertens, Karel. 2018. “The Near Term Growth Impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Working Paper 1803. https://doi.org/10.24149/wp1803 United Nations. 2017. World Population Prospects. https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/ Williams, John C. 2016. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23 (August 15). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/august/monetary-policy-and-low-r-star-natural-rate-of-interest/ Williams, John C. 2017. “Three Questions on R-star.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-05 (February 21). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2017/february/three- questions-on-r-star-natural-rate-of-interest/
