Considering Alternative Monetary Policy Frameworks: an Inflation Range With an Adjustable Inflation Target By Eric S. Rosengren January 12, 2018 University of California, San Diego, Rady School of Management Conference on Money, Models, and Digital Innovation Global Interdependence Center Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren today suggested that the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy framework has an opportunity to adapt to the recent experience with prolonged low interest rates. Rosengren said low inflation has enabled the Federal Reserve to pursue a very gradual exit from the “extraordinary” monetary policy accommodation undertaken to address the financial crisis, Great Recession, and slow recovery – adding that he does not view the “somewhat lower than expected” recent inflation rate as particularly troublesome for near-term monetary policy. But “I do see low and fixed inflation targets as a potential problem – particularly if we continue to experience low productivity growth, a low equilibrium interest rate, and the near-certainty of a slowly growing and aging workforce,” Rosengren said. In such an environment and with a two percent inflation goal, interest rates are likely to be low, on average. When a recession eventually does occur, Rosengren said, policymakers would likely start with a low policy rate leaving little room to lower rates to offset the effects of the recession. In addition to making it difficult to conduct monetary policy, low interest rate environments can potentially undermine financial stability, he said, as households and firms “reach for yield” in the face of low interest rates, almost always taking on additional risk as a consequence. Fundamental changes such as lower growth in productivity and in population have made it much more likely that future recessions could also result in periods of prolonged very low interest rates and a need to conduct monetary policy with nontraditional methods. “If we seek to avoid a prolonged low interest rate environment in the future, then policymakers should start studying and discussing alternative frameworks to make this outcome less likely.” Suggesting that the “optimal” inflation rate is not likely to remain constant over time, Rosengren offered the alternative of an inflation range with an adjustable inflation target – a range of inflation rates acceptable to policymakers across many economic circumstances, and a medium-term goal within that range policymakers would set depending on the current circumstance. Still, Rosengren acknowledged that such flexibility would generate more uncertainty about inflation in the medium to long run. However, he said as long as the inflation rate were in a relatively narrow band, such as 1.5 to 3.0 percent, the range would not be a dramatic change from actual experience and would therefore be less likely to impact inflation expectations. Turning to forecasts, Rosengren said recent forecast errors of inflation and unemployment have not been particularly large, and do not pose much challenge to continuing on the current path of gradual increases in the federal funds rate. “Perhaps the bigger risk for short-run policy is the fact that the unemployment rate continues to fall further below sustainable levels, and will likely continue to do so going forward, risking the sustainability of the recovery.” Rosengren was speaking at the Money, Models, & Digital Innovation Conference hosted by the Global Interdependence Center. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords monetary policy

Perspectives on the Economy and Fed Policy: Why Continuing to Remove Monetary Accommodation is Appropriate By Eric S. Rosengren March 9, 2018 Springfield, MA Springfield Regional Chamber's Outlook luncheon Springfield Regional Chamber Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share In remarks Friday, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said that economic data "have been quite good," monetary policy remains accommodative, and fiscal policy has just become quite a bit more stimulative." The unemployment rate, he said, is now below even the lowest estimates by Federal Reserve policymakers for the level that is likely to be sustainable in the longer run. Turning to inflation, Rosengren said that while it is still a bit below the Federal Open Market Committee's target, most forecasters expect inflation to rise to, or near, that 2 percent target by the end of 2018. The notable strength of the labor market provides some confidence in hitting the 2 percent inflation target. Rosengren noted that the number of individuals filing initial claims for unemployment insurance is at low levels not seen since the late 1960s and early 1970s, when the labor force was considerably smaller than it is today. While a tight labor market provides definite advantages – such as employment opportunities for workers who have struggled to find a job – "providing too much stimulus from either monetary or fiscal policy at this stage of the economic cycle could threaten to create a so-called 'boom and bust' economy," which policymakers certainly want to avoid, said Rosengren. He also noted that recent volatility in stock and bond markets likely reflects, in part, the realization that financial markets need to factor in the risk that wages and prices could grow too quickly in the event of too much fiscal and monetary stimulus, "particularly with the economy currently at or beyond full employment, and inflation approaching the Fed's goal." "To keep the economy on a sustainable path, I expect that it will be appropriate to remove monetary policy accommodation at a regular but gradual pace," Rosengren said, "and perhaps a bit faster than the three, one-quarter point increases envisioned for this year" in the December projection of appropriate policy by Fed officials. Rosengren said that this expectation assumes, of course, the data continue to come in more-or-less consistent with his outlook. Rosengren was speaking at the Springfield Regional Chamber Outlook 2018 in Springfield, MA. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)
