Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts Share Watch Live Thank you Eric, and thank you to everyone at the Boston Fed and throughout the system who have contributed to this conference. This gathering comes a few weeks after the announcement of this year's stress test results, so let me begin by recounting the highlights of those results. They show that our financial system remains resilient and that capital planning by banks continues to improve. The largest and most complex banks were tested against a severe hypothetical recession and retained strong capital levels, well above their minimum requirements. They demonstrated the ability to withstand a severe and lasting economic downturn and still be able to lend to households and businesses. Additionally, most firms are now meeting the high expectations we have set to make sure capital planning takes into account their specific risks and vulnerabilities. This is an improvement from last year. Overall, these results are good news that confirm our financial system is significantly stronger than before the crisis. Now let me turn to the purpose of this conference, which is to sharpen our understanding of the experience gained from stress testing and apply these lessons to think about the future. And let me begin by acknowledging that—notwithstanding our openness to learning from the collective experience of all of us in this room—the future of stress testing will, in a number of important ways, necessarily resemble the past. For example, we're still going to have them. Over the course of the last 18 months, I have heard overwhelmingly—from academics, from think tanks of every stripe, from banks of every size, from regulatory colleagues both domestic and foreign—that stress tests should continue to be a key element of the Federal Reserve's supervision of systemically important banks and a key aspect of the Fed's efforts to promote financial stability. Stress tests should be regular, rigorous, and dynamic. And the banks' performance on these tests will continue to be the most risk sensitive and consequential assessment of the affected banks' capital requirements. Transparency around the stress testing process and results was a fundamental principle of the first stress test and every one that has followed, and it will remain a primary goal. Stress tests, as ever, will provide the public with essential information to assess the health of banks and the overall financial system. To be credible, stress tests will also continue to provide significant information about how the Fed does its work, so the public can understand the rigor and independence of our assessment process and how we come to our judgment of the firms we test. Fidelity to these principles, embraced in the depths of the crisis by the first stress test a decade ago, does not mean that stress testing should never change or that it hasn't changed over the years. We have learned from our experiences with the early tests and added useful features and adjustments. These include a counterparty default scenario, as well as a number of policy statements that more explicitly convey the principles we find important in a sensible stress testing program. Stress testing has evolved, and must continue to evolve, to take on what we as supervisors learn from our work and what we can learn from others. Each year, we have refined both the substance and the process of the stress tests, guided by our own experience and by critiques and suggestions from others. This feedback comes from a variety sources, including conferences such as this one, and I am confident that the presentations today will provide insights that result in improvements in our stress tests. If stress tests are to continue to be relevant and effective, I strongly believe that they must continue to change: they must respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and the risk-management capabilities of firms. Evolutionary change has been a consistent principle of stress testing since the beginning, embraced by my predecessors at the Board of Governors and our supervisory staff and reflected in each cycle of tests. Without such adjustments, regulators, banks, and the broader public cannot get a clear and dynamic view of the capital positions of the largest banks. Stress tests each year have upheld the original principle of transparency around the capital adequacy of our largest banks. Stress tests results should allow investors, counterparties, analysts and markets to make more informed judgments about the condition of banks. Along with other regulatory measures, this transparency increases market discipline and it subjects the Federal Reserve to greater outside scrutiny and analysis. Accountability is important not only for the usual reasons that apply in a democracy but also, in this case, because stress tests can only be effective when the public has confidence in the Fed's evaluation of the capital adequacy of banks. In effect, stress tests are also a test of the Fed's supervision of large banks. In these remarks, I will first sketch out how changes in regulation, risk management, the economy, and overall financial stability have prompted alterations to stress tests over the past decade. Much of that change has enhanced transparency, which is a founding principle for stress tests. I will then suggest some ways in which the effectiveness of stress testing can be further enhanced with greater transparency. Ten years ago, in May of 2009, the Fed and the Treasury Department released the first stress test results under the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP). At that moment, the U.S. economy was in free fall. The United States had lost an astonishing three million jobs in the previous four months. One significant reason for these losses was that many businesses were severely constrained in their access to funding and found it impossible to predict when that access might improve. The goal of the first test was urgent and simple: to restore confidence in the 19 large banks that then accounted for two-thirds of the assets in the banking system. In fact, simply announcing in March that there would be tests helped stabilize bank finances. That improvement continued after the results in May outlined the quite feasible steps for raising additional capital that the banks would need to take, and did take, to be able to continue lending if adverse conditions continued. Challenging conditions did continue, but the stress tests and other actions taken in the first half of 2009 marked a turning point. The recovery from the Great Recession began in July, as the financial system came back to life, and then steadily strengthened. The principles that made that first test so effective were independence and transparency. For the first time, an independent authority, the Federal Reserve, would seek to independently assess risks. 1 Just as important, the details of that assessment would be shared with the public, an extent of transparency that until then wasn't characteristic of bank supervision but would become the hallmark of the regulatory framework erected in response to the crisis. The first tests relied heavily on banks' internal risk models, but they still represented a huge step in independence in providing the public with an assessment of the health and resiliency of large banks. Transparency facilitated both market discipline and accountability. The information provided to the public under the SCAP stress test reinforced the entire enterprise of estimating the capital shortfall faced by major banks. It held the banks accountable for information on their capital adequacy and required them to fill the capital hole. The next big step for stress testing came with its integration with the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), beginning in 2011. One big change from the initial SCAP test was that stress tests were no longer a one-time emergency measure intended to restore confidence in major financial institutions. Instead, they became a recurring, ongoing process intended to maintain confidence in major institutions. Second, stress tests were no longer a discretionary exercise by supervisors—under Dodd-Frank, they became the law of the land. And third, when they were integrated into CCAR, stress tests became part of a comprehensive —it's the first C in CCAR—framework for capital planning that more closely connected capital regulation to risk management of banks and overall supervision. These were changes, but with the effect of reinforcing the founding principles of the SCAP test. Transparency was enhanced when stress tests became mandatory, recurring events and the public could depend on continuing to have access to information about banks' capital adequacy. Also, the independence of those judgments was enhanced when Congress made them a statutory responsibility for the Fed and when they were integrated into our CCAR framework. Further changes to stress testing have likewise reinforced the original goals. Stress testing scenarios have become richer and more challenging, providing more information about how banks would deal with a range of adverse developments and, for example, exploring the effects of more differentiated risks that are not tied to the business cycle. Large trading banks now face an instantaneous shock to their trading assets, and many participants in the stress tests now must address how they would respond to the failure of their largest counterparty. Our stress tests demonstrate that banks have now built enough capital to withstand a severe recession. The capital-building phase of the post-crisis era is now complete, but as part of CCAR, stress testing continues to contribute to the significant and ongoing improvement since 2009 in risk management by banks. The original reason for the qualitative objection aspect of stress testing was to provide incentives for banks to address the risk-management shortcomings that the Federal Reserve had observed during the financial crisis. For example, many firms supervised by the Federal Reserve had substantial deficiencies in their ability to measure, monitor, and manage their risks. These shortcomings made it difficult for banks to accurately report their risk exposures to the Board, and consequently, threatened to undermine the credibility of the stress tests, which were, and remain, dependent on data from the banks. Since the beginning of CCAR in 2011, large banks have significantly improved their risk-management and capital-planning processes. The qualitative assessment conducted as part of the 2018 and 2019 CCAR cycles found that most firms either meet or are very close to meeting the Federal Reserve's supervisory expectations for capital planning. Large banks have improved the methods they use to identify their unique risks, now use sound practices for identifying and addressing model weaknesses, and have strong processes in place to evaluate their capital positions on a forward-looking basis. While we continue to perform a qualitative assessment and ensure that progress is retained, the improvements led the Federal Reserve to conclude that for most banks this assessment can be incorporated into our regular supervisory practices. The evolution of our qualitative assessment reflects the experience of the past 10 years of stress testing, and in particular, the great improvement in risk management by large banks and the cumulative effect of the Fed's improved supervision of large institutions. As I said earlier, for stress testing to remain effective, it must respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and risk-management capabilities. The changes to CCAR have occurred in the context of a similarly dramatic improvement in the strength and resilience of the financial system. The firms have more than doubled their capital since the first round of stress tests in 2009. Since that time, the common equity of the largest 18 firms has increased by more than $650 billion. Let me now turn to the most recent changes to CCAR and stress testing and put them in the context of the history I have just related. Congress revisited large bank supervision last year in S. 2155, yet the legislation it passed reaffirmed the important role of stress testing. This shouldn't be surprising, because the experience of stress testing over the last 10 years has demonstrated that it is a highly useful element of large bank supervision and the promotion of financial stability. Something else that shouldn't be surprising is that this experience has revealed that periodic stress testing has turned out to be a less useful supervisory tool to evaluate the risks of smaller and less complex financial institutions. Congress made use of this experience by raising the threshold for stress testing to $100 billion in assets and providing more flexibility for the Fed to tailor stress testing for all firms. This step has, once again, advanced the principles demonstrated in the first stress test and ever since. It has increased transparency because incorporating and disclosing what we have learned about the varying effectiveness of stress testing at different types of institutions is making stress testing more effective. The accountability of the Fed is enhanced when we are seen taking on board what we have learned through successive cycles of stress tests, and this strengthens the independence and credibility of our judgments. For those of us who believe stress testing should remain central to supervision and promoting financial stability, it is vital that an adjustment such as this takes place as appropriate. With that in mind, let me review recent changes and proposed changes to the Federal Reserve's stress testing. These changes are designed to make CCAR more transparent and simple and to feature less unnecessary volatility. The first principle is transparency . We have taken a number of recent steps to enhance the transparency around our models and the stress testing process more generally. Earlier this year, the Board published enhanced disclosures on two of the key models that we use in stress testing. In addition, the Board published estimated loss rates for groups of loans with distinct characteristics, to show how supervisory models treat specific assets under stress. We will publish disclosures about two additional models in 2020 and each year thereafter until we have provided transparency about all our stress test models. At the same time, we published a new policy statement on our approach to supervisory stress testing. Among other things, the statement emphasizes the importance of independence and stability to the credibility of our stress tests. We are currently considering options to provide additional transparency regarding scenarios and scenario design and I expect that the Board will seek comment on the advisability of, and possible approaches to, gathering the public's input on scenarios and salient risks facing the banking system each year. Such a proposal may also provide additional details about the scenario design features that underpins each year's scenarios, and a range of other enhancements. Some argue that the greater transparency and disclosure promoted by recent changes and proposed changes to stress testing amounts to providing banks with the answers to the tests. 2 This both overstates the extent of disclosure involved and misunderstands what we are trying to accomplish in stress testing—goals that haven't changed since the spring of 2009. If the goal were only to conduct a test that was difficult to pass—like the qualifying exams for some of the more esoteric and restrictive high-IQ societies—then trying to explain principles, scenario design, and how models work would be inappropriate. If the measure of success for the Fed in administering a stress test was simply how many banks failed, then greater transparency would indeed be a mistake. But that is not the purpose of stress testing, and it never has been. The vitally important goal is to improve and sustain good risk management and capital planning at the individual institutions we supervise and to promote the stability of the financial system. Like a teacher, we don't want banks to fail, we want them to learn. In this case, we want them to learn good risk management in the context of forward-looking capital planning. This will provide the public with more information about the capital planning of major banks, and about how the Federal Reserve views good capital planning and risk management, bolstering our credibility. The second principle reflected in recent changes to stress testing is simplicity . One important proposal—what we are calling the stress capital buffer—would simplify the Fed's large bank capital rule by integrating the stress testing process with our traditional regulatory capital rules. Our regulatory capital rule includes both minimum capital requirements and a buffer that sits on top of those minimum requirements. The buffer serves as an early warning to a firm and to supervisors, and it requires the firm to reduce its capital distributions as the firm approaches the minimum requirements. Integrating these two standards is a natural evolution of CCAR away from its origins during the crisis, when such tailoring was impractical and policy makers had not yet considered the approach of a regulatory capital buffer on top of a regulatory capital minimum. The stress capital buffer would result in a more transparent and simplified system of regulatory capital requirements because a firm will be held to a single, integrated capital regime. The stress capital buffer would not reduce the stringency of the regulatory capital framework for large banks, but it would effect a substantial simplification of that framework. By my math, the number of different capital requirements applicable to large banks would fall from 18 to eight and the number of different total loss absorbing capacity requirements for large banks would fall from 24 to 14. I expect that we will move forward with a revised stress capital buffer proposal in the near future, reflecting many of the comments received on our original proposal. The third principle addressed by the recent changes is volatility . When I think about volatility in stress testing, I want to distinguish what I consider to be useful variation in the tests, in the form of exploration of salient risks, from what I consider to be less useful variation, in the form of unexpected swings in capital requirements that don't have any particular relationship to changing risks at individual firms. In addition, one source of volatility in the tests comes from the fact that banks are forced to do their capital planning before they get the results of our tests. I will address each of these concerns in turn. In distinguishing useful from less useful volatility, one option to address the year-over-year volatility of the tests would be to average the results of the tests from the previous year or years. This would not affect the overall stringency of the tests but, mathematically, would mean that no single year could have an outsized influence on the amount of capital that a bank is required to maintain. The potential downsides to this approach include the reduced risk sensitivity that a bank may experience to a particular test and potential technical challenges associated with changes to a bank's balance sheet and earnings. Bearing in mind these potential challenges, I believe more thinking and discussion of this issue would be fruitful. With respect to the second concern, as I have said before, I believe it more rational and logical for firms to be able to plan for their capital needs with the benefit of the results of our tests. Given the huge strides that the banks have made in their capital planning and in meeting our expectations, I view the risk of banks backsliding in this regard to be minimal because it would be evident in the next test. Our capital-planning expectations will not decline, and we will continue to use the supervisory process to enforce these expectations. It is my hope that greater transparency can play a role in other parts of our supervisory process—for example, by allowing other aspects of bank supervision to benefit from public input. Greater transparency for supervision is in keeping with one of the biggest improvements to the regulatory framework and to stress testing since the financial crisis. I believe the changes and proposed changes to stress testing that I have discussed today reinforce the founding principles of the first test, administered in the challenging and uncertain spring of 2009, and reflect what we have learned each year over the decade since then. That process of learning and refining should and must continue in order to keep stress tests as relevant and effective as they have been in helping to reduce the chances of another severe crisis. 1. On May 7, 2009, the results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program were announced by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. Return to text 2. Mark J. Flannery, Simon H. Kwan, and Mahendrarajah Nimalendran, " Market evidence on the opaqueness of banking firms' assets ," Journal of Financial Economics 71, no.3 (2004): 419–60. Return to text Last Update: July 09, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At Utah Center for Neighborhood Stabilization 10-Year Celebration, Salt Lake City, Utah Share Thank you for the kind introduction and for this opportunity to recognize the contributions of the Utah Center for Neighborhood Stabilization (UCNS) to the vitality of our state's communities. Over its 10 years, UCNS has improved the lives of many aspiring homeowners, renters, and small business owners and helped to build a more healthy and vibrant Utah. 1 As some of you may know, I grew up in Roy, not too far from here, and have lived in either the Ogden or Salt Lake City areas for many decades. Although I spent a lot of my professional career in New York and London, and these days spend a good deal of my time in Washington, D.C., this is still my home, as it is yours. Like many others, I'm thankful for the work of UCNS and its affiliates, which are investing in the betterment of this city and other Utah communities and working to ensure that the benefits of those investments extend to everyone living here. I've spent most of my career in the private sector, and as I think about the approach of UCNS as a nonprofit organization, I am struck by the extent of entrepreneurship you bring to your work. Like many kinds of businesses, you deploy technical expertise and management skill to make investments, with either debt or equity financing, to generate healthy returns. Some of those returns, measured in dollars, help you continue to carry out your mission, but some of them also come in the form of promoting small businesses, affordable housing, and community facilities such as recreation centers, health-care clinics, and childcare facilities, among other things that build stronger communities. Private- and public-sector partners who support community development value entrepreneurship, and it also makes for a healthier and more sustainable organization, which allows you to continue your important work. By all evidence, UCNS is advancing its goals in spectacular fashion. I expect a large part of this success comes from the collaborative approach that you take to those efforts. It seems that collaboration is a common thread that runs through your programs. For example, that is apparent in UCNS's dedication to working closely with developers to finance affordable housing near high-capacity transit. These important investments help workers get access to the transportation they need to get to work, without a longer commute that strains finances and detracts from family life. Housing affordability is a growing challenge in Utah, and promoting mass transit—among UCNS's other objectives—has a role to play in keeping housing and transportation affordable. A collaborative approach also shows up in the close partnership that UCNS has had with local governments to establish and maintain the Utah Small Business Growth Initiative, which supports economic development and job creation by helping small businesses qualify for financing with banks or other financial institutions. And collaboration is apparent in your work with lenders and affordable housing providers to facilitate the acquisition, rehab, and sale of foreclosed homes to lower-income borrowers, which helps those families secure the dignity and wealth-building opportunity that comes with stable homeownership. This kind of cross-sector collaboration between the private, public, and nonprofit sectors is critically important to extending economic opportunity and access to financial services to low- and moderate-income families. I am happy to report that organizations like UCNS have an active partner in the Federal Reserve, through our community development function, when it comes to supporting these types of partnerships. I will highlight just a few examples of work the Fed has recently undertaken that intersects with the work of UCNS. As is the case in Utah, families in many states across the country face challenges in finding good quality housing they can afford. The Federal Reserve is actively engaged on this issue, and has conducted research and brought together stakeholders to understand it better and consider solutions. As many of you in this room probably know, Utah is located within the district of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. In September 2014, the San Francisco Fed co-hosted a symposium that explored innovative models for supporting equitable development, including the development of affordable housing, around public transit investment. The event brought together community development financial institutions, local transit authorities, banks, policymakers, and other stakeholders and included participants from Salt Lake City. More recently, in August 2018, the San Francisco Fed hosted a roundtable here to gather key decisionmakers to discuss ways the city and county could reduce barriers and provide more incentives for the development of housing that is affordable to lower-income families. In March of this year, the San Francisco Fed published an analysis of public-private loan funds for the construction and preservation of affordable housing. 2 The study spells out the relative advantages of different types of funds for different kinds of projects—preservation versus development, for example—and details which funds are best for the early, middle, or late stages of a project. Turning to support for small businesses, community development staffers across the Federal Reserve conduct extensive research and analysis of the challenges and opportunities facing small business owners. For example, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks collaborate on the annual Small Business Credit Survey, which surveys business owners about their financing needs and experiences to provide timely insights to policymakers, service providers, and lenders. 3 In addition to providing information on small business credit conditions, the Federal Reserve is trying to advance understanding of the best economic development strategies for supporting small businesses. The Kansas City Fed has helped lead on these issues through its "Grow Your Own" entrepreneurship-based economic development guidebook, and its 2018 Growing Entrepreneurial Communities Summit. 4 These are just a few of the ways that Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors support the efforts of community development organizations. I hope that our work will be useful as you chart a path forward for your second decade of service to Utah, and I look forward to continued collaboration between the Federal Reserve and community development organizations such as UCNS. Together, we can help support thriving communities across the Wasatch Front, the state of Utah, and across our nation. Thank you again for inviting me to speak, and congratulations again for 10 years of building stronger communities in Utah. 1. UCNS is the parent organization of four separate organizations that, in combination, work to advance access to affordable housing, including homeownership and housing near high-capacity or high-frequency transit; support economic development and job creation by funding small businesses; and improve access to important community infrastructure. Return to text 2. Elizabeth Mattiuzzi, "Funds for Kickstarting Affordable Housing Preservation and Production: Lessons for New Investors," Community Development Research Briefs (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 2019). Return to text 3. See www.fedsmallbusiness.org/ for more information. Return to text 4. The guidebook is available at https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/community/gyo/entrepreneurship-econ-dev-local-communities.pdf . Return to text Last Update: August 20, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At Program on International Financial Systems Conference, Frankfurt, Germany Share Introduction Thanks to the Program on International Financial Systems and the European Central Bank for the opportunity to speak to you today. I would like to take as my text today this reflection of the 20th-century philosopher, sociologist, and welterweight champion of the world, Oscar de la Hoya: "There's always room for improvement, no matter how long you've been in the business." As all of you know, 2019 marks the 10-year anniversary of our stress testing program in the United States. In only 10 years, stress tests have developed from an innovative but untested tool to become a well-established element of the Federal Reserve's bank supervision program for large banks. But developing and running those first tests required a willingness to change, and an openness to innovation, which underlie every advance in human endeavor—whether banking or boxing. In that same spirit of being open to change and innovation, my remarks will include some thoughts that might have seemed novel just a few years ago, but in my view, are ideas whose time has now come. As the Federal Reserve has been considering refinements to our stress testing and capital frameworks, two goals have been at the forefront of our thinking: first, to simplify these frameworks to make them easier to apply and understand, and second, to maintain the overall high level of loss-absorbing capacity in the banking system. Let me expand on those two goals. Goals for Refining Stress Testing and Capital Frameworks One of the great challenges of a regulator is to write rules that are comprehensive and detailed enough to be effective while also being consistent and simple enough to be well understood. There is a well-documented tendency for regulation to grow by accretion. And with that, there is always a risk that regulatory regimes will become less effective as they grow, developing redundancies and inconsistences that can obscure initial intentions and impair understanding. This is not a desirable outcome for financial regulation, and indeed, it is the responsibility of any regulator to ensure that the rule frameworks remain well integrated and credible. Congress has been adjusting the Dodd-Frank Act since its enactment, and, likewise, the Federal Reserve and other regulators have been making adjustments in the wake of the financial crisis to innovations such as stress testing, a public process that in my view has helped make financial oversight more effective. The thoughts that I am airing in these remarks, part of a public process of discussion and debate, should be seen as a continuation of the review and adjustment that has been taking place since the financial crisis. The goal is to simplify rules that have grown more complex in the past decade and in some cases redundant and harder to understand. My second goal, in considering these adjustments, is to maintain the high level of loss-absorbing capacity in the U.S. banking system. Our financial system today is far more resilient than it was before the crisis and I want to maintain that resiliency. We are all better served by well-capitalized banks that have the ability to continue lending to households and businesses even during stressful times. Adjusting regulation in measured ways, such as those I will describe, is an appropriate and, in fact, necessary way to preserve the success we have achieved in strengthening the financial system. Before I delve into describing the future direction of our stress testing and capital frameworks, allow me to begin with some background on the origins of the stress testing program and an overview of the changes we have made to our capital requirements since the financial crisis. Background on the Fed's Stress Testing Program At the height of the crisis, as a way to help restore confidence in the largest U.S. banks, the Fed created the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) to estimate potential losses at those banks, if economic and financial conditions worsened. Building on the success of SCAP, the Board moved to the current stress testing assessment, known as the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), to evaluate whether the largest firms have sufficient capital to continue to lend and absorb potential losses under severely adverse conditions. At the same time that we were building our stress testing program, we were also making changes to capital rules to address weaknesses observed during the crisis. These included new minimum capital requirements and a capital buffer on top of these requirements. The buffer puts increasingly strict and automatic limits on capital distributions as a bank's capital declines toward the minimum. Large banks are also subject to a potential countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB), which I will discuss more shortly. And the largest banks are subject to an additional buffer of capital based on a measure of their systemic risk. Stress testing and stronger capital requirements have combined to greatly strengthen the resiliency of the U.S. banking system. At the banks subject to CCAR, risk-based capital ratios have more than doubled since 2009. Combined, these firms now have more than $1 trillion of common equity capital, and a ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets of 12.1%, which is many multiples over the required ratio of Tier 1 common in 2009. As a result of these changes, large U.S. banks are substantially more resilient to stress than in the past. At the same time, I believe our regulatory measures are most effective when they are as simple and transparent as possible, and it is prudent to periodically review all of our practices to ensure that they are achieving these goals. Importantly, although CCAR and our regulatory capital requirements share similar ends, they were developed separately, due to the exigencies of the crisis, and this has led to significant redundancies, which I will describe in detail in a moment. Just to name one prominent example, we now have 24 different requirements for total loss absorbency, while before the financial crisis we had 3. Perhaps there were some benefits to having overlapping approaches when we were still in the capital-building phase after the crisis. But now that banks have built significant capital stores, I believe the overlapping requirements should be combined for efficiency and simplicity. The Stress Capital Buffer (SCB) Proposal Last year, the Board issued a proposal to address these redundancies. The proposal—known as the stress capital buffer—would simplify our regulatory regime by integrating the stress test with our non-stress capital rules. I believe the SCB proposal stands as a good example of how our work can be done more efficiently and effectively, and in a way that maintains the resiliency of the financial system. For large bank holding companies, the SCB would replace the fixed-for-all-times-and-for-all-banks 2.5 percent risk-based capital buffer with a firm-specific buffer based on the firm's most recent stress test results. This would integrate our stress testing capital requirements with our point-in-time capital requirements. And as a result, the two separate capital frameworks would be combined into one. Firms would have to manage according to one integrated set of requirements and, when their capital is insufficient, would be required to rebuild their resiliency through one integrated set of limitations on their capital distributions. Originally, we had planned to make the SCB final for the 2019 stress test cycle. However, we received thorough and insightful feedback on the proposal that we have been considering carefully. Among the comments we received were many that called for further simplification of the SCB framework. Based on this feedback, I first would like to emphasize two elements of the 2018 SCB proposal that, in my more considered judgment, I now believe should not be a part of the final SCB framework. Second, I would like to introduce two new co-equal options, either of which would improve the final product. The first element of the SCB proposal that I believe should be removed is the stress leverage buffer requirement. 1 By its nature, a leverage ratio is a blunt instrument that treats all assets the same and therefore is not risk-sensitive. Thus, I am concerned that explicitly assigning a stressed leverage requirement to a firm on the basis of risk-sensitive post-stress estimates is in conflict with the intellectual underpinnings of the leverage ratio. It is what the analytical philosophers call a category mistake: like saying that, "Freedom has curly hair". Of course, leverage ratios, including the enhanced supplementary leverage requirements, would remain a critical part of our regulatory capital regime, and I believe our existing leverage ratios provide a sufficient backstop to the risk-based capital requirements. For these reasons, it seems out of place and unnecessary to add a separate leverage capital buffer. 2 The second element of the SCB proposal that I believe should be removed is the requirement for banks to pre-fund the next four quarters of their planned dividend payments. The stress tests currently require banks to set aside sufficient capital today to "pre-fund" expected capital distributions, both dividends and repurchases, for all nine quarters of the capital planning horizon. Removing the pre-funding of dividend requirement would simplify the SCB proposal. Additionally, the SCB already has a mechanism for curbing dividends and other distributions when a bank's capital ratio falls into the buffer. Requiring pre-funding of dividends is a needless redundancy. Even worse, the pre-funding of dividends could lead to a conflict with the mechanics of the SCB—the SCB could call for a restriction of dividend payments even when those payments had been pre-funded. I believe it is better to focus on the root cause of our concerns and take a comprehensive approach to ensuring that banks have sufficient capital, rather than focus on the individual elements of capital distributions. Some have argued that requiring pre-funding of dividends helps reduce pro-cyclicality. 3 Limiting pro-cyclicality, or being countercyclical, essentially means limiting both the highs and lows of a business cycle. And there can be value in doing so because, among other things, it can help reduce stress on our financial system. With a counter-cyclical stress test, as the economy strengthens, the test should get tougher and be more stringent to mitigate the buildup of vulnerabilities during good times. Experience has shown that vulnerabilities can build during good times as risk appetite grows and memories of earlier instability fade. But likewise, when the economy does slow down, and losses mount at the banks, the tests should moderate so that firms can draw on the buffers built up during good times to absorb those losses while continuing to provide credit to qualified borrowers. As an alternative to requiring pre-funding dividends and in furtherance of the other goals I have mentioned, I would like to suggest two co-equal options that, in my opinion, would simplify our capital requirements while limiting pro-cyclicality. Importantly, these two options also are consistent with our goal of maintaining overall levels of capital in the banking system: The first option would be to set the CCyB at a higher baseline level during normal times. And the second option would be to raise the "floor," or the minimum level, of the SCB. The CCyB Option Before I outline how we might modify the CCyB, let me explain what the CCyB is designed to accomplish and how it fits into the Board's overall financial stability efforts. The CCyB, which was part of the original Basel III accord, is a macroprudential tool that allows the Board to dynamically adjust capital levels of large banking firms when the risks to financial stability have meaningfully changed. In 2016, the Board released a policy statement detailing the conceptual framework it would follow to set the CCyB. The policy statement details the range of financial-system vulnerabilities and other factors the Board may take into account as it evaluates settings for the buffer, including but not limited to, leverage in the financial sector, leverage in the nonfinancial sector, maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector, and asset valuation pressures. Right now, our policy is to maintain a 0 percent CCyB when vulnerabilities are within the normal range, as they happen to be now. When we determine that vulnerabilities have risen to be meaningfully above normal, the purpose of the CCyB is to increase capital to a level that compensates for those other rising vulnerabilities and thus reduces risks back to a normal level. Some of those vulnerabilities have indeed been rising in recent years, but because of the strength of our capital requirements and CCAR, our assessment of overall vulnerabilities remains moderate. This raises the question of whether our through-the-cycle capital levels in the United States have been set so high, that our CCyB is effectively already "on": we already have capital at a level that compensates for these increases in vulnerability, but because we did not reach that capital level through activation of the CCyB, we have no way of acting countercyclically in a future downturn. I would advocate for revisiting that policy so that the CCyB is more closely integrated into our overall capital framework, allowing greater scope for dynamic adjustments. While the Board has maintained the CCyB at zero since 2016, other countries have adjusted their countercyclical buffers in response to vulnerabilities within their financial sectors or, in the case of the United Kingdom, to integrate its CCyB with its structural capital requirements. For example, I find the U.K. framework, adopted by their Financial Policy Committee, to be quite compelling. Specifically, under the British framework, the CCyB would equal a positive amount—in the British case it's 1 percent—in standard risk conditions. The effect of the policy is that the buffer can be varied in line with the changing risks that the banking system faces over time. I see real merit in application of the U.K. approach in the United States, although the specific percentage would of course be open to analysis. It could provide a flexible mechanism that could complement other modifications to the SCB framework and allow the Board to adjust capital requirements as financial risks are evolving. In addition, making greater use of a countercyclical capital buffer would quite directly advance the goal of making the overall capital regime less pro-cyclical. Ultimately, I would expect that the new baseline for the CCyB would be set at a level that would maintain the overall level of capital in the U.S. banking system throughout the business and financial cycles—that is, taking account of the likelihood that there would be periods where it would be above the baseline as well as below the baseline. To be clear, this shift would require us to revisit our current CCyB policy and would introduce additional layers of decisionmaking complexity to the SCB proposal. On balance, however, I think this kind of shift would provide the Board with a helpful, additional tool that could be adjusted quickly in response to economic, financial, or even geopolitical shocks. I'd also like to preemptively address a potential objection to this option. That is, that it may be a "stealth" cut to our strong capital levels for the largest banks. I reject that characterization, and it is not supported by the approach I have outlined today. As I've said, we would maintain our strong current loss-absorbency levels, and, though I have focused on the ability to reduce the CCyB in times of stress, I also would stand ready to increase the CCyB above the new baseline when it was appropriate to do so. Indeed, the advantage of a truly flexible capital requirement is for it not only to provide additional resilience during a boom, but also to limit the risk of a pullback in credit supply aggravating an economic downturn. The SCB Floor Option Returning to our goals of increasing simplicity, mitigating pro-cyclicality, and maintaining the overall level of loss-absorbency in the system, I would like to advance another equally viable alternative to turning on the CCyB: raising the proposed SCB floor from the fixed 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets to a somewhat higher level—purely for the sake of illustration, let's say 3 percent. Using 3 percent as an example, we would give each firm a buffer based on the firm's most recent stress test results, but which must be at least 3 percent. For example, if a firm had a capital ratio decline of 2.7 percent during the stress tests, its SCB would nonetheless be sized at 3 percent, rather than 2.7 percent. For firms that have stress test results indicating an SCB greater than 3 percent, this change would have no impact compared to last year's proposal. For firms that have stress test results indicating an SCB at or slightly above 2.5 percent, this change would represent a modest increase in the stringency of the SCB. Raising the floor may help to reduce pro-cyclicality by limiting the reduction in SCB capital buffers when stress test losses decrease during good times. Raising the floor also would help moderate any increase in those buffers at the onset of economic downturn conditions as losses begin to increase. This approach would have three significant benefits as compared to the CCyB option: greater simplicity, transparency, and predictability. Raising the fixed floor would be simpler to execute than the CCyB proposal because raising the floor once and for all times would not require the Board to make complex, real-time decisions about how to adapt the regulatory framework to the evolving vulnerabilities to the economy. Raising the fixed floor also would be more transparent and predictable for the public and the industry because a firm's capital requirement would vary less over time. There are drawbacks to the higher fixed floor option, of course. For firms whose losses are typically close to the existing 2.5 percent floor, this change will affect them more than others and produce a capital regime with slightly less risk sensitivity. I also recognize, in terms of targeting pro-cyclicality, this approach would be much less direct than more actively managing the level of the CCyB. Conclusion In closing, let me say that it is my hope to have an SCB framework in place for the 2020 stress tests. Of course, we will solicit public comment on potential revisions to the SCB proposal through the standard rulemaking process, and I expect that to occur in the near future. I further expect that we will maintain the basic framework of the SCB while also incorporating some additional refinements, such as to address volatility and provide better notice for firms in planning their capital actions. As I have stated, our goals remain to simplify our capital framework while maintaining the overall amount of capital in the U.S. banking system. The refinements we are considering to the SCB framework would also improve the efficiency, coherence, and transparency of the regulatory capital framework and the core principles of our stress testing program that have proven successful. I look forward to continued feedback on CCAR as we work through the improvements that I described, with a goal of ensuring that we maintain the same incentives for effective stress testing practices that exist today. As I am sure Oscar would agree, there is always room for improvement in the stress testing ring. 1. As proposed in the SCB, firms would have been subject to a new stress leverage buffer, where their leverage ratio requirements would be sized based on their stress test each year. Return to text 2. See www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20181109a.htm . Return to text 3. See, for example, Donald Kohn and Nellie Liang, " Understanding the Effects of the U.S. Stress Tests (PDF) " (paper presented at "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review" Conference, Federal Reserve Board, July 9, 2019). Return to text Last Update: September 05, 2019 Back to Top
