Town Hall with Neel Kashkari in Kalispell February 11, 2020 | 11:30 a.m.–1:15 p.m. CT Hilton Garden Inn Kalispell , Montana Neel Kashkari President and CEO Town Hall with Neel Kashkari in Kalispell Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Your browser does not support the audio element. Audience Q&A with Neel Kashkari, moderated by Larry Simkins ( video ) Do you have a question about how the Federal Reserve System affects you? Wondering about economic disparities, regulating big banks, or the Fed’s recent interest rate decisions? Curious about how the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis gathers data and informs its work within the Federal Reserve System? Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari addressed these topics and more in Kalispell on Tuesday, Feb. 11, 2020. Kashkari is a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, the body of the Federal Reserve System that sets national monetary policy. Since taking over as president of the Minneapolis Fed in January 2016, he has spearheaded several initiatives, including releasing a plan to end the too big to fail problem and launching the Federal Reserve’s Opportunity & Inclusive Growth Institute , housed at the Minneapolis Fed. Kashkari gave brief remarks, followed by a Q&A with the audience moderated by Larry Simkins, President and CEO of The Washington Companies. Program: 11:30 a.m. – Check-In 11:50 a.m. – Lunch served 12:15 p.m. – Welcome and introduction, followed by opening remarks by Neel Kashkari 12:30 p.m. – Q&A with audience, moderated by Larry Simkins 1:15 p.m. – Program end This town hall was held in conjunction with the University of Montana Bureau of Business and Economic Research (BBER)'s Economic Outlook Seminar . Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

COVID-19 and the Minneapolis Fed: What we’re doing, how we’re working Read President Neel Kashkari’s statement March 17, 2020 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO COVID-19 and the Minneapolis Fed: What we’re doing, how we’re working Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter The coronavirus continues to present a unique challenge for all of us in the Ninth Federal Reserve District and across the country. Here at the Minneapolis Fed, it has changed how we work and where we work. What has not changed is our commitment to fulfilling our public service mission. Visit our COVID-19 page for resources, research, and media interviews Read more As you can tell from our numerous articles , research papers , and real-time COVID-19 dashboard , during this difficult time our economists and writers have been dedicated to providing local, state, and federal policymakers, business and community leaders, and the general public with the kinds of critical information they are seeking. Of course, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, I am deeply engaged in the critical actions the Fed is taking to support our nation’s economy. Every day, we monitor the spread of COVID-19 and assess its potential impact on our economy, both in the region and across the nation. We are united in our resolve to use our tools to achieve the goals Congress has assigned us: maximum employment and price stability. Here in the Ninth District, we are focused on maintaining operations that are essential to keeping our economy and financial system functioning. For example, at the Minneapolis Fed we’ve been tasked with the responsibility to manage the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) for the Federal Reserve System. We’re conducting our business while ensuring the health and well-being of our employees and their families in Minneapolis and Helena, Mont. Much of our workforce has the ability to work from home and is now doing so. I am thankful for their dedication to our mission of pursuing an economy that works for all of us. As always, my goal—and that of the Federal Reserve System—is to remain open and transparent and do our part to support the U.S. economy and the American people. Sincerely, Neel Kashkari Updated on May 5, 2020 More On Public health More On Public health COVID-19 and the Ninth District economy: A dashboard Use interactive charts to see COVID-19’s impact on our region. Explore the data › Related Content Scholar spotlight: Karen Kopecky Article Interview with Kosali Simon: How health economics can help people get back to school, work, and family Article Year in review: Summary of 2023 Institute Working Papers Article Related Content Scholar spotlight: Karen Kopecky Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Why the Institute? Why this magazine? March 19, 2020 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Why the Institute? Why this magazine? Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter The magazine of the opportunity & Inclusive Growth institute More from this issue › When I moved to the Federal Reserve’s Ninth District, which spans an area from Michigan’s Upper Peninsula to Montana, I was struck by a disturbing paradox. The diversity and strength of our economy are inspiring. We have a well-educated, high-performing workforce and, on average, low unemployment. Our labor force participation ranks high. Our poverty rate ranks low. But for all its successes, the benefits of our strong economy are not experienced by all of our citizens. We have some of the nation’s worst economic disparities. The difference in median annual household income between whites and African Americans is stark. In Minnesota, the region’s most populous state, the gap is nearly $36,000. Poverty is prevalent—and gaps are large—among this district’s whites as well. In over half of our counties, 10 percent or more of the white population lives below the federal poverty line. Pockets of white poverty blemish rural areas in all of our district’s states. Along many dimensions, our Native American communities receive the smallest share of our bounty. For example, the unemployment rate on South Dakota’s Pine Ridge reservation is three times the national rate, and median household income for American Indians there is less than half the national average for all races. Disparity in outcomes and lack of economic opportunity know no racial, ethnic, or even geographic boundaries. Since 2016, Neel Kashkari has been the president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. The Opportunity & Inclusive Growth Institute was founded in 2017. While this contrast is both stark and surprising for the heartland region I represent at the Fed, we are not alone. This is a national dilemma. America’s world-leading economy is afflicted by glaring distributional inequalities and appears unable to provide opportunities for those in need of them. What are the structural factors behind such disparities? In the context of global competition and ongoing technological change, how do we create a robust economy that includes all Americans? How can we build an economy that works for all? Creating the Institute We believe the Federal Reserve has a role in answering these questions and addressing these challenges. Congress gave us a dual mandate: to promote stable prices and maximum employment. By maximum employment, we mean an economy that has job opportunities available for all who seek work. The traditional view among central bankers is that there’s little we can—or should—do about economic opportunity and inclusive growth. But I believe we need to re-examine that assumption. We need to look beyond averages to see what effect national policies have on different groups. And perhaps we need to study whether such inequalities might be having a negative impact on growth by curbing aggregate demand and stifling human capital development. If we can understand the root causes of different distributional outcomes and identify potential policy solutions, we believe it is the Federal Reserve’s responsibility to summon our resources to do that research and suggest remedies. That’s why we established the Opportunity & Inclusive Growth Institute. To help the Federal Reserve achieve its maximum employment mandate, our goal is to conduct world-class research to improve the economic well-being of all Americans. We have a particular focus on structural barriers that limit full participation, and we use a multidisciplinary approach. That’s where For All comes in. We want to share the Institute’s ideas with you: our nation’s policymakers; scholars and students; civic, business, and labor leaders; and educators. We hope these ideas will aid your work, moving concept to reality through meaningful policies and partnerships. Related Content Kolb appointed SVP of Risk and Compliance at the Minneapolis Fed News New members named to Minneapolis Fed advisory council News Minneapolis Fed welcomes 2026–2027 class of Institute visiting scholars News Related Content Kolb appointed SVP of Risk and Compliance at the Minneapolis Fed News Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

President Kashkari op-ed: What the 2008 rescue package can teach us about today’s relief bill March 27, 2020 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Jake MacDonald/Minneapolis Fed Article Highlights Err on the side of helping workers and businesses, not prudence Policymakers should not hesitate to change tactics Speed and scale of interventions are paramount President Kashkari op-ed: What the 2008 rescue package can teach us about today’s relief bill Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This commentary was first published in The Washington Post . As a global crisis, the coronavirus pandemic is fundamentally different from the banking-centered 2008 financial crisis. Nonetheless, there are lessons from the 2008 rescue package, the Troubled Asset Relief Program (known as TARP) that may help as officials work to turn Congress’s $2 trillion relief package into actual assistance for ordinary Americans and Main Street businesses nationwide. I oversaw TARP during the George W. Bush and Barack Obama administrations, and my experience underscores that if there is a principle policymakers need to keep in mind going forward, it’s this: Err on the side of helping as many workers and businesses as possible rather than on prudence. This is not the time to worry about moral hazard or whether people are incentivized not to work. When the covid-19 crisis is behind us, if our biggest complaint is that some workers and small businesses got help when they didn’t really need it, that would be a wonderful outcome for our country. In terms of next steps, other lessons include: Policymakers will need to be nimble and adjust to rapidly changing conditions. When we negotiated the $700 billion TARP, our focus had been on buying troubled mortgages from banks. Within days of Congress approving the program, financial conditions rapidly deteriorated and we were forced to pivot. Buying thousands of mortgages would have taken longer than the financial system could endure. So, instead, we immediately injected hundreds of billions of dollars into the largest banks to stabilize the system. Our change created confusion and anger; members of Congress and the public felt like we had promised one thing but did another. Their criticism was fair, but the pivot was necessary to prevent a total financial collapse. Today, the support our health-care system, businesses and families need is likely to evolve. Policymakers should not hesitate to change tactics if necessary. Next, time is of the essence. Policymakers should not conserve the resources Congress is authorizing; they should deploy them as quickly as possible. In 2008, there was great anger across the country because banks had taken risks and Main Street bore the consequences. We were careful to conserve the TARP authority because we knew that if we used it up, there would be little political will to do more. Today, people intuitively understand that the covid-19 crisis is essentially a natural disaster; businesses and workers weren’t taking foolish risks. Policymakers should use the full authority Congress grants to immediately make sure that states have the health-care resources and equipment they need, that businesses have the wherewithal to preserve their staffs, and that individuals and families can make ends meet until the virus is contained. The highest priorities must be to enable the health-care system to catch up and control the spread of the virus — and to maximize the number of jobs saved. It is far better to spend taxpayer money to help small businesses retain their workers than to spend the same money helping workers after they’ve been laid off. If this health emergency lasts longer than these resources can bridge, Congress has shown it will do what is necessary to support the American people. Finally, policymakers should learn from perhaps the biggest mistake we made in 2008: We targeted our programs too narrowly, and they ended up being less effective than the country needed. Being prudent stewards of taxpayer resources is, of course, always important, but when a crisis is raging, the speed and scale of interventions are paramount. Congress and the Bush and Obama administrations enacted multiple programs to help homeowners avoid foreclosures. None of them was highly effective because they were all targeted to homeowners who needed only a little help. Americans were angry at the thought of their “irresponsible” neighbors getting a bailout. By applying numerous criteria to make sure only “deserving” families received help, we narrowed and slowed the programs dramatically, resulting in a deeper housing correction, with more foreclosures than had we flooded borrowers with assistance. The American people ultimately paid more because of our attempts to save them money. What does this mean today? Think of firefighters putting out a fire. If their primary aim is to conserve water, they increase the odds of losing control of the fire. The $2 trillion legislation includes many provisions to help both businesses large and small and the millions of Americans who are losing their jobs. As implementation begins, officials will be tempted to develop complex rules to decide who will qualify. For example, if each of the thousands of struggling small businesses needs to be individually vetted, the program is likely to be too slow to meaningfully help the economy. While the U.S. economy can bounce back from a crisis fairly quickly, it took more than 10 years after the 2008 crisis to rebuild the labor market. We can’t let that happen again. Let’s learn from history and douse the raging fire — before it becomes uncontrollable. Neel Kashkari is president and chief executive of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and oversaw the Troubled Asset Relief Program for Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama. More On Public health Public Policy Policy More On Public health Public Policy Policy Related Content Scholar spotlight: Karen Kopecky Article Interview with Kosali Simon: How health economics can help people get back to school, work, and family Article Year in review: Summary of 2023 Institute Working Papers Article Related Content Scholar spotlight: Karen Kopecky Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

A message from President Neel Kashkari: Our important mission, our pressing work In 2019, communicating clearly, sharing our expertise March 31, 2020 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO A message from President Neel Kashkari: Our important mission, our pressing work Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Dear Community Leader, As we all confront the public health and economic crisis caused by COVID-19, the importance of our mission to pursue an economy that works for all of us could not be clearer, nor our work to stabilize our economy and financial system more pressing. Against this sobering backdrop, I share with you our 2019 Annual Report , including our audited financial statements . Last year, we redoubled our efforts to reach out and engage our communities across the Ninth District. We know that public trust in key institutions, like the Fed, is often in question, and we’re committed to communicating clearly and to sharing our expertise. Our website is an invaluable resource with articles and analysis about our regional economy and academic research from our renowned research department. In 2019, I visited five of the six states in our district, meeting with local business, civic, education, labor, and elected leaders to discuss, among other pressing matters, monetary policy, workforce issues, and early childhood education challenges . I bring these insights about our region to Washington, D.C., as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, advocating for policies to strengthen our economy. Our engagement also underscores the impact of our Bank’s world-class research . We joined with the University of Minnesota’s Heller-Hurwicz Economics Institute to celebrate 50 years of a research partnership , including attracting more than 700 people to hear three Nobel laureates describe their years of working here at the Minneapolis Fed. We hosted one of the Federal Reserve System’s “ Fed Listens ” monetary policy conferences, bringing in community members and scholars from across the country to discuss how policy can work better for everyone. That event was led by our Opportunity & Inclusive Growth Institute , whose national profile continues to grow. Our impact and analysis around many issues that affect low- and moderate-income communities was led by our Community Development department, while our Center for Indian Country Development continued as a national leader bringing data and policy to Indian Country. We have recently released our annual Office of Minority and Women Inclusion’s report to Congress that details progress against our goals to ensure that our workforce reflects the diversity of our community and our commitment to contracting with women- and minority-owned suppliers. As I write this, the vast majority of our more than 1,000 employees in Minneapolis and Helena, Mont., are working from home. Their commitment to ensuring our critical functions —distributing cash to financial institutions, processing savings bonds on behalf of the U.S. Treasury, supervising member banks, and providing financial services to financial institutions, among other responsibilities—is nothing short of inspiring. As always, I am grateful to our board of directors for its guidance, leadership , and support as we strive every day to achieve the dual mandate Congress has given us: stable prices and maximum employment. I’m always happy to hear from you at President.Kashkari@mpls.frb.org , and please follow me on Twitter @neelkashkari . Sincerely, Neel Kashkari Related Content Kolb appointed SVP of Risk and Compliance at the Minneapolis Fed News New members named to Minneapolis Fed advisory council News Minneapolis Fed welcomes 2026–2027 class of Institute visiting scholars News Related Content Kolb appointed SVP of Risk and Compliance at the Minneapolis Fed News Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

President Kashkari’s Financial Times op-ed: Big U.S. banks should raise $200 billion in capital now April 16, 2020 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Jake MacDonald/Minneapolis Fed Article Highlights Banks should “vaccinate” themselves against the economic crisis now An extended economic downturn could easily sap banks’ current equity capital Banks must do their part by discontinuing dividends and raising capital now President Kashkari’s Financial Times op-ed: Big U.S. banks should raise $200 billion in capital now Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This commentary was first published in the Financial Times Large banks are eager to be part of the solution to the coronavirus crisis. The most patriotic thing they could do today would be to stop paying dividends and raise equity capital, to ensure that they can endure a deep economic downturn. Unlike the rest of us, banks have the ability to essentially vaccinate themselves against this crisis. They should do so now. When financial strains emerged in 2007, US officials urged large bank chief executives to raise equity to make sure they had the wherewithal to survive a crisis. The most common answer was: “We’re fine. We don’t need it. Our balance sheet is rock solid.” They only realised that they had serious problems after the deep losses were obvious to everyone, especially financial markets. At that point it was much more difficult, if not impossible, for them to issue equity because their stock prices had already collapsed. And that was when governments in the US and elsewhere had no choice but to step in with bailouts. Here is how a prolonged Covid-19 crisis could put banks at risk again. We have already heard stories about how US small businesses, having laid off their staffs, tell their landlords they will not pay rent until the crisis passes. The landlords then tell their bankers they will not make the mortgage payment. Multiply that example by thousands. The economic costs of the crisis eventually roll up into the banking sector. Banks have to pay the interest on their own liabilities, such as deposits. Doing otherwise would trigger a default. So they must pay their creditors while absorbing the losses out of their equity. While banks have more equity today than they had going into the 2008 financial crisis, the lockdowns are imposing economic hardship far more quickly this time. We simply do not know how large the losses from this crisis will be, because the depth and duration of the downturn depends on how the virus progresses and how our healthcare systems respond. Experts say a vaccine will not be ready for 18 months. Will new therapies emerge sooner that allow us to relax the economic shutdown while still protecting people? Nobody knows. It is not hard to see scenarios where we have to impose some economic controls for months on end. In 2009, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 61m Americans, or roughly 20 per cent of the population, contracted swine flu. Fortunately, the mortality rate was low. There is still tremendous uncertainty around the Covid-19 death rate. Even if government officials relax official controls, should the virus continue to spread rapidly Americans will socially distance on their own. Most people are not going to expose their families to serious health risks if they can avoid it. An extended economic downturn could easily sap banks’ current equity capital. Stress test modelling by the Minneapolis Fed indicates that under severe Covid-19 scenarios, large banks, those with assets greater than $100bn each, could together lose hundreds of billions of dollars of equity capital. Banks will argue that this crisis is not their fault, any more than it is the fault of airlines or hotel operators. So why should they not get a bailout too? There is an important difference: we can see this risk coming and banks have time to prepare for it. Airlines and hotel companies did not have advance warning. Everyone else is doing extraordinary things. People are staying home and sacrificing their livelihoods to slow the virus. First responders are working night and day to care for the sick, while potentially exposing themselves. Congress just passed a $2tn rescue package. The Federal Reserve has launched numerous emergency lending programmes. Banks must do their part by discontinuing dividends and raising capital now. In 2008, US taxpayers injected about $200bn of capital to strengthen banks. Raising that amount from private investors today, as a strong, preventive measure, would ensure that large banks can support the economy over a broad range of virus scenarios. If the crisis turns out less serious than we fear, banks can return the capital through buybacks and dividends once the crisis passes. We will then celebrate their action to support the public during a national emergency. As bankers are fond of telling their clients: no one has ever regretted raising capital. More On Public Policy Public health Policy More On Public Policy Public health Policy Related Content Burned out on hemp Article Baby is here. How much leave do parents take? Article Jesse Rothstein wants to say yes Article Related Content Burned out on hemp Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
