1 Presentation to California Bankers Association, Santa Barbara, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on January 8, 2016 After the First Rate Hike Good morning. This is my first outlook speech of the year, and I am pleased to be able to give it in beautiful Santa Barbara. Today I’d like to give my view of the economic outlook and discuss more extensively some of the issues that are probably on your mind: Interest rates, the path they’re on, and what we can expect when we reach full economic health. As always, the views expressed here today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. The economic snapshot The headline is that we’ve made the first rate hike. This was the right move because the economic outlook is good: We’re now well into the seventh year of the expansion, we’re very close to full employment, and the economy still has a good head of steam. Consumer spending continues to increase at a solid pace, auto sales have matched their highs of the early 2000s, and strong fundamentals point to continued strength going forward. There are some upside risks, specifically an even stronger and faster rebound in housing. And there are, of course, some downside risks: the threat of slowdowns and spillovers from abroad or the dollar appreciating further. Employment On the employment side, things are going very well. Job growth has averaged over 200,000 a month for most of the past two years, and the 12 th District has been at the head of the pack, with seven of our nine states ranked in the top ten for job growth over the past 12 months. 2 What’s particularly heartening is that some of the states that were hardest hit by the housing bust and financial crisis are among them, in particular, California, Nevada, and Arizona. Nationwide, based on data through November, we’re on track to see about 2½ million jobs added in 2015, and we met one marker on the unemployment rate. Because unemployment will never be zero—in any healthy economy, there wi ll be turnover, with people leaving jobs and new people entering the workforce—economists us e something called the “natural rate” of unemployment. Broadly, it’s the optimal rate in a fully functioning economy. I put the natural rate at 5 percent, and we’ve reached that threshold. I expect the unemployment rate to continue to edge down below the natural rate, to about 4.5 percent, by midyear or so. Of course, the unemployment rate alone doesn’t tell the whole story. There are other factors and measures that reflect the complexities of the American workforce and how people have fared in the aftermath of the recession. Most discussed—and for many, the most worriso me—is the labor force participation rate, which is still significantly lower than it has been in the past. On the surface, this can appear alarming. But digging deeper it is, by and large, explicable and relatively benign. As a reminder: The “labor force” is made up of people who are either employed or unemployed but actively looking for work. The labor force participation rate divides that group by the total working-age population— that is, everyone over the age of 16. It’s a very basic ratio that’s affected by myriad factors. In the ’60s and ’70s, for instance, women entered the workforce in greater numbers and the labor force participation rate shot up. Since the start of the recession, the participation rate has come down substantially. Some people are concerned that this is indicative of a portion of society that was hit hard by the recession and sidelined in the recovery—people who want to work but have given up looking, 3 either out of pessimism over the job market or fear that an extended time out of work has rendered them fundamentally unemployable. But much of the decline in the labor force participation rate can be explained not by disheartened workers, but by demographic and social shifts.1 First is the aging of the population. The baby boomers are entering retirement and people are living longer. Remember, the participation rate counts everyone over 16, so my happily retired parents count as “out of the labor force,” even though, in their 80s, few people at that age would still be working. Second is that younger people aren’t working as much as they used to. This is partly because many have extended their education or gone back to school, and fewer are working when they’re there. Third is an increase in people deciding they’d rather have single- income families.2 For whatever reason, they’ve traded a second paycheck for spending more time at home, whether it’s for child care, leisure, or simply that it’s a better lifestyle fit. Each of these groups is made up of people who are not working, but doing so for personal or demographic reasons. As their numbers swell, it will, obviously, push the participation rate down. This brings me to the question of whether there are a large number of people who will reenter the labor force and pull the participation rate back up. The “marginally attached” for instance, a group made up of people who are ready and able to work and who’ve searched for jobs in the past year but who aren’t currently looking. The assumption would reasonably be that this group is poised to return to the labor force. However, there are reasons to doubt that we’ll see much of a pickup in overall labor force participation. First off, the numbers of marginally attached people have come down a lot, falling by nearly 20 percent in the past year alone. In 1 See, for example, Fujita (2014). 2 See the Bureau of Labor Statistics news releases, “Employment Characteristics of Families” (archived at http://www.bls.gov/schedule/archives/all_nr.htm#FAMEE). 4 addition, my staff has found that, over the past few years, their reentry rate back into the labor force has actually fallen. When you combine this with the aging workforce, it looks unlikely that participation will rise. This is supported by other research from both within and outside the Fed System.3 Overall, the evidence suggests that, even with a quite strong economy, we aren’t likely to see a significant number of people come back into the fold. I know this has been a tough journey for a lot of people, and many are still struggling. But putting the recovery in perspective, we’ve come a very long way and we should be heartened by the progress. Since the dark days of late 2009, we’ve added over 13 million jobs, virtually all of them full-time. Looking forward, I see a labor market that’s growing ever stronger and will reach maximum employment on a broad set of measures very soon. Five small words: Inflation is still too low The inflation side of the equation is the dark end of the street. For those of us who lived through the ’70s and ’80s, the idea that we need higher inflation may seem strange, but that’s where we are right now. Inflation is like wine—a little bit is actual ly good for you. And right now our glass isn’t full enough. The Fed’s target rate is 2 percent, and inflation has been obstinately below that for 3½ years now. Over the past year, it’s been only about ½ percent. There are reasons for the low level of inflation, in particular the rise in the dollar and the fall in oil prices. Those effects should peter out, but they’ve had a downward influence on inflation at a time we’ve needed it to rise. Another special factor is that health-care prices have been rising much more slowly than we’re used to, and that’s pushing down the inflation rate as well. This is in part due to legislation that holds down payments to hospitals and other providers. These effects may prove to be transitory as well. 3 See Krueger (2015) and Aaronson et al. (2014). 5 For formulating monetary policy and analyzing data, policymakers need to look at underlying trends. That’s why I look at measures that remove the volatile components, like the trimmed mean rate that the Dallas Fed came up with.4 By that measure, we’re not as far from our goal as it first appears. The trimmed mean puts the underlying inflation rate for the past year at 1.7 percent—still below our 2 perc ent target, but not by much. Looking ahead, as the effects of the dollar and oil prices ebb, and as the economy strengthens further, I see inflation moving back up and expect that we’ll be at or near our 2 percent target by the end of next year. It’s time: Economic progress and the first rate hike With real progress on our goals, the conversation turned to normalizing policy. Before the first hike, that was the mystery dance: When are you raising rates? Now everyone wants to know when the second one is coming, and the third, and so on. From my perspective, we’ve made remarkable progress and the economy is on the cusp of full health. The first step in bringing policy closer to normal was when we ended QE. The next was the first rise in rates, which was the right move for a few reasons. First, Milton Friedman famously taught us that monetary policy has long and variable lags.5 Research shows it takes at least a year or two for it to have its full effect.6 So the decisions we make today must take aim at where we’re going, not where we are. The economy is a moving target, and waiting to see the whites of inflation’s eyes risked overshooting the mark. Second, experience shows that an economy that runs too hot for too long can generate imbalances, ultimately leading to either excessive inflation or an economic correction and recession. In the 1960s and 1970s, it was runaway inflation. In the late 1990s, the expansion 4 See http://www.dallasfed.org/research/pce/. 5 Friedman (1961). 6 Havranek and Rusnak (2013). 6 became increasingly fueled by euphoria over the “new economy,” the dot-com bubble, and massive overinvestment in tech-related industries. And in the first half of the 2000s, irrational exuberance over housing sent prices spiraling far beyond fundamentals and led to massive overbuilding. Waiting too long to remove monetary accommodation hazards allowing these imbalances to grow, at great cost to our economy. Finally, starting to raise rates allows a smoother, more gradual process of normalization. This gives us space to adjust our actions to any changes in economic conditions and avoid playing catch-up with little room for maneuver. The great unknown: What should we expect from interest rates? In thinking about the future path of monetary policy, it’s important to keep in mind that the economy, for all its progress, still needs support from an accommodative stance. We don’t need the extraordinarily accommodative policy that has characterized the past several years, but the headwinds we’re facing—weakness abroad, for in stance, and its impact on the dollar, or the continued slow recovery in housing construction—call for a continued push. Not with a bulldozer, but a steady nudge. This view of a gradual reduction in monetary accommodation is seen in the Federal Open Market Committee’s own projections of interest rates. The median projection of FOMC participants from our December meeting indicates four hikes being appropriate in 2016 and 2017. This path is generally consistent with forecasts from the private sector, such as the Blue Chip survey. That’s about half the pace of the last tightening cycle, 2004–06. Of course, it’s not a black-and-white world, so actual decisions will depend on real-time economic developments as well as any changes in the outlook. But if my aim is true and things evolve as expected, the path will look more like an airplane’s gentle ascension than a rocket shooting straight up: At that pace 7 it will take nearly three years before the funds rate reaches a stable level. But even then, our cruising altitude, as it were, likely won’t be as high as in the past. As we make our way back to normal, we should consider what “normal” will look like for interest rates. After the financial crisis and the global recession that followed, short-term interest rates around the world were pushed close to the zero mark—in some cases, less than zero—in an effort by central banks to revive their economies. But in that time, we may have seen a longer-run shift in the level of interest rates themselves. What can we expect from interest rates once the global economy is fully healed? Are expectations that a post-recession world will return to the exact size and shape of the go-go years that led up to it? Or is the future unlikely to repeat the past? The evidence is building that the new normal for interest rates is quite a bit lower than anyone in this room is accustomed to.7 Economists view this via the concept of the “neutral” funds rate—that is, the federal funds rate that balances monetary policy so that it’s neither accommodative nor contractionary. Hence the “neutral.” I find it useful to focus on the longer-run value of the neutral rate, called r* (r-star). R-star is essentially what inflation-adjusted interest rates will be once the economy’s back to full strength; we can align the funds rate with it, but we can’t control its underlying level. I think of it as a benchmark we can expect once we’ve recovered from the recession in all aspects, not just in the United States, but in Europe and other mature economies as they come back to full health. Global supply and demand has made real interest rates very low and they appear poised to stay that way.8 The particulars are myriad and fairly wonky aspects of the supply and demand 7 Laubach and Williams (2015) and Williams (2015). 8 Council of Economic Advisers (2015) and International Monetary Fund (2014). 8 of funds and the resulting global savings glut, but the basics are familiar to the banking world. These include emerging market economies’ desire to have large reserves of safe assets to help protect them in the event of an economic crisis, slower trend global growth, and shifting demographics. There are other factors as well, on both the supply and demand sides, but the upshot is, the indication from global economic trends is that interest rates are going to stay lower than we’ve come to expect in the past. That doesn’t mean they’ll be zero, but compared with the pre-recession “normal” funds rate of, say, between 4 and 4.5 percent, we may now see the underlying r-star guiding us towards a fed funds rate of around 3–3½ percent instead. In fact, some estimates, including those based on my own research with Thomas Laubach, indicate it could even be below 3 percent. So banks may see it as something of a poisoned rose: The Fed has started the process of raising interest rates, but the path to normal will be gradual and rates are likely to be low by historical standards. Along the way, QE, both in the U.S. and abroad, has also put downward pressure on long-term interest rates, which will, in turn, help flatten the yield curve as well.9 That brings me to the related question of the plans for our over $4 trillion balance sheet. We have made clear in our communication—and let me reiterate—that we s till have a ways to go before we start to unwind it. For the time being, we’re maintaining its size through reinvestment, so that the first steps in removing monetary accommodation occur slowly and gradually, via the funds rate only. This will continue until normalization of the funds rate is well under way. After that, our plan is to shrink the balance sheet “organically,” if you will, through the maturation of the assets. It’s likely going to take at least six years to get the balance sheet back to normal, which is in keeping with the overall approach to removing accommodation gradually.10 9 Williams (2014) and Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). 10 Carpenter et al. (2015). 9 Conclusion Ultimately, economic forces like r-star are going to affect the way monetary policy is conducted. The other end of the telescope shows an environment that will be, in the medium term, different from what bankers and everyone else are used to. Which means that, all in all, things are looking good. It’s been a tough climb back up after the economic fall, but we’ve made tremendous progress and we’re getting ever closer to our goals. 10 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. 2014. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197–255. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/projects/bpea/fall-2014/fall2014bpea_aaronson_et_al.pdf Carpenter, Seth, Jane Ihrig, Elizabeth Klee, Daniel Quinn, and Alexander Boote. 2015. “The Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections.” International Journal of Central Banking 11(2, March), pp. 237–283. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb15q2a7.htm Council of Economic Advisers. 2015. “Long-Term Interest Rates: A Survey.” Report, July. https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/interest_rate_report_final_v2.pdf Engen, Eric M., Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider. 2015. “The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005, January. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.005 Friedman, Milton. 1961. “The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 69(5), pp. 447−466. Fujita, Shigeru. 2014. “On the Causes of Declines in the Labor Force Participation Rate.” Research Rap Special Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, revised February 6. https://philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/publications/research-rap/2013/on-the-causes-of- declines-in-the-labor-force-participation-rate.pdf Havranek, Tomas, and Marek Rusnak. 2013. “Transmission Lags of Monetary Policy: A Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(4, December), pp. 39–75. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q4a2.htm International Monetary Fund. 2014. World Economic Outlook, April. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2014/01/index.htm Krueger, Alan B. 2015. “How Tight Is the Labor Market? The 2015 Martin Feldstein Lecture.” NBER Reporter 2015(3). http://www.nber.org/reporter/2015number3/2015number3.pdf Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams. 2015. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2015-16, October. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/files/wp2015-16.pdf Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings. http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2014/01/16-monetary-policy-zero-lower-bound-williams Williams, John C. 2015. “Will Interest Rates Be Permanently Lower?” Vox online, November 26. http://www.voxeu.org/article/evidence-low-real-rates-will-persist

1 Presentation to the National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference Los Angeles, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on February 10, 2016 The Health of Nations Thank you. It’s a pleasure to be here. Today I’d like to talk a little bit about health. Which probably makes you wonder, “Why him?” It’s a fair question, since I’m an economist who normally focuses on the macroeconomy and monetary policy. One answer is that more than six years ago, the San Francisco Fed and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation formed a partnership that has become a model of community development finance, aimed at directing money to support projects that improve the social determinants of health.1 But much more importantly, physical and economic health are inextricably linked. Prosperity is like a Jenga tower: Take one piece out and the whole thing can fall. And since well- being is the sum of a host of intertwined factors, finding a path to economic mobility and success means addressing them all. I should pause here to deliver the standard disclaimer that the views you hear today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Research shows that an increase in family income improves infant health.2 Which is good, because research also shows there’s a strong relationship between conditions in early life and health, educational attainment, and labor market outcomes in adulthood.3 In fact, one study found that simply moving children from disadvantaged backgrounds to full-time, high-quality 1 See http://www.frbsf.org/community-development/initiatives/healthy-communities/ for more information. 2 Hoynes, Miller, and Simon (2015). 3 Currie and Rossin-Slater (2015). 2 childcare in their early years significantly reduced risk factors for cardiovascular and metabolic diseases later on.4 We find evidence that when income increases, so do math and reading test scores, with children from disadvantaged families making particular gains.5 There also appears to be a direct correlation between the quality of a child’s neighborhood and income later in life.6 Recent findings suggest that children who’ve moved out of public housing and into lower-poverty areas in their younger years have an increase in total lifetime earnings of around $300,000. This doesn’t just benefit that one child; moving disadvantaged families with young children into higher-income communities may help that family’s subsequent generations avoid poverty and prosper as well.7 For these reasons and many more that you probably don’t have the patience to hear me recite, we have a broad definition of health that encompasses jobs, education, and safety. Now that I’ve given the requisite economist’s evidence, I want to make something of a departure. I’m going to wander outside my comfort zone of spreadsheets and talk a bit about my experiences and what I’ve seen, traveling across the Fed’s 12th District. I first want to address a word in the title of this conference: reinvestment. Because it’s worth noting that we are talking about investing in neighborhoods and communities. I think there’s sometimes a belief that programs aimed at improving economic mobility end up giving money away and undermining self-reliance. The same school of thought sometimes perpetuates the idea that people live in poverty because they simply haven’t worked hard enough, rather than the overwhelming truth: There are communities in which people face multiple hurdles, any one 4 Campbell et al. (2014). 5 Dahl and Lochner (2012). 6 Chetty and Hendren (2015). 7 Chetty, Hendren, and Katz (2015). 3 of which most of us would find daunting, and which combined are virtually impossible to overcome. For the past couple of years, I’ve been touring sites with my staff and seeing what these organizations and people can do, and it’s incredibly impressive and inspiring. More than any other in the Federal Reserve System, I oversee the District that represents what people think of when we talk about “innovation” or “entrepreneurship”: Seattle, Silicon Valley, Silicon Beach. The people I’ve visited embody that spirit just as much. They have exactly the kind of ingenuity and entrepreneurial spirit we exalt, and everyone is working double-time. It takes imagination to have a good idea and guts to get it off the ground. Doing that in an area like community development, where angel investors are few and resources are scarce…well, that’s MacGyver- like resourcefulness. I second want to address why community investment matters. On the one hand, it’s a simple matter of fairness. This country’s compelling origin story is that anyone who works hard and follows the rules can be anything they want. But it can’t happen if we’re starting at different points on the racetrack. If the basis of the American dream is earned success, we need to have a playing field where everyone has a fair chance. No one should be comfortable shrugging off entrenched inequality as simply the way the cards were dealt. However, some people need to see a detailed cost-benefit analysis, so if I take a purely pragmatic position, I’d point out that investing in creating safe, healthy communities is good for everyone. For one, health care accounts for a large share of the U.S. economy, and treatment of chronic disease is a big part of that.8 But more importantly, the kids whose economic conditions put them ten paces behind the starting line are an important factor in this country’s future. They’re part of our rising workforce. 8 Gerteis et al. (2014). 4 They’re potential sources of technological and scientific innovation. They’ll be paying into our Social Security and protecting our country. They can be our doctors, nurses, teachers, and legislators, or they can be caught in a cycle of poverty whose costs may well be exponentially larger than an early investment in their future. No one who’s planning on living past the next decade can afford to dismiss their fate. Whether the motivation is fairness or practicality, I’ve seen firsthand what can be accomplished, and it’s more than convincing. I recently visited Kearns, a township in Salt Lake County. Kearns has a lot of challenges: Half their children live in poverty. Infant mortality, obesity, and diabetes-related deaths are significantly higher than in the rest of the county, while life expectancy and graduation rates are much lower. But it also has some inherent strengths—the community is engaged, and involved in initiatives to tackle those issues. The goal is to combine the community’s energy with the county’s assets for an all-inclusive healthy communities initiative, the first in the county and a leader in Utah.9 Our first stop was the Olympic Oval, which is still used as a training facility—the day we were there, the Korean national speed skating team was practicing. But they’ve also opened it to the public, helping people get more active and giving kids a place to spend time and have something fun and different to do. That’s in part because of Derek Parra, who won a speed skating gold in 2002. He teaches kids from the community to skate and coaches speed skaters from the area and around the country. Yes, if you live in Kearns, your child can learn to skate from an Olympic gold medalist. 9 For more information, see Salt Lake County’s “Healthy Kearns” initiative, http://slco.org/townships/communities/healthy-kearns/. 5 We also saw the library, which serves as a safe place for kids to go after school. Some of them spend hours there, so, even though it’s not a formal program, they found a way to provide healthy snacks. The library isn’t big enough to offer all the services the kids need so it’s being expanded. There are also plans to build a police substation and community center. Our hosts told us there are already strong relationships between law enforcement and the community in Kearns, and that trust is obviously vital. So this approach to building a healthy community really does encompass the multiple factors that contribute to success: health, education, safety, and community cohesion. Next up is Mesa, Arizona. The initiative here is “creative placemaking,” an effort to revitalize downtown. We saw beautiful new affordable housing—when they heard the average rents, my San Francisco staff all threatened to move to Mesa—complete with a courtyard playground so kids have a safe place to run around. We toured Lulubell Toy Bodega—that’s Amy, the owner, and the mayor of Mesa. Here’s some of the unique art on offer. This was great for me, because my son’s in art school and it’s rare that my work gets me cool points. When you walk to the store, you can see that the area is already starting to look more like the small, boutique shopping areas you’d find in San Francisco or Brooklyn or LA. We ate at República Empanada where Marco, the owner, told us his story. He’d wanted to start a small, family business and was on his way, having bought the building. Then the recession knocked him for a loop, work dried up so he was struggling to make loan payments, and there was more than one time that it all looked ready to collapse. But he kept at it and called on friends and family. One friend donated construction materials. Others pitched in to refurbish the building. Still more loaned what money they could, and now it’s a thriving business. 6 This goes back to the idea that a tight-knit community is a healthier one, and that every area of community development and revitalization is intertwined. These people are entrepreneurs. They’re bringing jobs to the community and showing others what can be accomplished. They’re bringing personality and culture. And they’re turning a neglected area into a safe place people want to visit, and want to stay. This is a process, and it doesn’t happen overnight. I was talking to the mayor about the issues I see throughout my District in places that have undergone similar renaissances. I asked if they were seeing any downside effects, and he told me that they’re dreaming of the day that gentrification is their biggest problem. In the meantime, they’re watching what’s happening around the country and looking at ways to protect current residents as the area continues to evolve. Last, Honolulu. Almost everyone I mention this to says something like, “I’m sure it’s SO hard to live in paradise.” But the truth is, Hawaii has the same pockets of inequality and economic hardship as any other state—more, in fact, than many. We visited Kokua Kalihi Valley, or KKV, which is a grandmaster of treating all determinants of health and well-being. There’s a medical clinic, legal counseling, a youth employment program, microbusiness support, and a healthy community kitchen. I spoke with Marcos, who runs their “instructional bike exchange.” Which basically means that young people in the community learn to fix bikes that are headed to the landfill. They earn their own bike in the process, and sell the others in the community at a fair price. This is some of what comes out of the sewing project, which is part of a larger women- focused initiative that includes skills and job training, English language and literacy, and parenting classes. That’s the supply wall and Dina, who heads the medical-legal partnership. The 7 women sell their handmade products—from clothes to bags to iPad covers—so if you’re ever in Honolulu, stop by. There’s a very dignified picture of me and my staff participating in the senior center’s dancercise class, but I seem to have lost that slide. KKV also holds stewardship of a natural forest preserve. Volunteers and members of the community tend to the gardens, sell produce at farmers markets, use the vegetables in healthy meals for the KKV community, and maintain the land. Even the smallest things are taken care of. There’s a reading nook where people can wait for family members. It’s actually more of a permanent library, because you can keep any book you want. KKV’s work is pragmatic and efficient—when people come in to the clinic, they can get legal advice on tenants’ rights, for instance. But it’s also thoughtful and creative, and helps to create the strong community bonds that have proven so essential in fostering health. That’s my pitch. Community investment matters. We know that neighborhoods shape health and economic opportunity.10 We know that there are people out there with the skill and the determination to make communities better. And we know that when communities thrive, it’s good for everyone. All it takes is a commitment to do our part. 10 Jutte, Miller, and Erickson (2015). 8 References Campbell, Frances, Gabriella Conti, James J. Heckman, Seong Hyeok Moon, Rodrigo Pinto, Elizabeth Pungello, and Yi Pan. 2014. “Early Childhood Investments Substantially Boost Adult Health.” Science 343(6178, March 28), pp. 1,478–1,485. Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2015. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility: Childhood Exposure Effects and County-Level Estimates.” Working paper, May. Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2015. “The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment.” NBER Working Paper 21156. Currie, Janet, and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2015. “Early Life Origins of Life Cycle Well Being: Research and Policy Implications.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 34(1, Winter), pp. 208–242. Dahl, Gordon B., and Lance Lochner. 2012. “The Impact of Family Income on Child Achievement: Evidence from the Earned Income Tax Credit.” American Economic Review 102(5, August), pp. 1,927–1,956. Gerteis Jessie, David Izrael, Deborah Deitz, Lisa LeRoy, Richard Ricciardi, Therese Miller, and Jayasree Basu. 2014. Multiple Chronic Conditions Chartbook. AHRQ Publication 14-0038. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. http://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/wysiwyg/professionals/prevention-chronic- care/decision/mcc/mccchartbook.pdf Hoynes, Hilary W., Douglas L. Miller, and David Simon. 2015. “Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and Infant Health.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(1, February), pp. 172–211. Jutte, Douglas P., Jennifer L. Miller, and David J. Erickson. 2015. “Neighborhood Adversity, Child Health, and the Role for Community Development.” Pediatrics 135(2, March), pp. S48–S57. www.pediatrics.org/cgi/doi/10.1542/peds.2014-3549F

1 Presentation to Town Hall Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on February 18, 2016 The Right Profile: Economic Drivers and the Outlook Good afternoon, it’s a pleasure to be here. I gave my first public speech as President of the San Francisco Fed at Town Hall Los Angeles nearly five years ago. I always enjoy coming back. In fact, my last Town Hall event was memorable—the room lost power and I gave my speech in the dark, except for the glow sticks an enterprising staff member ran to the drugstore to get. I still have mine as a memento of that day. I’ll start out by stating something you all know. The Federal Reserve has a dual mandate: maximum employment and price stability. We want everyone who wants a job to be able to find one and for inflation to average 2 percent per year. I mention this because there are aspects of the current discussion—and worry—about the economy and monetary policy that should be seen in context. The narrative of the punditry can sound alarming, and can give a false impression of what motivates monetary policymakers. Since I’m about to talk about motivations, it’s probably a good time to inject the standard disclaimer that the views expressed today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. With that out of the way, today I’d like to talk about where we are on each of those goals, where I see the economy headed, and put some of those concerns in context. Call it MythBusters: Monetary Policy Edition. Employment: Career opportunities I first want to address employment, where things are looking good. “Groovy times” as they said back in the day. We use a variety of measures to gauge the health of the labor market, 2 but the most widely discussed, and most frequently used, is the unemployment rate. Unemployment will never be zero, because in any well-functioning economy, people leave jobs and new people enter the workforce. Economists use the term “natural rate of unemployment” to describe the optimal rate for an economy at full health. It’s hard to know exactly what the number is, but I put the natural rate at about 5 percent. We dipped just below that, to 4.9 percent, in January. I expect the unemployment rate to continue to come down a bit further, reaching the mid-4s later this year. This is a reflection of steady improvement in a labor market that has fully recovered from the recession and its aftermath, when we saw a peak of 10 percent. There are other indicators—workers who are part-time for economic reasons or the labor force participation rate, for example—that have been the focus of continued concern. But digging into the data, we’ve actually come quite far on both of those. In fact, while part-time employment for economic reasons looks like it’s still somewhat elevated relative to historical norms, the labor force participation rate now appears to be consistent with its longer-term trend.1 A further sign of the health of the labor market is that more people are quitting their jobs—indicating they feel confident that they’ll find another—and they’re probably right: Job vacancies are at the highest levels since they started collecting the data in 2000. We added more than 2½ million jobs in 2015. All in all, we have reached or are close to maximum employment across a broad range of markers. Inflation: Pressure drop? On the inflation side, we’re not quite where I’d like us to be, but we’re on course to reach our goal. 1 Aaronson et al. (2014). 3 The Fed sets a target of 2 percent average inflation. You’ll generally hear policy wonks and commentators talk about the Fed’s “2 percent inflation target”—I do it frequently myself. But I want to emphasize that I just included the word “average.” Sometimes we get so caught up in economic shorthand that we forget not everyone is speaking the same language. I don’t want to leave the impression that inflation should be exactly 2 percent all the time or that small movements in either direction should lead to alarm. Sometimes we’ll be a little lower, sometimes a little higher; this isn’t about complete control. What I want—on average, in the medium term— is for inflation to be about 2 percent. Worry should only set in if it’s persistently above or below that number. I’d also like to stress the “above or below” part. Many people think that Fed policymakers’ concern lies disproportionately with inflation that’s too high. They think we view inflation lower than 2 percent as sort of “not great,” but see inflation above 2 percent as catastrophic. That’s not the case. In my view, inflation somewhat above 2 percent is just as bad as the same amount below. And here’s the one place I actually am speaking for others in the Federal Reserve System—the most recent FOMC statement explicitly addressed this issue. 2 With that proviso firmly in place, I will note that inflation currently is too low. Over the 12 months of last year, the Fed’s preferred inflation measure, the personal consumption expenditures price index, stands at around half a percentage point while core inflation, which strips out volatile components like food and energy, is about 1½ percent. Now, Fed policymakers are often accused of not eating or driving, because we focus more on measures like the latter. It’s not that we don’t understand that gas and groceries are important parts of people’s household budgets. It’s just that for policy, we need to look at the underlying trends, and if we got lost in the supermarket or oil fields, we’d miss what the data are telling us about the medium term. 2 Board of Governors (2016). 4 In any event, I expect inflation to move back to 2 percent over the next two years. Current U.S. inflation pressures are playing tug-of-war. On one side, falling prices for energy and most goods are pulling us down, reflecting the strong U.S. dollar and other international developments. On the other, rising prices for domestic services are mostly trying to yank us to the 2 percent line. When you look at the parts of the U.S. economy that are not traded globally, like housing, we’re seeing prices increase in a way that reflects a stronger, tightening economy. While it might not be music to renters’ ears, the steep increase in rental prices is a reflection of the nation’s economic strength. In services more generally, we’re seeing inflation running close to our target.3 There are also increasing signs that wage growth is picking up— which, again, may not sound great to employers, but is actually something we’ve been waiting for. It’s a sign of the economy really powering back, and it will help boost household incomes and prompt even more growth in consumption spending. By at least one commonly cited measure, wage growth has picked up from 2 to 2½ percent in recent months. It’s also worth noting that wages in the aftermath of the recession may be acting out of character. During the recession, wage growth didn’t slow as much as might have been expected. Then, during the recovery, wage growth stagnated, even as the labor market made solid gains. Recent research by my staff suggests that this puzzle may be in part because of who was entering and leaving the workforce.4 During the recession and early in the recovery, wages stayed higher than expected because most of the people who lost their jobs were the ones making less. More recently, as the labor market has strengthened, the pattern has reversed. Many workers who were either on the sidelines or working part-time started finding full-time jobs. Because they’re new, the vast majority of these workers earn less than other employees, which pushes down the overall 3 Glick (2015). 4 Daly and Hobijn (2016). 5 average. Once you adjust for this factor, upward wage pressures are even stronger than the headline numbers suggest. So if we look at the domestic market in isolation, it shows strong growth. We’re just contending with outside forces. As the price of oil dropped by some 70 percent and the value of the dollar increased by over 20 percent, it naturally influenced near-term inflation. But the effects should peter out. One reason economists can comfortably say that these factors are transitory, or at least stabilizing, is that it’s incredibly unlikely that oil will fall another 70 percent. There is a basement on how low energy prices can go. That’s why I’m confident that we’re on track to reach our inflation goal. Mixed signals and the equalizer Another area of mixed signals is that certain sectors are slowing down at the same time the overall economy keeps chugging ahead. Sectors that are directly affected by the strong dollar, weak foreign demand, and falling energy and commodity prices have underperformed recently. But the hardest-hit sectors—manufacturing, drilling and mining, and agriculture—account for a relatively small share of employment and GDP. By contrast, the large domestic services sector— including restaurants, health care, and business services—is doing quite well, and makes up the huge majority of American jobs. In last year’s impressive jobs growth, 93 percent were in services, including government. Risks and concerns—lightning strikes? Still, as endless column inches have been dedicated to chronicling, and as the Fed itself mentioned in the last FOMC statement, there are areas of economic concern. In particular, economic developments abroad and market volatility have taken center stage in discussions of the U.S. economic outlook. 6 Of course, I am aware of, and closely monitoring, potential risks. But I want to be clear what that means. It’s often said that the economy isn’t the stock market and the stock market isn’t the economy. That’s very true. Short-term fluctuations or even daily dives aren’t accurate reflections of the state of the vast, intricate, multilayered U.S. economy. And they shouldn’t be viewed as the four horsemen of the apocalypse. Remember, the expansion of the 1980s wasn’t derailed by the crash of ’87, and we sailed through the Asian financial crisis a decade later. I say “remember”—some of you here will actually remember and others will remember it from your high school history class. From a policymaker’s perspective, my concern isn’t as simple as whether markets are up or down. Watching a stock ticker isn’t the way to gauge America’s economic health. As Paul Samuelson famously said, the stock market has predicted nine out of the past five recessions. What’s important is how it impacts jobs and inflation in the U.S. At the risk of puncturing some of the more colorful theories about what drives the Fed, I lay before you the cold, hard truth: Fed policymakers are even more boring than you think. Because all we see is our mandate. How does this affect American jobs and growth? What does this mean for households’ buying power? The same holds true for international developments. Of course we are closely watching situations abroad. But not because we should act in response to, say, financial volatility in China. We monitor developments in China, Brazil, South Africa, and more because we’re on alert for how spillovers could affect our goals at home. We live in a global economy, not an inoculated city. What happens in China or Brazil isn’t contained by national borders; the rest of the world necessarily feels the effects and they easily breach the gates of the West. But others’ economic fates do not spell our own. Yes, global markets affect U.S. growth; but we are also powered by 7 domestic demand and have the ability to make our own monetary policy. With the policy tools at our disposal, we can continue to achieve our employment and inflation goals. Ultimately, monetary policy has been supporting the expansion of the U.S. economy, allowing it to become stronger and stronger, and the domestic demand we’re seeing reflects its underlying might. Despite recent financial volatility, my overall outlook for the U.S. and the global economy remains unchanged. There is plenty of concern about China’s slower pace, but as I said last year, this largely reflects a pivot from a manufacturing-based economy to one driven by domestic consumption and services—the exact engines that are currently powering U.S. growth.5 Monetary policy: Data dependent So what does all this say about monetary policy? A lot of people make jokes about economists having the only job in the world where you can constantly change your answer and not get fired—my mother, by the way, is one of them. But what we actually do is adjust our forecasts as we get more data. A few years ago, for instance, I viewed the natural rate of unemployment as about 5½ percent. As more data came in and as we learned more about the shape of the recovery, I reassessed. This is just to put into context that when I look at my December forecast and compare it with my outlook for unemployment and core inflation today, there’s virtually no change. The shifts in my forecast amount to just one-tenth of a percentage point. I therefore continue to see a gradual pace of policy normalization as being the best course. My preferred route is a gradual path of increases. This reflects the fact that the economy still needs a gentle shove forward from monetary policy, as we continue to navigate the headwinds from weakness abroad and their effects on the dollar and commodity prices. 5 Williams (2015). 8 I want to emphasize, of course, that I don’t have this on remote control; the path of policy remains data dependent. Anyone who knows me knows that data-dependency is the irresistible force of my policymaking decisions—I literally made T-shirts about it. As I get more data and other information, I’ll adjust my views of the outlook for employment, inflation, and the appropriate path for monetary policy accordingly. Conclusion Despite the Sturm und Drang of international and market developments, the U.S. economy is, all in all, looking pretty good. I still expect to see U.S. GDP growth of about 2¼ percent for 2016. I still expect unemployment to edge down to about 4½ percent by late in the year. And I still see inflation edging up to our 2 percent goal within the next two years. So I’m not down—it all looks good to me. 9 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. 2014. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197–255. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/projects/bpea/fall-2014/fall2014bpea_aaronson_et_al.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016. “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” Amended January 26. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_20160126.pdf Daly, Mary, and Bart Hobijn. 2016. “The Intensive and Extensive Margins of Real Wage Adjustment.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-04. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/files/wp2016-04.pdf Glick, Reuven. “FedViews.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October 8. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/fedviews/2015/october/october-08-2015/ Williams, John C. 2015. “China, Rates, and the Outlook: May the (Economic) Force Be with You.” Presentation to the Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century: An agenda for China and the United States, September 19. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents- speeches/williams-speeches/2015/september/china-rates-outlook-building-the-financial-system/

1 Presentation to NYU Stern School of Business New York, NY By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on February 25, 2016 Rules of Engagement Good afternoon. While not many people coming from California would say they were delighted to experience East Coast weather in February, I am in fact happy to be here—Professor Schoenholtz and I have been talking about my coming here for years, but my calendar hasn’t allowed it until now. I was almost worried that there wouldn’t be anything interesting to talk about by the time I got here. That fear clearly didn’t come to fruition. And because there’s still so much attention on the Fed and what we’re doing, I want to talk today about what’s normal for monetary policy. Not the “new normal” that I and so many others invoke when we’re talking about the shape of the economy after the recession. Rather, what’s normal in terms of the process—how I think about making policy, particularly now that we’ve started the process of raising rates. And I should pause here to say that everything you’ll hear today is what I think—the views are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. What is normal? We’ve had the first rise in rates, but it’s been a long time since they were above zero. How do we look at things now and what does the future look like as we make decisions that affect the contours of the American economy? I spend a lot of time talking about being data dependent. I literally made T-shirts that say, “Monetary policy: It’s data dependent.” But there’s some confusion, because a lot of people take this to mean that I’m just waiting for the next employment or inflation report. This is what 2 happens when a Fed official tries to substitute economistese with real English. What I actually mean is that being driven by the data is about having a policymaking strategy. It’s about implementing consistent and predictable behavior that is driven by the economy’s performance relative to our goals. Rules, rules, rules As anyone who follows the Fed knows, there are a number of approaches we use to inform our policy decisions.1 The most famous is the Taylor rule and its variants, which have been the subject of a great deal of study and commentary.2 The Taylor rule looks at where inflation and output are today and uses a formula to reach a recommendation on where rates should be. Basically, it says that for every percentage point increase in inflation, you should raise rates by more than a percentage point. And when the economy falls into recession, you should lower rates. What’s striking about the Taylor rule is that it doesn’t incorporate forecasts or other information about the economy. It doesn’t take into consideration why inflation is low or where we think the economy will be in two years. You don’t need hundreds of economists deciphering all the data and putting together elaborate forecasts. You simply focus on two key data points that describe where we are today. An analogy may help: The Taylor rule says that to drive this car, all you need to do is steer. Just stay in your lane—you don’t need to think about every aspect of road conditions or what’s coming miles down the road. That sounds pretty straightforward. But there are a number of problems you run into. First is that crucial elements of the Taylor rule are the normal, or “natural,” levels of economic activity and interest rates. This means knowing what the economy looks like—in terms 1 See, for example, Board of Governors (2010). 2 See Taylor (1993), Levin, Wieland, and Williams (2003), Taylor and Williams (2011), and Yellen (2012). 3 of GDP, employment, the unemployment rate, interest rates—when it’s running on all cylinders. These natural rates play an important role in the Taylor rule, but are hard to know with any certainty, and they change over time. Let me give you an example: Two years ago, I put the natural rate of unemployment at about 5½ percent. But as more data came in, I reassessed, and now see 5 percent as natural in the post-recovery economy. One of the hallmarks of data dependency is that natural rates can and do shift over time. The same holds true for interest rates. The Taylor rule assumes that the long-run normal interest rate is fixed forever. However, evidence is building that the new normal for interest rates is quite a bit lower than we’ve been accustomed to in recent years.3 Economists have a concept called the “neutral” funds rate—that is, a federal funds rate that balances monetary policy so that it’s neither accommodative nor contractionary. Hence the “neutral.” The longer-run neutral rate, called r* (pronounced “r-star”), is essentially what the inflation-adjusted rate of interest will be once the economy’s back to full strength. This can sound confusing, since the Fed sets the federal funds rate. But the neutral rate is a function of the economy, not policy; we can align the funds rate with r*, but we don’t control its underlying level. The point is that these natural, or neutral, levels of economic activity and interest rates change over time in ways that are often unpredictable, and a steadfast rule that assumes that they are fixed can lead you astray. A second issue is what is called the “zero lower bound.” That is, interest rates can’t move much below zero. Why does this matter? Because standard monetary policy rules would have prescribed interest rates well below that mark during the recession and recovery. In fact, one version of the Taylor rule would tell us that, in the depths of the recession, interest rates 3 Laubach and Williams (2015), Williams (2015b). 4 should’ve been –5 percent.4 Research shows that strict adherence to the Taylor rule in the presence of the lower bound carries with it considerable costs in terms of stabilizing the economy and maintaining price stability.5 On the other end of the spectrum from the Taylor rule is something called “optimal control.” Here, you punch your targets into the computer—I want inflation to be 2 percent, I want the unemployment rate to be 5 percent—along with a baseline view of the economic outlook for the next several years. The computer is programmed with a detailed model of the economy and calculates, with all the available information, what path for interest rates will get you as close to your target as possible, period by period, over the next several years. To use the optimal control method, you need a detailed model of how the economy works and forecasts of every aspect of where you think it’s headed.6 The polar opposite of the Taylor rule. The optimal control approach puts a great deal of emphasis on the fact that monetary policy works, to cite the great Milton Friedman, with long and variable lags.7 Monetary policy takes at least a year or two to have its full effect, so we need to think about where we’re going and plan for that.8 It also accounts for headwinds, such as the impact of oil prices, volatility in China, and the effect of international developments on the dollar. It’s telling you how you should be driving, when you should turn the wheel, when you should let up on the gas. Optimal control says it’s not just about steering the car, it’s about planning for what’s coming ahead—there may be hairpin curves or exit ramps or, in a worst-case scenario, a cliff with no guardrail. Without warning signs or a map of the route, how can you best navigate the road? 4 Rudebusch (2009), Williams (2009). 5 Reifschneider and Williams (2000). 6 Yellen (2012). 7 Friedman (1961). 8 Havranek and Rusnak (2013). 5 Put that way, it sounds like optimal control is preferable to a simple Taylor rule. On its face, most people would argue that accounting for potholes—and everything else—along the way is essential. So why don’t we just abandon these simple rules and embrace optimal control? The answer is that, for all our intellect—and I’ll admit, economists are very sure their collective intellect is almost too much for the world to handle—there’s a limit to how much we truly know about the future. We have forecasts, which are based on sound data and analysis. But they’re only forecasts, and the unexpected can always erupt. I don’t have a 100 percent degree of certainty where housing prices are going. I don’t know for sure what’s going to happen with China. I wouldn’t bet my life on what the ECB or Bank of Japan is going to do. We may think we have it all figured out, but sometimes economists’ track records leave something to be desired. So there is a risk with the optimal control approach that we’ll believe our theories and our models too much, and that can lead us astray.9 There is a need for humility and to recognize our limitations. If Taylor rules are too rigid and optimal control relies too much on perfection, is there a Goldilocks approach? One that looks ahead and adapts to changing circumstances, but doesn’t rely on the omniscience of economists? Something called “difference rules” fit that bill. Personally I am a big fan of difference rules, for a couple of reasons. First, I’ve written a lot about them, and nothing pleases economists more than being able to talk about their own research.10 Second, this same research finds that these rules perform well in a wide variety of circumstances and are particularly suited for the lower bound.11 9 Orphanides and Williams (2008), Levin and Williams (2003). 10 Orphanides and Williams (2002, 2006), Orphanides (2003). 11 See also Tetlow (2015). 6 The key to the success of difference rules is that they don’t prescribe the level of interest rates, but the change in them. According to difference rules, if inflation is expected to be higher than the desired level, you raise interest rates; if unemployment is rising, you lower interest rates. Nothing else enters into the calculation—not the natural level of economic activity or the neutral interest rate. That means that they don’t rely on these hard-to-measure and changing concepts. Instead, they simply monitor the data in a way that keeps the economy on track. One rule to rule them all? Now, despite the lengthy explanation of the differences between variants of monetary policy rules and optimal control—and there are differences—the bottom line is that they’re not that different. They’re driven by the same factors. If the economy is in recession or inflation is undesirably low, all of them will say that interest rates should be low. Where they differ is in what they take into account and how they weigh different factors. So it would be easy to propose, as many people have, that we pick one approach or rule and stick to it. Proponents of this view say that having a set rule helps in communicating our intentions. It offers clarity and predictability about what the Fed is doing and why. It also, to some extent, “holds the Fed to account”—that is, we have a rule to follow and if we don’t, we have to explain our thinking. I don’t object to this in principle at all—I think central banks like the Fed have become, and should continue being, more open about policy rules and analysis. Several countries now publicly share these kinds of analyses: The Riksbank in Sweden, for instance, and the Norwegian Norges Bank.12 It just means being open and transparent about the thinking and analysis that go 12 See their websites: http://www.riksbank.se/en/Press-and-published/Published-from-the-Riksbank/Monetary- policy/Monetary-Policy-Report/ and http://www.norges-bank.no/en/Monetary-policy/. 7 into monetary policy and how policymakers come to the conclusions they do. So I shouldn’t object to having a set rule to follow, to offer the public more clarity, right? If only life were that simple. As the preceding discussion highlighted, while each of these policy strategies has value, there is no consensus about which one works best. The truth is that there is no absolutely right rule. They’re all just different ways to think about policy, and to come to a truly educated decision, it helps to look at the range of options. That is exactly what I do. I don’t focus exclusively on one rule, but examine a wide variety, hoping to glean insights and commonalities by comparing prescriptions from different approaches. In this regard, I favor an eclectic approach, recognizing that policy is always made with a high degree of uncertainty and one shouldn’t place all their bets on one approach. While I understand the impetus behind wanting a single rule to follow, it’s just not ready for prime time.13 It reminds me of the FDR quote that rules aren’t necessarily sacred, principles are. Rules and perspectives Fundamentally, what all these approaches do is help us think about policy, and the abundance of perspectives is important. The Fed is unique among central banks in the way we are organized. And one of the benefits of that structure is that it brings together 19 people with different backgrounds, different experiences, and different opinions. There is a lot of disagreement among policymakers and economists about what works best. Trying to pigeonhole all of them into one rule runs counter to the federated structure of the Fed that seeks to incorporate a diversity of views. Operating under one rule would mean losing the richness that’s fundamental to our success. 13 Williams (2015a). 8 Talking through different viewpoints and thought processes ensures that we’re truly looking at the economy through the correct lens, and vigorous debate means no one’s operating by knee-jerk reaction. This is why we can’t just be replaced by a monetary policy robot, tempting as that might sound. Rules and discretion in action All of this helps to explain the recent Federal Open Market Committee decision to raise rates, and our expectation that the subsequent increases will be gradual. I get asked a lot why the Fed raised rates when inflation was not just low, but when it had been persistently below target for some time. This decision is actually a good illustration of the use of various approaches to thinking about monetary policy. Both the basic and modified Taylor rules would call for an immediate increase in rates, mostly because we’re so close to our maximum employment goal. On the other hand, some people would call for waiting to act until we see the whites of inflation’s eyes. The far reaches of the spectrum get brought together because we’re also considering the difference rule and optimal control, which take forecasts into account in varying degrees, and because there are currently 17 voices in the room—who’ve spent the previous week debating the same issues with their own staffs of PhD economists. The fact that we raised rates when we did is an example of how ideas and instructions from all points on the playing field can come together in thoughtful, well- debated consensus. My own view is that it was time. The economy has been showing solid momentum, the recovery was well into its seventh year, and I’m someone who takes forecasts into account. I expect to see U.S. GDP growth of about 2¼ percent for 2016, unemployment edging down further below my estimate of the natural rate, to about 4½ percent by late in the year, and 9 inflation—despite the stubbornness it’s shown—to move back up to our 2 percent goal within the next two years. All of which argue for getting on the normalization track. I also expect this to be a gradual process. This reflects the fact that the economy still needs a gentle shove forward from monetary policy, as we continue to navigate some headwinds—like weakness abroad—and their effects, particularly on the dollar and commodity prices. It also reflects my wish to take things slowly, to be able to adjust to circumstances and data as they come in. These projections take into account the headwinds, low growth, and low r* that come out of our models and are incorporated into the optimal control paths.14 Again, this highlights that I give importance to forecasts, but am perfectly aware of their fallibility. And that the three things I’m most driven by are data, data, and data. Conclusion So there you have it. The Fed uses a number of approaches to help us think about the economy and monetary policy—they’re all insightful, they’re all useful, and they’re all a part of the debate. But none is absolutely fail-safe. They will continue to be part of the discussion, but the idea that we should follow only one—never deviating from the path—is ill-advised. 14 Williams (2016). 10 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2010. “Report to the FOMC on Economic Conditions and Monetary Policy. Book B, Monetary Policy: Strategies and Alternatives.” December 9. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20101214tealbookb20101209.pdf Friedman, Milton. 1961. “The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 69(5), pp. 447−466. Havranek, Tomas, and Marek Rusnak. 2013. “Transmission Lags of Monetary Policy: A Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(4, December), pp. 39–75. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q4a2.htm Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams. 2015. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2015-16, October. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/files/wp2015-16.pdf Levin, Andrew T., Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams. 2003. “The Performance of Forecast-Based Monetary Policy Rules under Model Uncertainty.” American Economic Review 93(3, June), pp. 622– 645. Levin, Andrew T., and John C. Williams. 2003. “Robust Monetary Policy with Competing Reference Models.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(5, July), pp. 945–975. Orphanides, Athanasios. 2003. “Historical Monetary Policy Analysis and the Taylor Rule.” Journal of Monetary Economics 50(5, July), pp. 983–1,022. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2002. “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, volume 2, pp. 63–145. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2006. “Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge.” Journal of the European Economic Association 4(2–3, April/May), pp. 366–375. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2008. “Learning, Expectations Formation, and the Pitfalls of Optimal Control Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 55(October), pp. S80–S96. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams. 2000. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low- Inflation Era.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(4, November, part 2), pp. 936–966. Rudebusch, Glenn D. 2009. “The Fed’s Monetary Policy Response to the Current Crisis.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2009-17, May 22. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2009/may/fed-monetary-policy-crisis/ Taylor, John B. 1993. “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice.” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, volume 39 (December), pp. 195–214. 11 Taylor, John B., and John C. Williams. 2011. “Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy.” In Handbook of Monetary Economics, eds. Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, volume 3B. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 829–860. Tetlow, Robert J. 2015. “Real-Time Model Uncertainty in the United States: ‘Robust’ Policies Put to the Test.” International Journal of Central Banking 11(1, March), pp. 113–155. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb15q2a4.htm Williams, John C. 2009. “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Lower Bound.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 1–37. Williams, John C. 2015a. “Monetary Policy and the Independence Dilemma.” Presentation to Chapman University, May 1. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams- speeches/2015/may/monetary-policy-independence-dilemma/ Williams, John C. 2015b. “Will Interest Rates Be Permanently Lower?” Vox online, November 26. http://www.voxeu.org/article/evidence-low-real-rates-will-persist Williams, John C. 2016. “After the First Rate Hike.” Presentation to California Bankers Association, January 8. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams- speeches/2016/january/after-the-first-rate-hike-economic-outlook/ Yellen, Janet. 2012. “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy.” Speech at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, April 11. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20120411a.htm

Presentation at U.S. Monetary Policy Forum New York, NY By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on February 26, 2016 Discussion of “Language after Liftoff: Fed Communication Away from the Zero Lower Bound” Historically central bankers have been a taciturn lot, especially when it comes to the subject of the future direction of monetary policy. This reluctance to opine on monetary policy has changed dramatically over the past decade, to the point where some exasperated commentators exclaim they wish central bankers would just be quiet! An important aspect of this new openness is “forward guidance,” that is, central banks’ efforts to describe the likely future direction of monetary policy through words or policy projections. The Feroli et al. (2016) paper reexamines the roles and effects of Federal Reserve forward guidance and draws a number of conclusions and policy prescriptions for the use of forward guidance in the future. I should note that my comments reflect my own views and not necessarily those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Their paper evaluates the Fed’s use of forward guidance from a number of perspectives: economic theory, empirical evidence, and assessments from market participants. Although it is impossible to do justice to all aspects of a 90-plus page paper in a few sentences, a few key takeaways stand out. First, they conclude that time-based forward guidance is generally a bad idea, especially when policy is not constrained by the lower bound on interest rates. They argue that it is inconsistent with the profession’s understanding that best-practice monetary policy reacts to changing economic conditions. It may also artificially reduce uncertainty about future policy, leading to excessive risk-taking and risks to financial stability. And it potentially locks in policy decisions in advance, restricting freedom to react to changing circumstances. Second, they conclude that well-designed data-based forward guidance can be a useful tool to help guide the public’s understanding of the central bank’s reaction function. They make a number of suggestions of how the Federal Reserve—and, presumably, other central banks— could improve their communication toward that end by emphasizing the data dependency of policy decisions and the resulting uncertainty about the future path of policy. Third, they present empirical evidence regarding the effects of various types of forward guidance and relate these findings to the desirable characteristics of monetary policy. This is where the rubber hits the road in terms of the debates about the costs and benefits of forward guidance in its various guises. I will devote the bulk of my comments to aspects of the evidence and present some new results of my own. In considering the empirical evidence on the effects of forward guidance, one is immediately confronted by the quandary that, in our standard textbook theories, forward guidance is superfluous and should leave no imprint on the data. Under rational expectations and complete knowledge, the public already knows everything they need to about monetary policy and make decisions accordingly. They don’t need to read policy statements or listen to press conferences or speeches. To think that policy guidance matters, you need to relax some assumptions about the public’s information set. For example, they may not possess a complete understanding of the policy regime, as in Rudebusch and Williams (2008), or there may be a break in the regime that the public is unaware of, or the central bank may be trying to reinforce commitment to a strategy, as in Woodford (2013). These issues are likely to be particularly salient when policy is constrained by the lower bound on interest rates and data dependency in policy actions is curtailed.1 Thus, any discussion about the costs and benefits of forward guidance must take place in the context of the situation in which it is being used. This brings me to my first case study, the Fed’s use of explicit time-based guidance starting on August 9, 2011. Despite extraordinary monetary stimulus—over 2½ years of near-zero short-term interest rates and QE1 and QE2—the unemployment rate had come down only 1 percentage point from its recession peak, to 9 percent, and the economic recovery remained tepid. Given the weakness in the economy, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) repeatedly stated that it intended to keep rates exceptionally low “for an extended period.” Nonetheless, public expectations were glued to the idea that the Fed would start to raise rates in about a year (Figure 1). It was against that backdrop that the FOMC decided to take dramatic action to shift public expectations using time-based forward guidance. The August 2011 FOMC statement said “The Committee currently anticipates that economic conditions—including low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation over the medium run—are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.”2 Three comments are in order. First, this statement, as well as subsequent FOMC statements that used forward guidance, clearly put the economic outlook front and center as the determinant of policy. The outlook defines the guidance. Second, it was the lower bound that tied the hands of policymakers, not the introduction of date-based guidance. Third, this action was taken after 1 See Williams (2006), Woodford (2013), and Swanson and Williams (2014a , b). 2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011). weighing the concerns around the costs of time-based guidance discussed in Feroli et al. (2016); the conclusion then was that the benefits from stimulating the economy outweighed the potential cost. The evidence bears out this judgment. The issuance of the statement dramatically shifted public expectations of future Fed policy. This is seen in private economists’ forecasts of the length of time until the Fed would raise rates, which jumped following the statement (Figure 1). Compared to the gentle taps of the hammer of previous FOMC verbal guidance that appeared to have little effect on expectations, the time-based guidance was like a sledgehammer. The impact of the introduction of time-based guidance is also seen in the Treasury market, where the yield on a 2-year Treasury note dropped by 10 basis points after the announcement (Figure 2). Yields on 10-year Treasury notes fell by over 20 basis points. A similar pattern is seen after the FOMC extended the date-based guidance in January and September of 2012 (Figure 2). Clearly, time-based forward guidance proved a powerful tool at a time when the FOMC wanted to shift public expectations of future policy. That said, it also proved a very blunt instrument in that all the conditioning statements and caveats around the guidance tended to get drowned out in favor of the date itself. With the work of shifting expectations done, the FOMC moved to more data-based guidance in December 2012. The lesson I draw from this experience is that the usefulness of explicit time-based forward guidance depends critically on the circumstances at hand. Therefore, one cannot overgeneralize to say it is “good” or “bad.” Although I do not see explicit forward guidance of this type as being beneficial away from the lower bound, it has definitely proven its value in case we find ourselves again constrained by the lower bound and in a similar predicament.3 So far I have been talking about the benefits of forward guidance. What about the costs? Feroli et al. (2016) enumerate various potential costs, but I will focus on the one for which we have the most evidence: the effect of forward guidance on market behavior regarding expectations of future interest rates. They claim that time-based forward guidance artificially dampens the public’s perceptions of future volatility in policy rates and makes expectations of future rates less sensitive to news. In other words, it creates excessive certainty about the future path of rates relative to what is implied by truly data-dependent policy. Whether this reduction in volatility is a good thing or a bad thing when rates are constrained by the lower bound is an open question I’ll leave aside. Instead, I’ll focus on the empirical evidence regarding the effects of guidance on market behavior. The authors’ theory that time-based guidance causes these market phenomena faces a thorny identification problem because the presence of the lower bound by itself will tend to mute perceptions of volatility of future interest rates and bond rate responsiveness to news.4 And, most uses of forward guidance have occurred when policy is constrained by the lower bound. Thus, the dilemma: If we see evidence of depressed responsiveness to news, is it because of the lower bound or because of forward guidance? The authors aim to distinguish between these alternative explanations in two ways. First, the Fed used forward guidance in the early 2000s when the funds rate was well above zero, so 3 See Williams (2013b). 4 See Swanson and Williams (2014a, b) for a lengthy discussion of this issue. that provides some independent variation in the data.5 Second, they try to get additional variation in the data by distinguishing between different types of guidance over time. Using these approaches, they find that time-based forward guidance depressed bond market responsiveness to news and implied volatility, beyond what would occur owing to the lower bound. I am not convinced by this evidence. First, the confidence bands on these estimates, although not reported in the paper, must be wide. Second, in practice it’s hard to make clear distinctions between types of guidance and such attempts are subject to considerable judgment and measurement error. Of course, the FOMC hasn’t made this any easier, tending to mix data- and date-based guidance together. For this analysis to be more convincing, one needs more data. Fortunately, we do have more data if we look at the international evidence. The Federal Reserve is not the only country to have been constrained at the lower bound and used forward guidance. The Bank of Japan, Bank of Canada, Bank of England, the European Central Bank (ECB), and others have used various forms of forward guidance at different times while at the lower bound.6 Comparing their experiences to the Fed’s provides independent information on the connections between forward guidance, the lower bound, and market behavior. Consider the cases of the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, and the ECB. The U.S. and U.K. examples are particularly interesting because both countries reached the lower bound at about the same time and had been expected to exit the lower bound in 2015 or 2016. The big difference between the two is that the Fed has employed a variety of types of forward guidance since 2008—including explicit date-based guidance, and issuing interest rate projections starting in 2012 (the “dot plots”)—while the Bank of England came to use forward guidance late in the 5 See Rudebusch and Williams (2008) for a detailed discussion of the FOMC’s use of forward guidance before the financial crisis. 6 See Carney (2012), Bank of England (2016), European Central Bank (2014), and Shirai (2013). game in 2013 and has made limited use of forward guidance since 2014.7 Therefore, if forward guidance on its own has a big effect, we should see a sizable difference between market behavior in the U.S. and U.K. I look at two pieces of evidence regarding public expectations of future policy rates, following the methodology of Swanson and Williams (2014a, b). First, I examine how the response of the yield on a zero-coupon two-year government bond to economic news changes over time in each country. Second, I look at the perceived volatility of short-term interest rates implied by options on 12-month-ahead short-term interest rates in the U.S. and U.K. The first finding is that, despite significant differences in forward guidance in the U.S. and U.K., bond market responsiveness to news has been very similar in the two countries since 2012 (Figures 3 and 4). Although not shown here, the same pattern is evident in one-year yields. This similarity in the face of different policies is reinforced by the evidence from implied volatility of future short-term rates: There is no discernible difference in the pattern in market perceptions of future variability in short-term interest rates between the two countries (Figure 5). The second finding is that both countries have seen a sizable increase in market responsiveness and implied volatility over the past year as expectations of liftoff came nearer. Although these measures are still somewhat below their respective historical norms, the return to data dependence in market behavior is clear.8 The differences in forward guidance across these two countries is exerting no discernible imprint on these measures of market behavior across the two economies. 7 The Bank of England’s main two uses of forward guidance were the introduction of a short-lived 7 percent unemployment threshold in August 2013, and the replacement of that in February 2014 with a description of the likely eventual rise in rates as “gradual.” 8 The “normal” level shown in each figure refers to a benchmark period in which the zero bound was not a concern for that country. Finally, market responsiveness to news remains very low in Germany, reflecting expectations of being stuck at the lower bound for quite some time (Figure 6). In this regard, the ECB provides another interesting example in that their use of forward guidance has been limited to saying since July 2013 that it “expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower levels for an extended period of time.”9 Nonetheless, market responses to news are negligible, and there is no evidence of a return to data dependency in market behavior, unlike in the U.S. and U.K. Taken together, this international evidence suggests that being stuck at the lower bound is the primary driver of the muted responsiveness of the bond market to news and implied volatility of future short-term rates. Although forward guidance undoubtedly can affect market expectations of future policy, it appears to do so by affecting expectations of being constrained by the lower bound, rather than the behavior of rates away from the lower bound. In conclusion, we have learned a lot from the experience of forward guidance, both in the United States and across the globe. One practical lesson is that it is most effective when it’s both simple and explicit. Vague hints about future policy seem to be ineffective. Although it’s understandable to want to communicate a comprehensive view of monetary policy with all of its incumbent uncertainties, the public has only so much bandwidth dedicated to central bank messaging. Intricate and conditional messages tend to be ignored as well. So, like a sledgehammer, strongly worded forward guidance can be a powerful tool when it’s needed. But, like a sledgehammer, care needs to be taken when and where it is used. 9 See European Central Bank (2014) for further discussion of the ECB’s use of forward guidance. References Bank of England. 2016. “Forward Guidance.” Bank of England website. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/pages/forwardguidance.aspx Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2011. “Press Release.” August 9. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20110809a.htm Carney, Mark. 2012. “Guidance.” Remarks to the CFA Society Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, December 11. http://www.bankofcanada.ca/2012/12/guidance/ European Central Bank. 2014. “The ECB’s Forward Guidance.” ECB Monthly Bulletin, April, pp. 65–73. https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/mobu/mb201404en.pdf Feroli, Michael, David Greenlaw, Peter Hooper, Frederic Mishkin, and Amir Sufi. 2016. “Language after Liftoff: Fed Communication Away from the Zero Lower Bound.” Paper prepared for the 2016 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, February 26. Rudebusch, Glenn D., and John C. Williams. 2008. “Revealing the Secrets of the Temple: The Value of Publishing Central Bank Interest Rate Projections.” In Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, ed. John Y. Campbell. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 247–284. Shirai, Sayuri. 2013. “Monetary Policy and Forward Guidance in Japan.” Speeches at the International Monetary Fund and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 21. https://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/press/koen_2013/data/ko130921a1.pdf Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams. 2014a. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates.” American Economic Review 104(10, October), pp. 3,154– 3,185. Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams. 2014b. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Yields and Exchange Rates in the U.K. and Germany.” Journal of International Economics 92(S1), pp. 2–21. Williams, John C. 2006. “Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Economy with Learning.” In Monetary Policy in an Environment of Low Inflation; Proceedings of the Bank of Korea International Conference 2006. Seoul, Korea: The Bank of Korea, pp. 199–228. Williams, John C. 2013a. “Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Unconventional Monetary Policy.” Panel presentation at the NBER conference, Boston, MA, October 18. http://www.frbsf.org/our- district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2013/october/research-unconventional-monetary- policy-financial-crisis/ Williams, John C. 2013b. “Will Unconventional Policy Be the New Normal?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-29, October 7. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2013/october/federal-reserve-unconventional-monetary-policy-large-scale-asset-purchases- forward-guidance/ Woodford, Michael. 2013. “Forward Guidance by Inflation-Targeting Central Banks.” Presented at Riksbank Conference on “Two Decades of Inflation Targeting: Main Lessons and Remaining Challenges,” June 3. http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Rapporter/POV/2013/2013_3/rap_pov_artikel_3_131122_eng.pdf Note: Number of quarters until federal funds rate expected to rise above 37.5 basis points. Source: Swanson and Williams (2014a), from Blue Chip Consensus Survey data. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Quarters + FOMC issues "mid-2013" guidance Figure 1: Date-based forward guidance Blue Chip expectations of time until Fed liftoff 1 Figure 2: Forward guidance and Treasury yields Source: Williams (2013a). Treasury Yield Maturity 3-month 6-month 1-year 2-year 5-year 10-year FOMC drops "considerable period" language on Jan. 28, 2004 Jan. 27, 2004 0.89 0.96 1.17 1.69 3.08 4.39 Jan. 28, 2004 0.92 0.98 1.30 1.86 3.22 4.49 change (bp) 3.0 2.0 12.5 16.6 13.9 10.3 FOMC projects near-zero funds rate "at least through mid-2013" Aug. 8, 2011 0.05 0.07 0.17 0.27 1.13 2.59 Aug. 9, 2011 0.03 0.06 0.13 0.17 0.93 2.36 change (bp) -2.0 -1.0 -4.3 -9.9 -20.4 -22.8 FOMC projects near-zero funds rate "at least through late 2014" Jan. 24, 2012 0.04 0.07 0.15 0.24 0.95 2.19 Jan. 25, 2012 0.04 0.07 0.14 0.20 0.85 2.11 change (bp) 0.0 0.0 -0.2 -3.8 -9.4 -8.0 FOMC projects near-zero funds rate "at least through mid-2015" Sep. 12, 2012 0.10 0.13 0.20 0.23 0.74 1.82 Sep. 13, 2012 0.10 0.13 0.20 0.22 0.70 1.79 change (bp) 0.0 0.0 -0.2 -0.9 -3.7 -2.9 2 Figure 3: Data dependence in the United States Response of 2-year Treasury yields to macroeconomic news Source: Swanson and Williams (2014a, updated). “Normal” Response (1990-2000) 3 Figure 4: Data dependence in the United Kingdom Response of 2-year UK gilt yields to macroeconomic news Source: Swanson and Williams (2014b, updated). “Normal” Response (1993-2006) 4 Source: Swanson and Williams (2014a, b, updated). Figure 5: Policy rate uncertainty: A tale of two countries 5 Figure 6: Data dependence in Germany Response of 2-year German bund yields to macroeconomic news Source: Swanson and Williams (2014b, updated). “Normal” Response (1993-2006) 6
