Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy CFA Society of Philadelphia/The Bond Club of Philadelphia September 25, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy CFA Society of Philadelphia/The Bond Club of Philadelphia September 25, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction Let me welcome you all to the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and to thank both the CFA Society and the Bond Club for inviting me to speak today. In October of 2006, I gave my first speech as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia to the CFA Society of Philadelphia. Well, a lot has happened since then, and the world is a different place. So I will use my time with you today to offer my perspective on the current state of the economy and monetary policy. Our gathering comes at an opportune time, since less than two weeks ago, I participated in the most recent meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, or the FOMC, which, as you know, is the body within the Federal Reserve responsible for determining monetary policy. Four times a year, and most recently at our last meeting, FOMC participants submit their economic projections for output growth, inflation, and unemployment, based on their latest assessments of appropriate monetary policy. The Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, gives a perspective on participants’ views of how monetary policy can best achieve the goals that Congress has set forth for it. Specifically, the Federal Reserve Act states that the Fed should conduct monetary policy to “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are stable and the economy is operating at full employment, it is often said that Congress has given the Fed a dual mandate. 2 Monetary policy actions generally affect the economy with a lag, so the FOMC must be forward-looking in calibrating the appropriate stance of policy. Therefore, I want to begin my remarks with a review of the nation’s economic recovery and my outlook for growth and inflation. I will then offer some observations on current monetary policy, including the actions announced at our last meeting. Before continuing, I should note that my views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the FOMC. Economic Outlook So let me begin with the state of our economy. We have now seen three years of economic expansion since mid-2009 when the recession officially ended. Yet, no one would describe our nation’s economic state of affairs as satisfactory. Economic growth has come in fits and starts, taking two steps forward, only to then take one step back. Most disheartening is that the unemployment rate remains high, affecting millions of Americans and their families. After finishing 2011 with 4.1 percent growth in the fourth quarter, growth of real gross domestic product slowed to 2 percent in the first quarter of this year, and then to 1.7 percent in the second quarter. We are likely on a trajectory that will lead to growth of about 2 percent for the full year. Looking out a little further, I anticipate that the pace of growth will pick up somewhat to about 3 percent in 2013 and 2014 – a pace that is slightly above trend. That outlook places me near the high end of the central tendency of FOMC participants’ forecasts for 2013 and near the low end for 2014. In September’s projections, the central tendency showed real GDP growth of 1.7 to 2 percent this year, followed by growth of 2.5 to 3 percent in 2013 and 3 to 3.8 percent in 2014 and 2015. One temporary factor contributing to sluggish growth in the very near term is the drought in the Midwest and its effects on this year’s crops. Estimates vary, but the 3 drought will probably cut about half a percentage point off growth in the second half of this year. Sluggish manufacturing activity has been another reason for the recent moderating growth estimates. The Philadelphia Fed’s monthly Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers has been a useful barometer of national trends in manufacturing over many years. The survey’s general activity index posted a few negative readings last summer and then returned to positive numbers through this spring. We saw a return to negative territory this summer. While the readings for the past five months have been negative, the recent readings have been improving, and the latest survey suggests that manufacturing activity in the region was essentially flat from August to September. Despite weak current activity, the survey’s indicators of activity six months ahead have remained positive throughout this recovery and showed a nice bounce up in the September report, suggesting that manufacturers are optimistic about the future. Consumer spending, which accounts for about 70 percent of the nation’s GDP, also continues to make modest gains. In July, the Bureau of Economic Analysis reported that personal consumption expenditures (PCE) increased $46 billion, or 0.4 percent. That followed a weak reading in June, when consumer spending increased just $3.5 billion. We need to keep in mind, though, the extent of the shocks from the financial crisis and the ensuing recession. The housing bust that precipitated the crisis destroyed a lot of household wealth. It is only natural for consumers to want to rebuild the savings that were lost as a result of the decline in housing wealth – savings they might have used to send their children to college or to help fund their retirement. Consequently, private savings rates have risen substantially. Between 2000 and 2007, private savings averaged less than 5 percent of GDP, and between 2008 and 2011, the savings rate averaged 7½ percent. Thus, it is not surprising that consumers are not the engine of growth they normally are in economic expansions. And they are unlikely to provide a very robust boost to demand until the health of their balance sheets has been significantly improved. 4 There are, however, encouraging signs that the housing sector is beginning to improve. Of course, we entered the recession over-invested in residential real estate, and we are not likely to see a strong housing recovery until the surplus inventory of foreclosed and distressed properties declines. Moreover, we should not want housing activity to return to those heady days of 2005 and 2006. Such activity was unsustainable and a prime contributor to the financial meltdown. On the labor front, the pace of employment growth this year hasn’t been strong enough to have much of an effect on the unemployment rate. Firms added an average of 226,000 jobs per month in the first quarter of the year. This slowed considerably to just 67,000 jobs a month, on average, in the second quarter. Through the first two months of the third quarter, employment has picked up slightly, to about 118,000 a month. At 8.1 percent, the unemployment rate is still elevated, but we should remember that it is a full percentage point lower than it was at this time last year. In the FOMC’s economic projections in September, the FOMC participants’ central tendency suggested that unemployment in the fourth quarter would be close to where we are now, between 8 and 8.2 percent, and then fall gradually to between 6 and 6.8 percent by the end of 2015. My own forecast is at the low end of that central tendency. I wish we had better numbers to report. The sizable shocks that hit the economy resulted in a loss of 8.8 million jobs from the peak of employment in January 2008 to the employment trough in February 2010. We have regained fewer than half of these jobs. In my view, unfortunately the frictions and structural adjustments that are holding back improvements in labor markets cannot be cured by monetary policy, nor can monetary policy do much to speed up the slow progress we are making on the labor front. Turning to inflation, it has been running near our longer-term goal of 2 percent. Although the drought in the Midwest and higher gasoline prices are likely to push up inflation in the near term, these effects should be transitory. Thus, I do not see much evidence that we will have an outbreak of inflation in the near term, nor do I see 5 elevated risks of deflation. Indeed, over the medium to longer term, I expect inflation to be near our 2 percent target. But this expectation is incumbent on appropriate monetary policy, and my assessment is that the appropriate policy is likely to be tighter going forward than anticipated by the Committee at this point. Thus, I do see some risks to inflation in the longer run given the current stance of monetary policy, as I will discuss in a few moments. Of course, other risks cloud the forecast. While the recent policy actions in Europe may have calmed markets and eased financial conditions somewhat, many fundamental issues remain unresolved. Thus, there is still a great deal of uncertainty as to whether the Europeans will make the difficult choices needed to put Europe back on a sustainable fiscal path. Our own fiscal policy is also uncertain. While I believe we will avoid the worst-case scenarios related to falling off the fiscal cliff, the U.S. needs to forge a path toward sustainable fiscal policy. These uncertainties constitute significant hurdles for the economy and are retarding near-term growth. Monetary Policy Let me now turn to some thoughts on monetary policy. Even before the actions taken this month, the Fed had put into place an extraordinary amount of accommodation to support the recovery. The Fed has kept the federal funds rate near zero for more than 45 months; it has completed two rounds of asset purchases that more than tripled the size of the Fed’s balance sheet; and it is implementing a maturity extension program, known as “operation twist,” which is lengthening the maturity of our holdings of Treasury securities. These actions have changed the composition of the portfolio from mainly short-term Treasuries before the crisis to mostly longer-term Treasuries and housing-related securities today. Many of these actions were taken at the height of the financial crisis and during the ensuing deep recession. But the financial crisis has substantially abated and the 6 economy has been healing, if somewhat more slowly than we would like. In fact, if you compare today’s economic and financial conditions to the conditions that prevailed when the FOMC previously took bold actions, you will see that the economy is undoubtedly in a better position. At its latest meeting in September, the FOMC decided to begin a third round of quantitative easing, commonly known as QE3, with the purchase of additional agency mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $40 billion per month. The FOMC statement indicated that if the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Fed would make these purchases and more and would employ other policy tools as appropriate until such improvement is achieved within a context of price stability. I interpret “within a context of price stability” to mean so long as the inflation outlook remains near the Committee’s goal of 2 percent. The FOMC statement also said that the Committee expects a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy to remain appropriate for a considerable period after the economic recovery strengthens. It also stated that the Committee currently anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015. The Committee’s decision was based on the view that with unemployment far above the level typically seen in normal times and inflation near its goal, increasing the amount of monetary accommodation should help bring unemployment down without jeopardizing our inflation goal. And since the Fed said it expects to keep substantial accommodation in place even after the recovery strengthens, people and businesses should be reassured that the recovery will remain intact, even in the face of future adverse shocks. This should make households and firms comfortable spending more today rather than saving, which should, in turn, spur hiring. I opposed the Committee’s actions in September because I believe that increasing monetary policy accommodation is neither appropriate nor likely to be effective in the current environment. Every monetary policy action has costs and benefits, and my 7 assessment is that the potential costs and risks associated with these actions outweigh the potential meager benefits. Given the magnitude and nature of the shocks that hit our economy, one should not be particularly surprised by the slow recovery. Both the housing and the financial sectors suffered large declines, and it will take time for the economy to adjust. While unemployment is expected to remain above FOMC participants’ range of estimates of its longer-run level for some time, it is not at all clear that monetary policy can speed up that transition. In other words, the slow pace of the recovery should not be taken as evidence that the stance of monetary policy is inappropriate or that ever more aggressive accommodation can speed up that pace. Indeed, many economists expect that further asset purchases by the Fed are unlikely to reduce long-term interest rates by a significant amount; some studies suggest that the effect will be quite small and transitory. Given our current economic situation and my reading of the empirical evidence, I do not believe that lowering interest rates by a few more basis points will spur further growth or higher employment. Business leaders who have talked to me continue to cite uncertainty about fiscal decisions – here and abroad – as the greatest hindrance to hiring and investment. Hopefully these uncertainties will abate over time, but the central bank can do little to alleviate them. And as far as households are concerned, they continue to try to repair their balance sheets in the wake of substantial losses of housing wealth, as I indicated earlier. They are deleveraging and saving more. It seems unlikely that a small drop in interest rates will overturn the strong desire to save and, instead, induce households to spend more. In fact, driving down interest rates even further may encourage consumers to save even more to make up for lower returns. Thus, in my view, we are unlikely to see much benefit to growth or to employment from further asset purchases. If I am right, then conveying the idea that such action will have a substantive impact on labor markets and the speed of the recovery risks the Fed’s 8 credibility. This is quite costly: If the public loses confidence in the central bank, our ability to set effective monetary policy in the future will be harmed and households and businesses will feel the consequences. The recent actions risk the Fed’s credibility in other ways as well. The rationale for the actions leading to increased spending today depends on the Fed’s ability to convince the public that it will conduct policy in a fundamentally different way than it has in the past. People must believe that we will delay raising interest rates compared to when we normally would and, by so doing, make the economy stronger than it otherwise would be. At the same time, people must believe that we will ensure that inflation expectations do not take off and threaten longer-run price stability. Making such a change in the policy regime believable will be very hard to do. If the public doesn’t believe that we will delay raising rates, they won’t bring spending forward and the policy will be ineffective. But if they do believe we will delay raising rates, they may infer that the Fed is willing to tolerate considerably higher inflation. This may spur an increase in inflation expectations, which would require a response from the FOMC, or else risk the credibility of its commitment to keep inflation low and stable. I do not think it prudent to risk that hard-won credibility. The subtlety and complexity of successfully managing expectations in this manner make this quite a risky policy strategy in my view, with little evidence of quantitatively meaningful results for employment. Continued expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet has other costs as well. By greatly expanding the size of the Fed’s balance sheet, the new asset-purchase program will exacerbate the challenges that the Fed will face when it comes time to exit this period of extraordinary accommodation, risking higher inflation and harm to the Fed’s reputation and credibility. I have been a student of monetary theory and policy for over 30 years. One constant is that central banks tend to find it easier to lower interest rates than to raise them. Moreover, identifying turning points is difficult even in the best of times, so timing the change in the direction of policy is always a challenge. But this time, exit will be even more complicated and risky. With such a large balance sheet, our 9 transition from very accommodative policies to less accommodative policies will involve using tools we have not used before, such as the interest rate on reserves, term deposits, and asset sales. Once the recovery takes off, long rates will begin to rise and banks will begin lending the large volume of excess reserves sitting in their accounts at the Fed. This loan growth can be quite rapid, as was true after the banking crisis in the 1930s, and there is some risk that the Fed will need to withdraw accommodation very aggressively in order to contain inflation. At this point, it is impossible to know whether such asset sales will be disruptive to the market. A rapid tightening of monetary policy may also entail political risks for the Fed. We would likely be selling the longer maturity assets in our portfolio at a loss, meaning that we may be unable to make any remittances to the U.S. Treasury for some years. Yet, if we don’t tighten quickly enough, we could find ourselves far behind the curve in restraining inflation. While these risks are very hard to quantify, it is clear that the larger the Fed’s portfolio becomes, the higher the risk and the potential costs when it comes time to exit. And based on my economic outlook, that time may come well before mid-2015. In my view, to keep the funds rate at zero that long would risk destabilizing inflation expectations and lead to an unwanted increase in inflation. In fact, some are interpreting the FOMC’s statement that we will keep accommodation in place for a considerable time after the recovery strengthens as an indication that the Fed is focused on trying to lower the unemployment rate and is willing to tolerate higher inflation to do so. This is another risk to the hard-won credibility the institution has built up over many years, which, if lost, will undermine economic stability. Some of my colleagues on the FOMC have advocated giving quantitative triggers or thresholds for the level of unemployment and inflation to explain the economic conditions that would lead the Fed to consider a change in policy stance. For example, the Fed might indicate that extraordinary accommodation would remain in place if unemployment were above, say, X percent, so long as its outlook for medium-run inflation was not higher than, say, Y percent. 10 I believe that policy should be state-contingent and systematic, and that the FOMC should strive to explain its policy reaction function – how it expects to change policy as economic conditions change. A Taylor rule is one such reaction function, but research indicates that other simple rules are good guides to policy even when the true model of the economy is uncertain. These rules involve policy responding aggressively to deviations of inflation from its target and also responding to deviations of output from some concept of its potential. In addition, the rules tend to involve some smoothing of the policy rate over time rather than sharp jumps in rates. Using such robust rules as guides to policy is, in my view, the appropriate way to communicate policy guidance. As a result, as many of you know, I have never been an advocate of calendar-date forward guidance. I thought it was a mistake when we implemented that language, and it remains a nettlesome communication problem. But while the unemployment-inflation thresholds do move away from calendar-date guidance and toward economic conditions, they fall short of a reaction function that I would like to see, since they say nothing about how monetary policy will change after such levels are reached. Will the FOMC tighten quickly? Or slowly? How will the Committee decide? In addition, the unemployment rate is not the only factor to consider in judging the state of labor markets. Indeed, it fell two-tenths of a percentage point in August, yet few think that represented improved labor market conditions. The reduction stemmed from a decrease in the participation rate rather than an increase in employment. In addition, I am not convinced that the inflation trigger would prove to be much of a constraint. While the unemployment trigger is based on the current value, the inflation trigger is based on the outlook for inflation, and if monetary policy is being set appropriately, this outlook should be consistent with price stability. Thus, I believe that using thresholds or triggers could easily put us behind the curve, if we have a tendency to underestimate future inflation. Finally, I also opposed September’s decision to purchase additional mortgage-backed securities. In general, central banks should refrain from preferential support for one 11 sector or industry over another. Those types of credit-allocation decisions rightfully belong to the fiscal authorities, not the central bank. Engaging in such actions endangers our independence and the effectiveness of monetary policy. Conclusion In summary, the U.S. economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. I expect annual growth of around 3 percent in 2013 and 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve only gradually. I believe inflation expectations will be relatively stable and inflation will remain at moderate levels in the near term. However, with the very accommodative stance of monetary policy in place for nearly four years, we must guard against the medium- and longer-term risks of inflation and the further distortions such accommodation can create. The Fed’s most recent actions carry with them significant risks. I am not forecasting that those risks will necessarily materialize and I hope they will not. But if they do, they could prove quite costly to the economy. It is therefore important that we understand those risks and evaluate them in assessing policy. A common error in policymaking is an excessive focus on the short term and an underestimation of the longer-term consequences of policy choices. I take the longer-term risks I have outlined today quite seriously. In my view, the potential costs outweigh what appear to be meager potential benefits of further asset purchases and extended forward guidance. It is important that the Fed’s policymaking remain credible to the public. This has important benefits to our economy. I believe the FOMC should continue to work toward increasing the public’s understanding of how policy will react systematically to changes in economic conditions using robust rules. Improving the transparency of our monetary policy decision-making process will help to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy and the Fed’s accountability to the public. Thus, I would prefer that we pursue such systematic rules rather than simple thresholds or triggers.

Economic Outlook and the Limits of Monetary Policy Southern Chester County Chamber of Commerce October 11, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Economic Outlook and the Limits of Monetary Policy Southern Chester County Chamber of Commerce October 11, 2012 Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction Thank you for inviting me to speak today at this fall luncheon of the Southern Chester County Chamber of Commerce. Your group, like so many other chambers of commerce throughout our region, represents diverse segments of our economy and provides valuable support to many businesses and the communities they serve. I’d like to share with you some thoughts on the nation’s economy and my assessment of the outlook. I should begin by warning you that providing an economic outlook is difficult even in normal times. It has been even more difficult over the last few years in the wake of the housing collapse and the financial crisis. Thus, I approach my effort to provide clarity about the economic outlook with a healthy dose of humility. I will also share some of my views on monetary policy, which also requires a degree of humility. Congress has instructed the Federal Reserve to conduct monetary policy in a manner to “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Yet, I am concerned that over the years, people have come to expect too much from monetary policy. Chairman Bernanke has noted many times that monetary policy is not a panacea for all our economic challenges. Nevertheless, there are still those who seem to believe otherwise. The Federal Open Market Committee, or the FOMC, is the body within the Federal Reserve responsible for determining monetary policy to meet these mandated goals. By 2 design, policy is set by 12 voting members on the FOMC — the seven members of the Board of Governors in Washington always have a vote, as does the president of the New York Fed. The remaining four votes come from among the other 11 Reserve Bank presidents, who serve one-year terms on a rotating basis. Whether or not they vote, though, all Reserve Bank presidents contribute to the discussion. This ensures that the Committee considers a wide range of independent assessments of the economy and the policy we should pursue. Before continuing let me note that my views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the FOMC. Economic Outlook So let me begin with an overview of the economy as we enter the final quarter of 2012. We are now in the third year of the economic expansion that officially began in mid- 2009. Yet economic growth has come in fits and starts, taking two steps forward, only to then stall or take one step back. The general path has continued to be forward, but we’ve made far slower progress than anyone would like. This sluggish growth has had its most profound effect on the millions of Americans and their families who have lost their jobs. Last Friday, we learned that the unemployment rate improved to 7.8 percent. That’s a better outcome than many had expected. And it is the lowest unemployment rate since January 2009. Yet, there are still millions of unemployed and many others who have dropped out of the labor force. So far, in 2012, employment growth has averaged 146,000 jobs per month, compared with an average monthly gain of 153,000 in 2011. While the economy continues to add jobs, we are simply not making progress as fast as we would like. In order for labor market conditions to improve, we need to have faster overall real growth in the economy. We finished 2011 on a strong note, with 4.1 percent growth in the fourth quarter. But growth of real gross domestic product slowed to 2 percent in 3 the first quarter of this year and then to 1.3 percent in the second quarter. We are likely on a trajectory that will lead to growth of about 2 percent for the full year. I anticipate that the pace of growth will pick up somewhat to about 3 percent in 2013 and 2014 – a pace that is slightly above trend. This should allow for some steady improvement in labor markets and lead to a gradual decline in the unemployment rate. But we need to keep in mind the size and nature of the shocks that hit the economy. The economy lost 8.8 million jobs from the peak of employment in January 2008 to the employment trough in February 2010. We have regained fewer than half of these jobs. In my view, we will not see greater job gains and a more rapid recovery until a number of adjustments occur. These required adjustments arise from the nature of the shocks we experienced. And I believe these adjustments are unlikely to be significantly accelerated through government policies, especially monetary policy. We entered into this recession over-invested in the housing and financial sectors. Those sectors are shrinking as a share of the economy, and labor and capital must be reallocated to other uses. The labor force needs to be at least partially retooled to match the skills employers demand. This adjustment takes time. It is painful to be sure, but it will lead to a healthier economy in the long run. Consumer spending accounts for about 70 percent of the nation’s GDP. So without robust consumer spending, the economy will be sluggish. Here too, the nature of the financial crisis and the recession play an important role in understanding the slow recovery to date and the underlying adjustments that are occurring. The housing collapse that precipitated the crisis destroyed a lot of the equity that families had built up in their homes. Thus, a huge chunk of their savings vanished. Many households had been counting on their savings to help send their children to college or to help fund their retirement. With that wealth gone, it is only natural, and rational, for consumers to want to rebuild savings. Consequently, private savings rates have risen substantially and consumption by households has been restrained. 4 To be specific, between 2000 and 2007, private savings averaged less than 5 percent of GDP, whereas between 2008 and 2011, this savings rate averaged 7½ percent. This desire to save for the future rather than spend today is a drag on near-term growth but is good for longer-term growth prospects. I believe consumers are unlikely to provide a very robust boost to current demand until the health of their balance sheets has significantly improved. Manufacturing activity has also been sluggish. Firms have been unwilling to invest and hire to any significant degree. For example, the Philadelphia Fed’s monthly Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers has been a useful barometer of national trends in manufacturing over many years. The survey’s general activity index posted a few negative readings in the summer of 2011 surrounding the congressional debate over the debt ceiling and then returned to positive numbers last fall through this spring. We have seen a return to negative numbers over the past five months. Still, the most recent readings have been improving, and September’s survey indicated that manufacturing activity in the region was essentially flat from the prior month. A bright spot is that the survey’s indicators of future activity six months ahead have remained positive throughout the recovery. In fact, the September future activity index showed a nice bounce up, suggesting that manufacturers have regained their optimism. We will see if these trends continue when the October results come out next week. Of course, the weakness in domestic consumer demand is one reason for the sluggish growth in the manufacturing sector. Another reason is the slowdown in global demand, due in large part to the economic turmoil in Europe, which is hovering near recession. This slowdown, combined with the weakness here at home, has restrained world trade. In the early part of our recovery, U.S. exports boosted manufacturing. Now with the slowdown in Europe, U.S. exports have slackened and, with it, our manufacturing sector. Uncertainty is another factor restraining growth. The fiscal issues in Europe remain unresolved. While leaders in Europe have, so far, avoided the financial implosion that some fear, they are far from resolving the underlying fiscal issues they confront. 5 Of course, uncertainty is not limited to Europe. Many U.S. firms have taken a wait-and- see attitude with respect to hiring and investing as businesses and consumers wait to see how our own fiscal problems will be resolved. Will tax rates rise or will spending be cut? Or will we see some combination of the two? U.S. fiscal policy is clearly on an unsustainable path that must be corrected. Yet, there remains significant uncertainty about the choices that will be made. And that uncertainty is a drag on near-term growth. Finally, in terms of the prospects for near-term growth, I should mention the effects of the drought in the Midwest on this year’s crops. Estimates vary, but the drought will probably cut about half a percentage point off growth in the second half of this year, but the return to normal conditions will boost growth by a similar amount over the first half of next year. In case you didn’t notice, nowhere in my list of factors restraining growth did I mention that financial conditions were too restrictive. Indeed, interest rates are at historic lows, and markets are generally functioning well. Therefore, I do not believe a lack of monetary accommodation is restraining near-term growth prospects – a point I will return to shortly. Turning to inflation, it has been running near our longer-term goal of 2 percent. Although the drought in the Midwest and higher gasoline prices are likely to push up inflation in the near term, these effects should be transitory. Thus, I do not see a risk of higher inflation, or deflation, in the near term. Indeed, over the medium to longer term, I expect inflation to be near our 2 percent target. But this expectation is based on my assessment that the appropriate monetary policy is likely to become tighter more quickly than the Committee anticipated in its latest statement. Thus, I do see some risks to inflation in the longer run, given the current stance of monetary policy. 6 Monetary Policy Let me now turn to monetary policy. The Fed has put into place an extraordinary amount of accommodation to support the recovery over the past few years. It has kept the federal funds rate near zero for nearly four years; it has more than tripled the size of its balance sheet through two rounds of asset purchases; and it is implementing a maturity extension program, known as “operation twist,” which is lengthening the maturity of our holdings of Treasury securities. These actions have dramatically changed the composition of the Fed’s portfolio from mainly short-term Treasuries before the crisis to mostly longer-term Treasuries and housing-related securities today. In September, the FOMC began a third round of quantitative easing, commonly known as QE3, with an open-ended plan to purchase $40 billion of additional agency mortgage- backed securities per month. The FOMC statement indicated that the Fed would make these purchases and more and would employ other policy tools as appropriate until the outlook for the labor market improves substantially within a context of price stability. I interpret “within a context of price stability” to mean so long as the inflation outlook remains near the Committee’s goal of 2 percent. The FOMC statement also said that the Committee expects a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy to remain appropriate for a considerable period after the economic recovery strengthens. It also stated that the Committee currently anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted at least through mid-2015. There is a reason for telling the public that the Committee expects to keep substantial accommodation in place even after the recovery strengthens. The Fed is hoping to reassure households and businesses that the recovery will remain intact, even in the face of future adverse shocks. This should induce households and firms to spend more today rather than save, which should, in turn, spur hiring. However, I opposed the Committee’s actions in September because I believe that increasing monetary policy accommodation is neither appropriate nor likely to be very 7 effective in the current environment. Every monetary policy action has costs and benefits, and my assessment is that the potential costs and risks associated with these actions outweigh the potential benefits. While the unemployment rate is expected to remain elevated above FOMC participants’ estimates of its longer-run level for some time, it is not at all clear that monetary policy can speed that transition. In other words, the slow pace of the recovery should not be taken as evidence that the stance of monetary policy is inappropriate or that ever more aggressive accommodation can speed up that pace. Indeed, many economists expect that further asset purchases by the Fed are unlikely to reduce long-term interest rates by a significant amount; some studies suggest that the effect will be quite small and transitory. Given our current economic situation and my reading of the empirical evidence, I share this skepticism and so do not believe that attempts to lower interest rates by a few more basis points will spur further growth or higher employment. Business leaders who have talked to me continue to cite uncertainty about fiscal decisions – here and abroad – as the greatest hindrance to hiring and investment. None think that lowering nominal interest rates by a few basis points will alter their behavior. Hopefully, the uncertainties will abate over time, but the central bank can do little to alleviate them. And as far as households are concerned, it seems unlikely that a small drop in interest rates will overcome the strong desire to save and, instead, induce households to spend more. In fact, driving down interest rates may encourage consumers to save even more to make up for lower returns. Thus, in my view, we are unlikely to see much benefit to growth or to employment from further asset purchases. If I am right, then conveying the idea that such an action will help speed up the recovery risks the Fed’s credibility. This can be quite costly: If the 8 public loses confidence in the central bank, our ability to set effective monetary policy in the future will be harmed and households and businesses will feel the consequences. Continued expansion of the Fed’s balance sheet has other costs as well. By greatly expanding the size of the Fed’s balance sheet, the new asset-purchase program will exacerbate the challenges that the Fed will face when it comes time to exit this period of extraordinary accommodation. I have been a student of monetary theory and policy for over 30 years. One constant is that central banks tend to find it easier to lower interest rates than to raise them. Moreover, identifying turning points is difficult even in the best of times, so timing the change in the direction of policy is always a challenge. But this time, exit will be even more complicated and risky. With such a large balance sheet, our exit strategy will involve using tools we have not used before, such as the interest rate on reserves, term deposits, and asset sales. At this point, it is impossible to know whether such asset sales will be disruptive to the market. A rapid tightening of monetary policy may also entail political risks for the Fed. We would likely be selling the longer maturity assets in our portfolio at a loss, meaning that we may be unable to make any remittances to the U.S. Treasury for some years. Yet, if we don’t tighten quickly enough, we could find ourselves far behind the curve in restraining inflation. While these risks are very hard to quantify, it is clear that the larger the Fed’s portfolio becomes, the greater the risk and the potential costs when it comes time to exit. And based on my economic outlook, that time may come well before mid-2015. In my view, to keep the funds rate at zero that long would risk destabilizing inflation expectations and lead to an unwanted increase in inflation. In fact, some are interpreting the FOMC’s statement that we will keep accommodation in place for a considerable time after the recovery strengthens as an indication that the Fed is focused on trying to lower the unemployment rate and is willing to tolerate higher inflation to do so. This is another risk to the hard-won credibility the institution has built up over many years, which, if lost, will undermine economic stability. We know that monetary policy can control 9 inflation, but its ability to manage the unemployment rate is far more dubious. Chasing an elusive goal for unemployment could well risk losing control over inflation. That was the lesson of the Great Inflation during the 1970s. Finally, I also opposed September’s decision to purchase additional mortgage-backed securities. In general, central banks should refrain from allocating credit toward one sector or industry. Those types of credit-allocation decisions rightfully belong to the fiscal authorities, not the central bank. Engaging in such actions endangers our independence and the effectiveness of monetary policy. Conclusion In summary, the U.S. economy is continuing to grow at a moderate pace. I expect annual growth of around 3 percent in 2013 and 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve only gradually. I believe inflation expectations will be relatively stable and inflation will remain at moderate levels in the near term. However, with the very accommodative stance of monetary policy in place for nearly four years, we must guard against the medium- and longer-term risks of inflation and the further distortions such accommodation can create in the financial markets. The Fed’s most recent actions carry significant risks. I am not forecasting that those risks will necessarily materialize, and I hope they will not. But if they do, they could prove quite costly to the economy. It is therefore important that we understand those risks and evaluate them in assessing policy. A common error in policymaking is an excessive focus on the short term and an underestimation of the longer-term consequences of policy choices. I take the longer-term risks I have outlined today quite seriously. In my view, the potential costs outweigh what appear to be meager potential benefits of further asset purchases and extended forward guidance. I’d like to close with a quotation from the Nobel Prize-winning economist, and my former teacher, Milton Friedman. While the quote is now over 40 years old, I believe it 10 is as applicable today as when Milton admonished our profession on the limits of monetary policy in his presidential address to the American Economic Association: “….we are in danger of assigning to monetary policy a larger role than it can perform, in danger of asking it to accomplish tasks that it cannot achieve, and, as a result, in danger of preventing it from making the contribution that it is capable of making.” ∗ ∗ Milton Friedman, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review , 58:1 (March 1968), pp. 1-17.

Good Intentions in the Short Term with Risky Consequences for the Long Term Cato Institute 30th Annual Monetary Conference Money, Markets, and Government: The Next 30 Years November 15, 2012 Washington, D.C. Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Good Intentions in the Short Term with Risky Consequences for the Long Term Cato Institute 30th Annual Monetary Conference Money, Markets, and Government: The Next 30 Years November 15, 2012 Washington D.C. Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Introduction The last five years have been an extraordinary time for the global economy and monetary policymakers. The financial crisis and the severe global recession that followed have tested our resolve, our patience, and our economic theories. To restore the health of ailing financial markets and economies, central banks have driven short-term interest rates to essentially zero, expanded their balance sheets to unprecedented levels, and engaged in market interventions that have blurred the lines between monetary policy and fiscal policy. These extraordinary efforts were well intentioned. Although it will be some time before we fully understand the effectiveness of various actions, some have credited them with preserving financial markets and saving the global economy from an even deeper recession. Yet, these actions also carry long-term risks for our economies and for central banks. In my remarks today, I will focus on U.S. monetary policy and discuss some of the longer-term risks arising from our policy responses to the financial crisis and slow recovery. I will then share my thoughts on an approach to monetary policy that I believe would prove beneficial in the post-crisis economy. Before continuing let me note that my views are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Risks of Extraordinary Accommodation and Nontraditional Policies Let me begin by reviewing the extraordinary actions taken by the Federal Reserve as it attempted to maintain liquidity and the basic functioning of our financial markets and subsequently to support an economic recovery. During the height of the crisis, the Federal Reserve instituted various liquidity facilities for particular segments of the financial system that were under stress. These programs supported primary dealers, the commercial paper market, and money market fund investors. The Fed also 2 gave support to specific individual institutions, including Bear Stearns and AIG, to avert what could have been disorderly failures. After reducing its policy rate, the fed funds rate, to essentially zero, the Fed instituted several large-scale asset-purchase programs. The first of these programs of quantitative easing, commonly referred to as QE1, ultimately involved purchasing $175 billion of housing agency debt and $1.25 trillion of agency mortgage-backed securities, or MBS; the Fed also purchased $300 billion in longer-term Treasuries in 2009. The unprecedented purchases of significant quantities of MBS were intended to support housing – the specific sector of the economy in which the financial crisis was centered. As market functioning returned to normal, large-scale asset purchases continued. But the purpose shifted to providing monetary stimulus or defending against the potential for deflation while our policy instrument was constrained by the zero lower bound rather than supporting market functioning or lender-of-last-resort activities. As the economy struggled to recover and deflation became a concern, the Fed implemented QE2, a program to purchase $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities. Most recently, the Fed instituted QE3, an open-ended program to purchase agency MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month. In addition to the asset-purchase programs, the Fed has been engaged in a maturity extension program, popularly referred to as operation twist – an intervention that was last attempted, with little success, in the 1960s. The objective of this program is to flatten the yield curve by removing duration from the market. 1 Finally, the Fed has attempted to alter public expectations of the future path of monetary policy and the economy by issuing forward guidance about how long it expects to keep the fed funds rate exceptionally low. As of September, that expected date was at least through mid-2015. As a result of these policy initiatives, the Fed has now held its policy rate near zero for almost four years, its balance sheet is more than three times larger than before the crisis, and the composition of its balance sheet has shifted toward mainly longer-term housing-related and Treasury securities compared with mostly short-term Treasury securities held before the crisis. Indeed, by the end of this year, the Fed will hold almost no short-term Treasuries. Despite these extraordinary efforts by the Fed, our economy remains lackluster – unemployment remains uncomfortably high and is declining only slowly, economic growth is mediocre, and confidence in the future remains subpar. Looking at this state of economic affairs, one might conclude that the Fed just hasn’t done enough. Since the Fed seems to be missing on the employment part of its dual mandate, some 1 I note that operation twist could easily have been conducted, or fully offset, by having the Treasury alter the maturity structure of the public debt. Like the purchases of housing-related assets, this action blurs the line between fiscal and monetary policy. 3 suggest the Fed can and should continue to pursue more accommodation as long as inflation remains contained. But this is not the only conclusion one could draw from the evidence. Instead, one could conclude that the factors contributing to mediocre economic performance cannot be offset by monetary policy. This alternative hypothesis should not come entirely as a surprise or as a radical point of view. The ability of monetary policy to influence employment has long been recognized as tenuous at best. Indeed, the current workhorse models in macroeconomics rely on some form of wage or price stickiness to generate real effects of monetary policy. As wages and prices adjust, the effects of monetary policy on the real economy dissipate; in other words, the effects are transitory. In addition, the experience of the 1970s clearly demonstrated that attempts to use monetary policy to pursue an employment or unemployment target can lead to extremely poor economic outcomes, jeopardizing both employment and inflation. Of course, one might argue that even if there was only a small chance that additional accommodation could put people back to work more quickly, it would be worth undertaking. Yet, that would only be true if the potential benefits of such a policy outweigh the potential risks that such accommodation creates. I join many economists who are skeptical that further asset purchases will have much effect on longer-term interest rates. Even if they do, the declines in long rates are likely to have fairly negligible effects on employment or growth at best. On the other hand, I believe the extraordinary policies the Fed has pursued pose substantive longer-term risks: These include moral hazard, future inflation, and loss of institutional credibility. Moral Hazard. Let’s first discuss moral hazard. In taking unconventional and unusual steps in recent years, policymakers run the risk of altering the public’s expectations of how policy will be conducted in the future. This is most frequently discussed in the context of the too-big-to-fail (TBTF) problem. In trying to stabilize the financial system, policies led creditors of large financial institutions to expect that the government will protect them from losses. This creates moral hazard and undermines the market discipline that creditors exert on a firm’s risk-taking. Without a clear set of rules or guidelines that tell market participants how such lender-of-last- resort policies will be conducted in the future, the actions run the risk of sowing the seeds of a future credit crisis. Moreover, it is unlikely that regulatory reform as embodied in Dodd-Frank has substantially addressed the TBTF problem. Indeed, some have argued that it has expanded the government safety net, thereby aggravating moral hazard. Yet, moral hazard risks are not confined to the TBTF problem. By engaging in targeted purchases of housing-related securities, the Fed has affected expectations about what monetary policy will do in the future should the housing market take a sharp downturn. Will market participants price housing-related assets with the expectation that the Fed will protect the market from significant losses? Will investors in other markets expect similar treatment and therefore be encouraged to take excessive risk? Similarly, will holding rates at essentially zero for a long time also spur increased and undesirable risk-taking in the search for higher yields? Certainly, the Fed does not intend to create such moral hazard. Yet, the lack of clear 4 guidelines about future monetary policy can introduce its own form of instability and uncertainty. Future Inflation Risks. Another potential risk is future inflation. So far, the asset-purchase programs have expanded the Fed’s balance-sheet assets from about $900 billion before the crisis to nearly $3 trillion. Banks are holding $1.5 trillion in excess reserves in their accounts at the Fed. These reserves are not inflationary in the current environment. Indeed, inflation and inflation expectations remain near our goal, despite high unemployment rates or large measures of output gaps. Yet, history tells us that central banks tend to find it easier to lower interest rates than to raise them. Moreover, it is difficult to identify the appropriate moment to begin tightening policy, even in the best of times. The tremendous expansion in the size of the Fed’s balance sheet complicates the challenges the Fed will face when it comes time to begin exiting from this period of extraordinary accommodation. Once the recovery strengthens — and it surely will — long rates will begin to rise and banks will begin lending out their excess reserves. Loan growth could be quite rapid, and there is a real possibility that the Fed will have to withdraw accommodation very aggressively in order to restrain money growth and inflation. While economic conditions might evolve very gradually, financial markets are not always patient. As soon as the markets perceive that the Fed might begin to remove accommodation, we could see long-term rates move up quite rapidly. In such an environment, policymakers might need to tighten policy quickly to contain inflationary pressures. Will this tightening require rapid sales of housing-related assets that could potentially disrupt a recovering housing market? The bigger our balance sheet, the more difficult it will be to exit in a way that meets our inflation objective without creating instability in the real economy, thereby undermining our credibility and reputation. Institutional Risk. The Fed’s recent policy choices also impose other institutional risks. The purchase of large quantities of housing-related securities is viewed by some commentators and policymakers as a type of credit allocation to one sector of the economy in preference to other sectors. I, and others, believe such credit allocations should be in the province of the fiscal authorities, not the central bank. Blurring the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policies can pose institutional risks for the central bank and its independence. As I mentioned, the Fed’s balance sheet is not only quite large, but it now contains mostly long- term securities. As interest rates rise, if the Fed finds it must sell assets at a rapid pace to restrain inflation, it would very likely incur substantial losses. If so, the Fed may not be able to make any remittances to the Treasury for some years. While this is of little macroeconomic significance, it will not go unnoticed, particularly in an era when the government will be struggling to reduce deficits. This could place considerable short-term pressure on the Fed to prevent those losses by tightening policy more slowly than might otherwise be appropriate. If, instead of asset sales, the Fed tries to restrain credit growth by increasing the interest rate paid on excess reserves, this too would reduce our remittances to the Treasury as more of the Fed’s 5 income would be paid out to the banks holding the reserves. Again, this is of little significance to the macroeconomy, but it is a risk to perceptions about the institution, which eventually may put the Fed’s independence at risk. It is very hard to quantify the risks associated with our unconventional policies. But they are real. With our recent extraordinary policies, we have sailed into uncharted territory; we need to acknowledge that, proceed with caution, and continually assess the potential costs and benefits of our policy actions. Monetary Policy Principles I would like to spend my remaining time outlining my preferred course for setting policy in these uncharted waters. Even in such an environment, or perhaps even more so in such an environment, I believe sound and effective central banking should focus on four guiding principles. The first principle is to be clear and explicit about the goals and objectives of policy. And in so doing, policymakers must acknowledge what policy can and cannot achieve. The second principle is for policymakers to make a credible commitment to their goals by describing how they will conduct policy in a way that is consistent with those goals. One way to do this is for the central bank to articulate a reaction function or rule that will guide policy decisions. The third principle is to be clear and transparent in communicating to the public the policy actions that are taken. The fourth principle is to strive to ensure central bank independence. During the last few years, the Federal Reserve has made some important strides in advancing these principles. Most important in my view was the statement of the FOMC’s longer-run goals and policy strategy released in January. This statement made explicit for the first time the FOMC’s goal of a 2 percent inflation target. It also explained why it was inappropriate for the FOMC to establish an explicit numerical objective for the employment portion of our mandate. Indeed, in this respect, I believe the statement helped to explain certain limitations of what monetary policy can achieve. The Federal Reserve has also made great strides in enhancing transparency. It has expanded the quarterly Summary of Economic Projections, or SEPs, and has begun to include information on each participant’s view of the appropriate monetary policy that underlies these projections. The Chairman now holds press conferences following each of the meetings at which the SEPs are compiled. 6 A Systematic Approach to Monetary Policy I believe we could take further steps to improve our communications and reduce uncertainty over the path of monetary policy and reduce moral hazard. One enhancement would be to articulate a more rule-like approach to our decision-making process. This means making policy decisions based on available information in a consistent and predictable manner. One cannot know what the future holds or what future policy decisions will be. Policy will be data dependent, but the data should feed into a decision-making process in a mostly systematic or rule-like way. Research has shown that more systematic policy can generate better economic outcomes and that there are simple monetary policy rules that perform well in a variety of models. 2 Of course, the Taylor rule is the most well known of these simple rules, but a number of variations have been studied, including growth-rate rules and first-difference rules that avoid some of the measurement issues of rules based on gaps or levels. Because we simply do not know the true model of the economy, I prefer to focus on a set of robust rules designed to give good results across a variety of models. These robust rules tend to have some features in common. They suggest that policy should respond aggressively to deviations of inflation from target but more modestly to measures of economic slack, such as output gaps or unemployment. These robust rules also tend to exhibit inertia that prevents the policy rate from significant swings or volatility. I believe that by using these robust rules and being explicit that such rules are important guides for policy, we could make policymaking more transparent and make policy actions more predictable. Indeed, articulating rules as guides provides the best kind of forward guidance, which would be helpful in stabilizing the economy and the path of inflation. In this approach, the FOMC would describe its policy decisions in terms of how the arguments in such rules change. For example, we would indicate that we chose to tighten policy because inflation or inflation expectations rose or some measure of resource utilization, such as capacity utilization, unemployment, employment growth, or an output gap, improved. Conversely, we would explain that we took actions to increase accommodation because inflation or inflation expectations fell or some measure of resource utilization weakened. There would be an added benefit of accountability from this approach because it would require policymakers to explain why they might choose to deviate from the guidelines offered by the rules at certain times. With the fed funds rate at the zero lower bound and the Fed engaging in large-scale asset purchases, now may be one of those times. For example, some economists argue that because the policy rate has been stuck at the zero lower bound for some time, policy should be set at a more accommodative stance than what would be suggested by the standard set of rules. 2 Most of the macroeconomic models economists and policymakers rely on to assess the effects of policy actions in fact assume that policy is conducted in a well-understood systematic manner. 7 Although some of the standard rules suggest that the current stance of policy is a bit too tight, others suggest that a policy rate of zero is too low, given economic conditions. While the zero lower bound needs to be considered in setting appropriate policy, it does not mean that the systematic approach I advocate should be abandoned or simply ignored. Instead, I would argue that we use the rules as guides and then explain why the zero lower bound might suggest deviating from the prescriptions of those rules when appropriate. This approach will be particularly helpful when all of the rules begin to point to policy tightening. I believe the systematic approach I have advocated is also preferable to the calendar-date forward guidance that the FOMC is currently providing. I also think that it is preferable to proposals to use quantitative thresholds to convey policy guidance. The Committee first used calendar-date forward guidance in its August 2011 statement when it indicated that it anticipated that economic conditions would likely warrant keeping the fed funds rate exceptionally low at least through mid-2013. In January 2012, the Committee lengthened that horizon to at least late 2014, and in September, it lengthened it again to at least mid-2015. Date-based forward guidance is problematic. Instead, a systematic approach provides data-based forward guidance. Policy decisions should be made and explained in terms of economic conditions, not the calendar. I also prefer the systematic or rules-based approach I have outlined to proposals calling for the Committee to indicate that it will not contemplate raising the funds rate while unemployment is above some threshold, as long as inflation is below some threshold. Some view this as a way to move away from calendar-date forward guidance by specifying the economic conditions that might prevail when the Fed begins to reverse course. Once either of the thresholds is met, the Committee will consider whether to take action. That is, meeting a threshold may be a necessary but not sufficient condition for action. In my view, this threshold approach could cause some long-lasting confusion, especially if the thresholds are misinterpreted as the FOMC’s longer-run policy goals. But how do you decide on the right numerical values? Moreover, if numerical thresholds were provided as a way to convey forward guidance for the fed funds rate, a numerical stopping rule would also be needed to convey when QE3 asset purchases could be expected to end. This means we may have multiple thresholds associated with multiple tools. It would be difficult to describe all the various conditions necessary for this multi-faceted strategy and communicate them to the public in a comprehensible and credible fashion. I am concerned that we would create more confusion than clarity. One statement of a systematic policy would be a much clearer way to conduct policy. Others view thresholds as a way to signal that the FOMC will wait a very long time before beginning to tighten policy. The thought is that this should improve consumer and business confidence in a sustainable recovery and that this will spur increased spending and reduced saving today. But in order for this to work, the public needs to believe that the Fed is making a credible commitment that it will not deviate from, even if it appears to be desirable to do so at the time. 8 According to this view of forward guidance, the Fed would be trying to manage the public’s expectations in a fully credible way. I don’t believe there is any empirical evidence that we can be successful with such a strategy or that it would be of any quantitative significance if we could. Moreover, even if the action were credible, for it to be successful, the public must understand how the Fed is planning to respond to changes in economic conditions after those thresholds are reached – that is, they need to understand the Fed’s reaction function. Will the FOMC tighten quickly? Or slowly? And on what basis will the FOMC make that decision? So to believe that this approach to forward guidance will succeed in providing stimulus at the zero bound, one must have an extraordinary amount of confidence in the Fed’s ability to manage expectations with complete credibility, even though the Fed has never articulated a systematic approach to policy before. The systematic approach I advocate is more transparent than thresholds because it gives the public much more information on how those policy decisions will be made, based on changes in economic conditions. Ironically, had the FOMC articulated and followed this approach before the crisis, it might be easier now to credibly commit to keeping rates lower for longer than the public would typically expect. Conclusion In summary, I believe that some of the actions the Fed has taken to address the financial crisis and the slow economic recovery, while well intentioned, have created some long-term risks for the economy and for the Fed as an institution. Excessive focus on the short term can result in long-term problems. Avoiding these risks is dependent on the Fed executing a graceful exit from this period of extraordinary accommodation. Such an exit depends on the Fed’s ability to be systematic and transparent about its policy decisions. Over the past several years, the Fed has taken some beneficial steps toward increased transparency, which I believe will serve the economy well now and in the future. I believe the Fed should continue on this path by more clearly articulating a systematic approach to policymaking, centered on using robust simple rules as guides to both its policy decisions and the way in which it communicates those decisions.
