1 Presentation to Business and Community Leaders Las Vegas, Nevada By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on October 9, 2014 Navigating toward Normal: The Road Back to the Future for Monetary Policy Good afternoon and welcome. It’s great to be here with business and community leaders from around Las Vegas, members of both our Los Angeles Branch and San Francisco Head Office Boards of Directors, and Fed friends, families, and representatives from around the District. I’m also very happy to welcome Mayor Carolyn Goodman. We had an informative tour of some redevelopment sites in downtown Las Vegas yesterday, including neighborhoods that are part of the Downtown Achieves initiative. That project has brought public- and private-sector partners together to address academic attainment in under-performing schools. My own staff at the San Francisco Fed works closely with them on this important work. I’d like to talk to you today about the outlook for the economy, as well as address some of the whens, whys, and hows of monetary policy going forward. As ever, please remember that the views I express today are entirely my own and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Economic outlook I’ll be honest: These speeches get more and more enjoyable as time goes by because the economic outlook keeps getting better and better. Instead of gloom and doom with a scattering of 2 hopeful notes, things are now pretty upbeat, with only a couple of standard economist’s caveats thrown in. To wit: After a dip in the first quarter, real GDP bounced back sharply in the second quarter. All the data point toward momentum having been sustained entering the second half of the year, with solid gains in consumer and business spending. Taking all the pieces of information together, I expect real GDP to grow at about a 3 percent annual rate over the second half of this year and next.1 The labor market is also looking a lot better. Over the past 12 months, we’ve added more than 2.6 million jobs and that momentum has been sustained. These job increases helped push down the unemployment rate from 7.2 percent in September 2013 to 5.9 percent this September. The decline in the unemployment rate is important, because it’s generally seen as the best single barometer of labor market health. But it’s not the only indicator, and we’re seeing continued improvement across others as well. For example, measures of job vacancies and hiring have strengthened. And a broader measure of underemployment—which includes the unemployed, people who are working part-time but want to be full-time, and people who want a job but haven’t looked for one in the past four weeks—has dropped significantly over the past year. Similarly, the number of people out of work for over six months has come way down. 1 Liu (2014). 3 While this is all good news and points to further sustained improvement, there remains considerable slack in the labor market. Because unemployment can never be zero—in any well- functioning economy, people will move in and out of jobs and new people will enter the workforce—economists look to the “natural rate” of unemployment as a measure of full employment. I put the natural rate at 5.2 percent, so with unemployment at 5.9 percent—a huge decrease from the recession’s painful 10 percent high—we’re still a way off from full employment. Looking ahead, with solid economic growth and job gains, I expect the unemployment rate to gradually come down, reaching 5.2 percent by late next year. Another indication that the labor market still has a way to go is that we’re not yet seeing solid growth in wages.2 At the moment, wage growth is hovering around 2 to 2¼ percent, when it really should be between 3 and 3½ percent. That’s the rate I’d expect in a fully functioning economy with a 2 percent inflation rate. Why hasn’t wage growth picked up more as the economy’s improved? A recent study by some of my colleagues at the San Francisco Fed found that there was something of a floor on wages during the recession and recovery.3 Employers are generally reluctant to cut wages outright, so as the recovery has unfolded, wages have in many cases stayed stagnant, making up for the losses they didn’t—or couldn’t—incur during the depths of the recession. That is 2 See Aaronson and Jordan (2014) for results regarding the relationship between broad labor market indicators and wage inflation. 3 Daly and Hobijn (2014). 4 certainly a contributing factor. But, as unemployment continues its move down, we should see those effects wane and wages gradually move up. I’m sure some employers aren’t thrilled with the idea of wages taking off. But that jump from 2 to 3 percent wage growth is what’s been missing in this recovery; in fact, it’s what we’ve been waiting for. More wage growth means more money in people’s pockets, which means more spending and more economic activity. That’s important because inflation is too low. For anyone who lived through the 1970s and early ’80s, it may sound strange to say we want higher inflation. Nonetheless, persistently low, rather than high, inflation has been our concern for the past few years. Inflation has been running at 1½ percent over the past year. That’s well below the Fed’s longer-term inflation goal of 2 percent. With the economy continuing to strengthen and labor market slack dissipating, I expect we’ll see a gradual rise in inflation, reaching our 2 percent goal over the next couple of years. Tapering and continued accommodative policy The ongoing improvement in the labor market has been a primary motivation for tapering the Fed’s asset purchase program—that is, quantitative easing, or “QE.” As you no doubt know, we’re on track to end these purchases soon, barring any dramatic changes in the economy.4 And 4 Board of Governors (2014b). 5 as the economic situation and outlook continue to get better, we’re moving closer to the time we can start thinking about normalizing policy, by which I mean raising the federal funds rate. I want to be clear that monetary policy will remain accommodative for some time, because we’re still quite a way from our goals. We are still experiencing a good amount of slack in the labor market. We need progress on unemployment, progress on wage growth, and progress on inflation. Given the current distance from our goals and my expectation that further progress toward those goals will be gradual, it’s too early to start down the path of full normalization. I’ve said it often enough that I should probably have a T-shirt, but let me reiterate: The decision to raise rates will be data-driven, not date-driven. Based on my current forecast for economic growth, employment, and inflation, it would be appropriate to start raising the fed funds rate sometime in the middle of 2015. If the economy or inflation heat up faster than I expect, we should lift rates sooner. If progress on these fronts slows, we should wait longer. Why not now? I’ve stated my case for waiting for further progress on our goals before we start raising rates. But I increasingly hear voices saying: The economy is really heating up in some places; isn’t it time to start cooling things down? From my perspective, there are compelling reasons to remain on the current accommodative path of monetary policy. For one, we still haven’t reached our goals and we need strong stimulus to keep the economic expansion on track and make further progress toward full employment and 2 percent 6 inflation. Accommodative monetary policy has been an important part of getting us as far along in the recovery as we are today, and we don’t want to remove that support prematurely.5 We have reached a point where we no longer require additional stimulus, and for that reason we’re ending asset purchases. But if we were to withdraw accommodation too soon, progress toward our goals could slow or even stall. This is actually exemplified by looking around this room—our audience is made up primarily of representatives from Las Vegas, Los Angeles, and San Francisco. They’re all relatively close, geographically. But if you turn to the person next to you, or walk over to another table, there are going to be very different discussions about housing or unemployment. One of the advantages to the Fed’s system of regional representation is that economies— and economic concerns—vary from area to area. The U.S. economy is a composite of a vast and diverse country. Home prices may be increasing strongly in Texas but still struggling to recover in Connecticut. Unemployment may be extremely low in North Dakota but high in North Carolina. Even within Federal Reserve Districts, there are dramatic variations. When I go to work on Market Street in San Francisco, I’m surrounded by cranes. The Bay Area’s property market is booming—the only thing holding back growth is traffic. But in California’s Central Valley, or here in Las Vegas, it’s a different story. Looking at housing prices across the District, you can 5 See Swanson and Williams (2014) and Williams (2014). 7 see how uneven the recovery has been. Home prices in Hawaii and Utah are now down less than 10 percent from their respective pre-recession peaks. Arizona, on the other hand, is nearly 30 percent behind and Nevada is trailing its previous highs by almost 40 percent. It’s the same story across the country. Some areas were just hit harder than others by the crisis and recession. 6 Even if they were rebounding at comparable rates—which not all of them are—they have deeper holes to climb out of. You can’t just look at the housing market in San Francisco, or unemployment in Seattle to gauge the health of the U.S. economy. You also need to look at the housing market in Las Vegas and unemployment in Yuma. I don’t want to see accommodation lifted until we’re on economic terra firma across the country. That doesn’t mean that every municipality in America needs to be at pre-recession numbers; but it does mean we need to see further improvement in the many areas where the economy is still struggling. The bottom line is that, in some places, the recession is fading into memory; in others, the wounds are still raw. Taking into account this diversity in experience, overall, the economy’s getting better all the time, as the song goes. But we still have a way to go to get to full health. A second issue to consider is inflation, which, as I already noted, has been too low. Considering that, it might seem strange that there’s been a lot of talk about inflationary pressures 6 See Williams (2012) and Mian and Sufi (2013) for discussion of cross-state growth variation during the recession and recovery. 8 lately; fears that it’s going to shoot up unexpectedly. In fact, that’s one of the arguments employed by some commentators who advocate an earlier interest rate hike. In their view, the Fed is lumbering along like a dinosaur, perhaps aware of the danger, but too slow and unwieldy to react to a swift economic predator. Or they’re worried we’re asleep at the wheel—or too blinded by our own biases—and don’t see the imminent threat. These concerns got a lot more attention this year when inflation started to edge up. But, like Lucy with the football, just when it looked like inflation pressure might be emerging, it was snatched away. Which leads to a crucial point: To adequately judge inflation’s trajectory we need to carefully analyze the data and separate the signal from the noise. Monthly or quarterly numbers, when taken in isolation, can give a false impression of new trends when in fact they are just blips in the data. For most of 2013 and the beginning of 2014, we saw inflation that was very low, bottoming out at around 1 percent. There were many influences at work, including declining import prices and reductions in Medicare payments.7 So there were special factors helping to depress inflation. With those pressures ebbing, the inflation rate has floated back up. Indeed, if anything, the 1 percent inflation rate in 2013 was the anomaly, not the subsequent rebound to 1½ percent. 7 Clemens, Gottlieb, and Shapiro (2014). 9 As for those who believe we’re too myopic, or too reliant on data that confirm our own prejudices: This is a misconception. For one, the views within the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) fall at points all along the spectrum. For another, we are unapologetic data wonks: My decisions are formed by looking at various indicators of wage pressures, employment and growth metrics, and a multitude of price measures. I study commentary and analysis from all corners. And while I think the Bureau of Labor Statistics and Bureau of Economic Analysis do fantastic jobs of collecting and distilling inflation data, I also look at—and point critics to—more straightforward assessments like the Billion Prices Project from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.8 This tool scrapes the Internet for prices, giving a daily reading of, well, billions of prices of myriad products. It lacks the complicated adjustments and methods that characterize the government agencies’ models. Nonetheless, it does track pretty closely with the official numbers. What’s more, it gives an independent assessment of consumer prices that is helpful for those who may distrust official federal data. While the BPP’s numbers run a tad higher on average than the official indices, it shows that price inflation remains low and shows no sign of taking off. The signal from all these indicators, both government and independent, point to the same conclusion: Inflation trends are quite modest. As I said, I expect that we will be moving back toward our 2 percent longer-run goal over the next few years. 8 The Billion Prices Project (2014). 10 Normalizing policy As the economy gets better, we’re moving closer to setting the stage for raising interest rates. As I said, I don’t think it’s going to happen soon, nor do I see it being far off in the future—likely around the middle of next year is a reasonable guess to my mind. As I also said, the data will drive the decision—not just how close we are to our goals, but how quickly they come into sight. And, assuming the economy progresses as anticipated, rates will likely increase relatively gradually. This has been a fragile recovery with significant ups and downs, and there are still some lingering headwinds. Whenever it happens—that is, whenever the data indicate is the right time—we’ll raise rates as we always do during an expansion. One of the things I hope to see when it eventually occurs is a shift in the way the public views Fed decision making. During the extraordinary economic times of the crisis, recession, and recovery, we turned to forward guidance—that is, laying out in very explicit terms where we thought the economy and policy were headed. But once we make the return to a more normal policy environment, we won’t need to be so explicit. We want instead to let the public start intuiting our actions by looking at the economy and the outlook, understanding it’s the data that drive decisions. We want them to understand our strategy, rather than waiting to be told what we plan to do. 11 The course of action we’ll eventually take was charted by a lot of research and thinking about the best way to accomplish our goals with as little disruption as possible. At our last FOMC meeting, we published a high-level description of our plan to return to normal, imaginatively called “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.”9 As you may know, our various quantitative easing programs have significantly expanded the Fed’s balance sheet to about $4.5 trillion. This has caused some concerns about how we will steer the economy with such a large balance sheet: one, that it might make controlling interest rates too difficult, and two, that reducing the balance sheet over time could prove disruptive. We’re well aware of these issues, we’ve spent a lot of time thinking about them—hence, the carefully considered plan released far in advance of the actual action—and we have the tools to deal with them. First, we’ll pay interest on reserves held at the Fed. That is, when banks park their money with the Fed, we pay them interest on that money. By increasing the rate we pay to banks for the money they hold with us, we give them the incentive to keep their reserves with us, rather than having funds flow into the market and overheat the economy. Second, we have a new tool, the reverse repo facility, which folds non-bank financial institutions into that process as well. They’ll have the ability to keep their cash with us in 9 Board of Governors (2014a). 12 exchange for temporarily holding our assets, with a return that’s below that on excess bank reserves. These and other tools will help us keep good control as we raise the target range for the federal funds rate. And, like all tools, we’ll use them appropriately. The reverse repos in particular will be carefully managed, and we’ll eventually eliminate their use when they are no longer needed. As for reducing the balance sheet over time, we won’t be doing it all at once. At some point after we raise the target range for the federal funds rate, we will stop reinvesting maturing securities and principal payments from our asset holdings. Thereafter, as our securities mature, they’ll simply roll off, and our balance sheet will slowly shrink to a more normal size. Instead of going further into more extensive technical explanations, I’ll note that this is how policy is best managed: having a well-thought-through plan. Once you have the plan, it’s just a matter of executing it. I have every faith that we’ve looked at this from every angle and that we can manage the transition over time. Conclusion So the message is that things are getting better. We’re on track to end our asset purchases and we’re preparing for the time the economy can sustain an end to accommodation. We’ll want to see improvements in unemployment, wages, and inflation, and we’ll be driven by the data. But all in all, it’s good news—with just a few of those requisite caveats thrown in. 13 14 References Aaronson, Daniel, and Andrew Jordan. 2014. “Understanding the Relationship between Real Wage Growth and Labor Market Conditions.” Chicago Fed Letter 327, October. https://www.chicagofed.org/digital_assets/publications/chicago_fed_letter/2014/cfloctober2014_327. pdf The Billion Prices Project. 2014. “U.S. Daily Index.” Massachusetts Institute of Technology. http://bpp.mit.edu/usa/ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2014a. “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.” Press release, September 17. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2014b. “Press Release.” September 17. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917a.htm Clemens, Jeffrey, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Adam Hale Shapiro. 2014. “How Much Do Medicare Cuts Reduce Inflation?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2014-28 (September 22). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2014/september/medicare-cuts- reduce-inflation-budget-control-act/ Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2014. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips Curve.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2013-08, January. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/wp2013-08.pdf Liu, Zheng. 2014. FedViews. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, September 11. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/fedviews/2014/september/september-11-2014/. Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Aggregate Demand and State-Level Employment.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-04 (February 11). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2013/february/aggregate-demand-state-level-employment/ Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams. 2014. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates.” American Economic Review 104 (10, October), pp. 3,154–3,185. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles.php?doi=10.1257/aer.104.10.3154 Williams, John C. 2012. “Monetary Policy and the Slow Recovery: It’s Not Just About Housing.” Presentation to the SPUR Business Breakfast Series, San Francisco, California, April 4. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2012/april/williams- monetary-policy-slow-recovery-housing-san-francisco/ Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at Brookings. http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2014/01/16-monetary-policy-zero-lower-bound-williams

1 Inflation Targeting and the Global Financial Crisis: Successes and Challenges John C. Williams Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Prepared for the South African Reserve Bank “Conference on Fourteen Years of Inflation Targeting in South Africa and the Challenge of a Changing Mandate” October 30–31, 2014 Abstract Inflation targeting has become the predominant monetary approach across the globe. In a very real sense, “we are all inflation targeters now.” Before, during, and after the financial crisis, nearly all central banks following an inflation-targeting approach—whether explicit or implicit— have been highly successful at achieving price stability and anchoring inflation expectations. Recent events, however, highlighted two critical issues for inflation targeting going forward: the constraint of the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates and the appropriate role of monetary policy in supporting financial stability. This has led to the development of alternative approaches to inflation targeting that offer, in theory, potential advantages with respect to the zero lower bound and financial stability.  Ben Pyle supplied excellent research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are the author ’s and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Email contact information: John.C.Williams@sf.frb.org 2 Twenty-five years ago the Reserve Bank of New Zealand bravely embarked on a new framework for monetary policy: Inflation Targeting. Today, some 20 central banks— representing economies from small to large, emerging markets to advanced—practice some version of inflation targeting.1 Approaches differ in the details, but it is striking how similar inflation-targeting practice is across a diverse set of countries with distinct economic and institutional landscapes. Although the central banks of the three largest advanced economies— the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Federal Reserve—don’t explicitly identify themselves as practicing inflation targeting, all three have enunciated numerical longer- term inflation goals, a cornerstone principle of inflation targeting. To paraphrase Milton Friedman, “we are all inflation targeters now.”2 This essay assesses the macroeconomic performance of inflation targeting and other central bank monetary policies during and after the global financial crisis and discusses two critical challenges for central banks in the future. Spoiler alert: My main conclusion is that inflation targeting and related approaches to monetary policy have been remarkably successful at providing a nominal anchor and keeping inflation low and relatively stable during a period of severe turbulence. Nonetheless, recent events have revealed some chinks in the armor of inflation targeting related to the zero lower bound on interest rates and financial instability— issues I will also address. I will conclude by outlining some alternative, as yet untested approaches that have the potential to improve inflation targeting, options for Inflation Targeting 2.0, if you will. 1 See Kuttner (2004) for a concise summary of the history of inflation targeting and its spread across the globe. 2 Milton Friedman is widely credited with coining the phrase “we are all Keynesians now” back in the mid -1960s. 3 Before turning to these issues, it is worthwhile to ask two basic questions: what is inflation targeting, and why has it become so widespread? At its core, inflation targeting is an answer to the oldest and thorniest problem of monetary policy: providing a nominal anchor for the economy. Past regimes—including the gold standard, pegged exchange rates, and targeting monetary aggregates—all sought to do so, but proved to be fatally flawed when it came to providing the flexibility to deal with economic cycles and crises. In a nutshell, inflation targeting is designed to anchor inflation expectations, enabling central banks to achieve greater macroeconomic stability in the short run, while ensuring price stability in the long run. Although the implementation of inflation targeting differs across countries, three elements are central to the framework.3 First and foremost is the announcement of an explicit quantitative inflation target coupled with the central bank’s assuming responsibility for delivering price stability. Second is clear communication of the central bank’s policy strategy and the rationale for its decisions, which enhance the predictability of the central bank’s actions and its accountability to the public. Third is a forward-looking policy orientation, with a particular focus on inflation expectations. Together, these elements provide a focal point for inflation, facilitate the formation of inflation expectations, and provide a transparent framework for actions fostering price stability. It is important to note that, although inflation is front and center in each of these elements, inflation-targeting central banks also recognize a role for stabilizing economic activity—what is often referred to in the economics literature as “flexible inflation targeting.” 3 Numerous treatises have been written on inflation targeting. See, for example, Leiderman and Svensson (1995), Bernanke and Mishkin (1997), Bernanke et al. (1999), and citations therein. 4 Success at taming inflation has fueled wide adoption of inflation targeting (both explicit and implicit) over the past 25 years. Since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods international monetary system in the early 1970s, most countries have faced bouts of high and volatile inflation as they sought a suitable nominal anchor. Some chose to explicitly adopt an inflation- targeting framework with all the bells and whistles, while others did not. However, in the following, I do not distinguish between countries that have explicitly adopted inflation targeting and others, like the United States, whose behavior is in many ways similar to inflation targeting but which have not made such specific commitment. Since the adoption of inflation targeting and similar approaches, inflation in these countries has been relatively quiescent. The first column of Table 1 shows the average rates of inflation in a number of countries in the decade before the global financial crisis (1998–2007). Compared to double-digit inflation rates in prior periods, nearly all of these countries experienced relatively low inflation rates in the run-up to the crisis. Inflation tended to be relatively stable as well, as shown in column 3 of the table, which reports the standard deviations of inflation rates in each country during this period. Although the stabilization of inflation in so many countries was a great accomplishment, the real test for inflation targeting was yet to come. The global financial crisis and the resulting recessions presented a massive challenge for monetary policy. As has been widely remarked, inflation-targeting central banks generally did not foresee or forestall the ballooning risks to financial systems that eventually exploded. Moreover, central banks were not able to fully mitigate the spillovers to economic activity, and the resulting economic costs of the crisis proved enormous. These are subjects that I will return to later. 5 However, when gauged by the behavior of inflation since the crisis, inflation targeting delivered on its promise. Columns 2 and 4 of Table 1 report the average inflation rates and their associated standard deviations, respectively, since the beginning of 2008. Inflation rates stayed remarkably low and stable during this otherwise turbulent period. The crisis and economic downturns left virtually no traces in terms of the ability of central banks to maintain price stability. This is an important achievement in and of itself, but also because the stability of inflation provided many central banks with room to take aggressive actions to foster economic recovery. What explains this impressive performance with regard to price stability? The key is the anchoring of inflation expectations before the crisis and the actions taken to maintain price stability, and thereby hold the anchor in place, during and after the crisis. Figure 1 shows the net change in survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations from the start of the crisis until today for a number of countries. In most cases, the anchor held firmly (to put these numbers in perspective, the inflation targets are typically between 2 and 3 percent). In a few cases, such as Japan and New Zealand, the observed shift represented a desirable move back toward the announced target. In only two other cases, Norway and the United Kingdom, do we see a nontrivial shift in inflation expectations. I will return to the case of Norway later. With inflation expectations firmly anchored and the public apparently confident that central banks would hold the line on price stability, the transmission of economic turmoil to inflation was muted. Inflation (and, on the downside, deflation) proved to be the dog that didn’t bite. 6 Two critical challenges Despite inflation-targeting central banks’ noteworthy successes in maintaining low inflation and anchoring inflation expectations during and after the crisis, inflation targeting faces two critical challenges. The first is the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates, which has constrained conventional policy actions for most major central banks during the past six years. The second is the appropriate role of monetary policy in maintaining financial stability. The zero lower bound The zero lower bound (ZLB) has been a significant constraint for many central banks across the globe. Figure 2 shows the policy rates for four major advanced economies since 1990. Combatting persistent deflation and a stagnant economy, the Bank of Japan moved its policy rate close to zero in the 1990s. Then, following the financial crisis, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Federal Reserve all brought their policy rates to their respective effective lower bounds in late 2008 or early 2009. In addition, central banks in many other economies—including Canada, Denmark, Sweden, and Switzerland—cut policy rates to near zero in the aftermath of the crisis, as seen in Figure 3. In countries where the ZLB has been a major constraint, achieving inflation goals has been especially challenging. In response to shocks that lower inflation below the target, the ability to lower short-term rates and stimulate the economy and thereby inflation is curtailed at the zero lower bound. This has been an ongoing problem for Japan, contributing to an extraordinarily long period of deflation. Central banks have turned to unconventional policies to mitigate the constraint of the ZLB, but even with these interventions, inflation has been persistently running below target levels in several countries in the aftermath of the crisis. 7 Although most central banks in emerging market economies and advanced economies rich in natural resources did not hit the ZLB during the recent episode, they did see interest rates reach very low levels in many cases. Historically, emerging market economies have typically experienced relatively high nominal interest rates, reflecting higher inflation and higher real rates than in advanced economies. All else equal, this elevated level of average interest rates reduces the chance of hitting the ZLB. Figure 4 shows policy rates for Australia, Chile, Mexico, Norway, and South Korea. In the cases of Chile and Norway, short-term rates did fall below 2 percent for a time. So, how important an issue is the ZLB likely to be in the future? Are the events of the past decade a harbinger of regular future bouts with the ZLB or an outlier that won’t be repeated? The answer to that question may be best found by looking further into the past rather than focusing on recent history. In considering the likelihood of another bout with the ZLB, one important factor is the probability of another severe recession of the kind the United States and many other countries recently experienced.4 If one tries to answer this question by looking at postwar U.S. data before the financial crisis, one would conclude that such an outcome is highly unlikely. For example, in the 50 years before the crisis, there was no year in which U.S. per capita real GDP fell by as much as it did in 2009, the worst year of the recession. A statistical analysis of the U.S. data over the 50 years prior to the crisis would lead one to expect a downturn of this magnitude or larger once every 430 years.5 The data would show an even greater sense of complacency if one based this calculation solely on the 25 years leading up to the crisis—the so-called Great Moderation 4 This discussion is based on Williams (2014). 5 This calculation is taken from Williams (2014). It assumes the variance of the growth rate is set equal to that observed in the U.S. data over 1958–2007 and that the distribution of outcomes is normally and independently distributed. 8 period. In that case, such a drop in output would be expected to occur only once every 33,000 years! This extremely optimistic prediction reflects the unusually tranquil quarter-century before the global financial crisis. A very different conclusion is reached when one considers a broader view of historical experience. If, instead of concentrating on the U.S. postwar experience, one includes the history of numerous countries over more than a century, then deep recessions are not that rare.6 Specifically, analysis of data from 17 advanced countries over the past 140 years (1871–2012) shows a decline in per capita real GDP of the magnitude experienced in the United States in 2009 occurs, on average, about once every 20 years. Using this metric, the recent U.S. recession is far from unprecedented or an outlier. A broad view of history teaches us that very large downturns are not only possible, they are common. The point of this example is that the assessment of tail risks—and thereby the incidence of the ZLB—depends on the breadth of economic experiences that one considers relevant. Looking at broad international experience over a protracted period is likely to mute the overconfidence garnered by a more limited set of data points. It rejects the “this time is different” view that downplays distant events, and instead treats a wide range of historical experience as potentially informative in describing the types of risks the future may hold. A second factor influencing the incidence of ZLB episodes is the level of the normal or “natural” real rate of interest expected to prevail over the foreseeable future. This is because the lower the natural rate of interest, the thinner the available cushion to lower rates when needed. A 6 Following Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2011), the data are taken from Barro and Ursúa (2010), and updated for 2007–2012 using data from the World Bank. For the United States, data for 1930–2012 are the current national income and product accounts data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The countries in the sample are Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States. 9 number of factors—including persistent changes in productivity growth, demographics, pricing of risk, and fiscal policy—potentially affect the natural rate of interest. In my research with Thomas Laubach, we developed a statistical model that provides estimates of the natural rate of interest for the United States.7 Figure 5 shows these estimates, compared with the medium-term forecasts of the real federal funds rate from the 2014 Blue Chip Financial Forecasts survey. Both the model-based and survey-based estimates of the medium-term natural rate of interest show significant declines since the onset of the global financial crisis. It is too early to judge whether this downward shift in the natural rate will endure. However, if it does, then it raises the specter of the ZLB being a more frequent problem than in past decades when the natural rate of interest was higher. In summary, based on the broader historical experience and potential for a lower level of the natural rate of interest, the ZLB is likely to be a recurring issue for central banks that target low levels of inflation. This analysis has focused on advanced economies, particularly the United States. Although most emerging market economies have not yet been constrained by the ZLB, this situation may change. Looking to the future, circumstances may be different—commodity prices may not be booming as they did during the global financial crisis, and global growth trends and real interest rates may be lower—with the result that the ZLB may become a more palpable constraint on monetary policy, even in emerging market economies. A monetary policy mandate for financial stability? The second challenge concerns the appropriate role for monetary policy in sustaining a stable financial system. From the beginning, the inflation-targeting approach has focused on a single outcome: price stability. As I have argued, according to this measure, inflation targeting 7 Laubach and Williams (2003). 10 has been an unmitigated success. But the global financial crisis has called into question whether a singular focus on price stability suffices, and some have argued that monetary policy should be directed at minimizing risks to financial stability as well. In this regard, it is important to recall that the near single-mindedness regarding the nominal anchor was originally seen as a virtue, not a vice. Muddying the waters by adding concern for financial stability was typically viewed as a potentially dangerous distraction, risking policymakers’ attention to, and credibility in, maintaining price stability. Indeed, this attitude was codified in numerous central bank charters, which in some cases dictated consequences if the inflation goal was not met. To be sure, the elevation of financial stability concerns at central banks and other regulatory agencies is a natural and appropriate reaction to the events of the global financial crisis, when the near meltdown of the financial systems in many countries almost toppled the global economy. Even with the dramatic—and in many cases, unprecedented—actions of governments and central banks, the fallout from the financial crisis has been greater and longer- lasting than had been experienced in generations. In fact, this renewed concern for financial stability represents more a return to the roots of central banking than new-age thinking. After all, the Federal Reserve was created from the ashes of the panics and resulting depressions that tormented the U.S. economy in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. It has become a mantra in central banking that robust micro- and macro-prudential regulatory and supervisory policies should provide the first and second lines of defense for financial stability. Still, some are concerned that is not enough and call for including a financial stability goal in the monetary policy mandate as well. Doing so, however, raises the important 11 issue of how one commits to taking financial stability into account while simultaneously preserving the nominal anchor. If financial stability and price stability goals are in conflict, there is a risk that price stability will be subordinated to the financial stability goal, with serious long- run consequences for economic performance. This issue of the appropriate role of monetary policy in fostering financial stability at the potential cost to inflation goals has been playing out in policy debates and decision in two Scandinavian countries: Norway and Sweden. In discussing these examples, let me be absolutely clear that I am not judging the wisdom of these decisions. Rather, they provide useful case studies of the possible tradeoffs between financial stability and inflation goals that we can and should learn from. Take the case of Sweden. As background, Sweden’s economy has experienced inflation persistently below target, while at the same time, household debt and house prices have grown enormously. In response to the growing level of debt and the potential risks to financial stability it entailed, the Sveriges Riksbank undertook a somewhat tighter stance of monetary policy than it would otherwise have, were it based purely on macroeconomic conditions. The predicted result was a more gradual return to inflation and unemployment goals (Sveriges Riksbank 2014a, p. 17). Similarly, in Norway, the Norges Bank framed a recent policy decision as follows: “Both the objective of keeping consumer price inflation close to 2.5% and the objective of sustaining capacity utilization in the years ahead could in isolation imply a somewhat lower key policy rate forecast.… On the other hand, a lower key policy rate may increase the risk of a further buildup of financial imbalances” (Norges Bank 2014, p. 16). 12 These examples illustrate the tradeoff between price and macroeconomic goals on one hand, and financial stability goals on the other, when using monetary policy to mitigate risks to financial stability. For example, Lars Svensson (2013, and references therein) uses model simulations to show that the monetary policy actions of the Riksbank, based on a concern for financial stability, have induced a significantly higher rate of unemployment and a sustained shortfall of inflation relative to its target. He goes on to argue that the policy, by reducing income, has actually increased the already high household debt-to-income ratio, potentially exacerbating financial stability risks. These calculations focus on the short-run costs of these policies; the more significant issue is whether concern for financial stability undermines the nominal anchor. If the central bank actions aimed at addressing financial stability risks are large and persistent, the inflation rate will likely deviate from target for many years. The protracted failure to deliver on the inflation objective could undermine the credibility of the central bank’s commitment to its inflation target and unmoor inflation expectations. In this regard, it is instructive to examine the behavior of inflation expectations in Norway and Sweden. Figure 6, based on Levin (2014), shows survey data on longer-run measures of inflation expectations for the United States, the euro area, Norway, and Sweden. Longer-run inflation expectations have remained very stable in the United States and euro area, despite the tumult of the global financial and euro crises and the subsequent aggressive monetary policy undertaken by the Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank. In contrast, Norway and Sweden saw some slippage in long-run inflation expectations below target levels, based on 13 this survey.8 This follows a long period of realized inflation averaging below-target levels and central bank communication that financial stability concerns have been affecting policy decisions. Interestingly, the Riksbank cut the policy rate in July 2014, arguing that “expansionary monetary policy can also contribute to inflation expectations remaining anchored around 2 per cent by sending a clear signal that monetary policy will ensure that inflation approaches the inflation target within the reasonably near future” (Sveriges Riksbank 2014b). Subsequently, longer-run inflation expectations bounced back, as seen in the chart. So far, it’s unclear how durable a slippage in inflation expectations resulting from a focus on financial stability concerns will prove to be. Nonetheless, it is an apt reminder of the potential long-run costs of losing sight of the price stability mandate. The steadfastness of the nominal anchor in most advanced economies has been, and continues to be, a key factor in many central banks’ ability to maintain low and stable inflation during and after the global financial crisis. It was forged over many years of consistent commitment to price stability and successfully taming the inflation dragon. If the anchor were to slip, it would wreak lasting damage to a central bank’s control over both inflation and economic activity, at considerable cost to the economy. This applies equally to deviations above and below the target. Inflation Targeting 2.0 The two challenges that I have highlighted—the ZLB and the role of monetary policy in support of financial stability—are not entirely new, but the events of the past seven years have highlighted their importance for central banks. Much of the research and discussion has been centered on how to adapt the existing monetary policy framework to account for and mitigate the 8 I should note that other surveys show smaller downward movements in long-run inflation expectations. See Norges Bank (2014) and Sveriges Riksbank (2014a). 14 negative effects of these issues. For example, real-world experience with the ZLB has led to the development and use of various unconventional policy approaches such as forward policy guidance and variations on using the central bank’s balance sheet to affect financial conditions.9 Similarly, recognizing the need for a more resilient financial system has led to the introduction of stronger and more comprehensive micro- and macro-prudential regulations and supervision. Beyond adapting inflation targeting to these realities, there remains the question of whether the inflation-targeting framework itself should be modified or replaced by a new regime better suited to deal with the ZLB and financial stability concerns. Given the limitations and costs of using unconventional policies and the residual risks to the financial system even with stronger regulation, is there an alternative approach to monetary policy that may engender more favorable tradeoffs? In other words, after 25 years of inflation targeting, is it time for a reboot to Inflation Targeting 2.0? In the following, I am not advocating any particular position, rather I am highlighting some research on alternative approaches to inflation targeting that may have advantages with respect to the ZLB and financial stability. Two closely related alternatives to inflation targeting have been proposed: price-level targeting and nominal income targeting. Under price-level targeting, the central bank aims to keep the price level on a predetermined growing path. It differs from inflation targeting in that past deviations from the target rate of inflation must be made up by offsetting deviations in the other direction. Nominal income targeting is similar, but posits a deterministic growing path of nominal GDP that the central bank aims to achieve. In the following, I first consider the merits of price-level targeting and then turn to nominal income targeting. 9 See Williams (2013) for a discussion. 15 In theory, price-level and inflation targeting are close cousins, with relatively little to distinguish them in terms of macroeconomic outcomes in “normal” times (Williams 2003). Both approaches aim for a low average rate of inflation and put price stability front and center as a goal of monetary policy. However, price-level targeting possesses some potential advantages over inflation targeting in mitigating both the economic repercussions of the ZLB and risks to financial stability. The difference between price-level and inflation targeting really shows up in situations of negative shocks to the economy when inflation falls well below the targeted level. With inflation targeting, monetary policy acts to bring inflation back to the target level, with past misses below target ignored: that is, bygones are bygones. In contrast, price-level targeting requires more aggressive monetary policy action that promises future above-target inflation needed to bring the price level back up to its desired path. This promise of sustained future monetary stimulus provides a powerful pull on an economy experiencing disinflationary pressures, even in the presence of the zero lower bound. Indeed, according to model-based research, a price-level targeting central bank can, in theory, successfully target a very low trend inflation rate with very little cost in terms of macroeconomic stabilization resulting from the ZLB (Reifschneider and Williams 2000, Svensson 2001, Eggertsson and Woodford 2003, Williams 2006). Price-level targeting also has potential positive attributes related to financial stability. Because debt contracts are typically written in nominal terms, a period of unexpectedly low inflation or even deflation causes the real value of debt to rise relative to expectations when the contract was signed. This can contribute to weakening of households’, businesses’, and banks’ balance sheets, resulting in a decline in economic activity and greater stress in the financial 16 system. Under inflation targeting, the increase in the real value of debt is not reversed. In contrast, if the central bank acts to keep overall prices on a steady growth path, then episodes of excessively low inflation or deflation are eventually reversed, mitigating this type of debt deflation problem and the deadweight losses and disruptive effects associated with foreclosure and bankruptcy. In this way, price-level targeting has the potential to reduce the risks to the financial system and spillovers to the economy from debt-fueled booms. Nominal income targeting takes these arguments a step further. Instead of a price path that sets the goal for policy, it’s a path for nominal GDP. In terms of the ZLB, nominal GDP targeting shares the advantage of price-level targeting: Specifically, it promises higher inflation in the future following a period of low inflation that helps dampen deflationary pressures. On the financial stability front, it may be an even more powerful deterrent to debt-fueled crashes. If aggregate nominal income is kept close to a steady growth path, then on the aggregate, incomes won’t fall as much during a downturn, allowing people to continue to repay their loans and avoid default and bankruptcy (Koenig 2013 and Sheedy 2014). These potential benefits of price-level and nominal income targeting are worthy of further careful study and discussion. It is too early to judge whether one approach or the other would provide a better framework than inflation targeting. In contemplating a shift away from inflation targeting, it is crucial to consider what unintended negative consequences these approaches might entail. For example, nominal income targeting could generate persistent deviations of inflation from target, which may interfere with the credible communication of the price stability objective. There are also practical considerations in the communication of policy decisions and goals that need to be fully analyzed. In weighing all the potential advantages, disadvantages, and 17 risks of these and other alternative approaches, it is absolutely essential that any modification of approach not undermine the hard-fought achievement of price stability and well-anchored inflation expectations that have been of great benefit, especially during the recent challenging economic times. 18 References Barro, Robert J., and José F. Ursúa. 2010. “Barro-Ursúa Macroeconomic Data.” http://scholar.harvard.edu/barro/publications/barro-ursua-macroeconomic-data Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen. 1999. Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1997. “Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(2, Spring), pp. 97–116. Eggertson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford. 2003. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 34(1), pp. 139–235. Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2011. “Financial Crises, Credit Booms, and External Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons.” IMF Economic Review 59(2), pp. 340–378. Koenig, Evan F. 2013. “Like a Good Neighbor: Monetary Policy, Financial Stability, and the Distribution of Risk.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(2, June), pp. 57–82. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q2a3.htm Kuttner, Kenneth N. 2004. “A Snapshot of Inflation Targeting in its Adolescence.” In The Future of Inflation Targeting, eds. Christopher Kent and Simon Guttmann. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, pp. 6–42. http://www.rba.gov.au/publications/confs/2004/kuttner.html Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams. 2003. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(4), pp. 1,063–1070. http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/003465303772815934 Leiderman, Leonardo, and Lars E.O. Svensson, editors. 1995. Inflation Targets. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research. Levin, Andrew T. 2014. “The Design and Communication of Systematic Monetary Policy Strategies.” Presented at the Hoover Institution conference on “Frameworks for Central Banking in the Next Century,” May 29–30. http://media.hoover.org/sites/default/files/documents/2014LevinThe%20DesignandCommunicationof SystematicMonetaryPolicyStrategies.pdf Norges Bank. 2014. Monetary Policy Report with Financial Stability Assessment, March. http://static.norges-bank.no/pages/101366/monetary_policy_report_3_14.pdf Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams. 2000. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low- Inflation Era.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(4), pp. 936–966. Sheedy, Kevin D. 2014. “Debt and Incomplete Financial Markets: A Case for Nominal GDP Targeting.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 301–361. Svensson, Lars E.O. 2001. “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping from a Liquidity Trap.” Monetary and Economic Studies 19(S1), pp. 277–312. Svensson, Lars E.O. 2013. “Some Lessons from Six Years of Practical Inflation Targeting.” Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2013:3, pp. 29–80. 19 http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Rapporter/POV/2013/2013_3/rap_pov_artikel_2_131122_eng.pd f Sveriges Riksbank. 2014a. Monetary Policy Report. February. http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Rapporter/PPR/2014/140213/rap_ppr_140213_eng.pdf Sveriges Riksbank. 2014b. “Repo Rate Cut by Half a Percentage Point to 0.25 Per Cent.” Press release, July 3. http://www.riksbank.se/Documents/Pressmeddelanden/2014/prm_140703_eng.pdf Williams, John C. 2003. “Simple Rules for Monetary Policy.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Review 2003, pp. 1–12. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- review/2003/simple-rules-for-monetary-policy.pdf Williams, John C. 2006. “Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Economy with Learning.” In Monetary Policy in an Environment of Low Inflation, proceedings of the Bank of Korea International Conference. Seoul: Bank of Korea, pp. 199–228. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/working-papers/2006/wp06-30bk.pdf Williams, John C. 2013. “Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Unconventional Monetary Policy.” Panel discussion at the NBER Conference, Boston, Massachusetts, October 18. http://www.frbsf.org/our- district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2013/october/research-unconventional- monetary-policy-financial-crisis/ Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at Brookings, January 16. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2014/01/16-monetary-policy-zero-lower- bound/16-monetary-policy-zero-lower-bound-williams 20 Table 1. Consumer Price Inflation Mean Standard Deviation 1998Q1-2007Q4 2008Q1-2014Q2 1998Q1-2007Q4 2008Q1-2014Q2 Australia 2.8 2.8 1.3 0.9 Canada 2.2 1.6 0.9 1.0 Chile 3.3 3.2 1.3 2.9 Euro Zonea 2.0 1.9 0.5 1.1 Japan -0.2 0.1 0.6 1.2 Mexico 7.4 4.3 4.8 0.9 New Zealand 2.2 2.4 1.1 1.4 Norway 2.0 2.1 1.1 1.0 South Africa 4.9 6.3 3.4 2.0 South Korea 3.2 2.9 1.8 1.2 Sweden 1.2 1.2 1.0 1.5 Switzerland 0.8 0.3 0.5 1.1 United Kingdom 1.6 3.1 0.5 0.9 United States 2.6 2.0 0.8 1.5 Source: Euro Zone data from IFS; all else from OECD. a The country composition of the Euro Zone has varied over time. -1 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 AUS CAN CHE CHL Euro GBR JPN KOR MEX NOR NZL SWE USA Source: Consensus Forecasts and SPF (USA). Change in 6-10 year-ahead CPI inflation expectations between 2007 and 2014. Change since onset of global financial crisis Figure 1: Longer-term Inflation Expectations Percentage Points 21 22 23
