The Outlook for the Economy and Bank Regulation Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Ohio Bankers League 2015 Economic Summit Columbus, Ohio February 4, 2015 1 Introduction Good afternoon. I thank the Ohio Bankers League for inviting me to participate in this year’s economic summit. It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak with so many leaders from the state’s banking community. I’m glad to be here with my colleague Steve Jenkins, whom many of you know well and who will be speaking later today. It is also great to be in Columbus, where it seems as if the euphoria from The Ohio State University’s national championship isn’t going to wear off any time soon. Today, I will share my views on the outlook for the U.S. economy and monetary policy in 2015. Given the important role financial institutions play in the economy, I also want to offer some perspectives on banking supervision and regulation. Of course, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook The U.S. economy begins 2015 in its sixth year of expansion. The trip out of the Great Recession hasn’t broken any speed limits. For most of the journey, the economy has been traveling at a relatively slow to moderate pace, and it’s taken several rest stops along the way. But the recent data on the real side of the economy have been encouraging. There are accumulating signs that the economy is building momentum and that, this time, a pickup in speed will be sustained because the underlying fundamentals have improved. Last year’s severe winter helped spur an annualized decline of about 2 percent in real output in the first quarter. Growth rebounded to about 4 percent over the remainder of last year, quite a bit higher than the average growth rate of around 2 percent over the prior three years. Many of the so-called headwinds that held back the pace of growth earlier in the expansion and dampened the effect of very accommodative 2 monetary policy on the economy have abated, suggesting that the economic momentum at the start of this year is likely to be sustained. One of those headwinds has been the deleveraging that households and businesses had to do after the Great Recession. Consumer balance sheets have improved significantly over the expansion. Household debt relative to disposable personal income peaked at 130 percent prior to the recession but is now closer to 100 percent and has leveled out over the past couple of years. Very low interest rates mean that households are spending less to service their debt. And thanks to higher prices of equities and houses, households have more than made up the $10 trillion in net worth destroyed in 2008. The rise in home prices means that fewer households are underwater on their mortgages and mortgage delinquencies are down. Businesses also had to deleverage. But now business balance sheets are quite healthy. Business sentiment is positive and supportive of higher levels of investment and stronger hiring. Another headwind came from the government sector. Government spending has been a drag on growth during much of the expansion. Unlike in most earlier recoveries, government payrolls actually fell during much of this expansion. Last year, buoyed by stronger tax revenues, state and local governments added to their payrolls after a meager increase in 2013 and declines in the prior four years. State and local government spending made a net positive contribution to real output growth last year, and the drag from federal government spending is waning. Of course, this audience doesn’t need to be reminded of the repairs that had to be made to bring the banking sector back to health in the wake of the Great Recession. Now that banks are recapitalized they are in a better position to take appropriate risks. Loans to consumers and businesses are rising and delinquencies and write-offs are at low levels. 3 At the same time the headwinds have diminished, we now have a tailwind in the form of lower oil prices. Last July, oil was selling at around $110 a barrel. Now the price is near $50. While the drop in oil prices will lead to some reduced investment and dislocation in parts of the domestic energy sector, lower oil prices will be a net positive for the U.S. economy. The lower costs of fuel to consumers, businesses, and local governments will support higher spending elsewhere. The U.S. Energy Information Administration is projecting that the average U.S. household will spend about $550 less on gasoline this year than it did last year. This will put money into people’s pockets that can be spent on other goods and services. Based on the improvement in fundamentals, as well as the fall in energy prices, and with the usual caveats that there are risks around any forecast, I expect the economy to grow at a 3 percent pace in 2015 and 2016, somewhat above my estimate of 2.5 percent longer-run growth. I don’t expect the housing sector to come back strongly this year, although continued moderate improvement is likely. The improvement will be supported by some relaxation of mortgage credit conditions, which remain fairly tight except for the highest quality borrowers. Net exports are also unlikely to contribute much to U.S. growth. As you are well aware, the U.S. economy is in better shape than the economies of many of our trading partners. Weak demand from abroad will dampen U.S. exports but will be more than offset by healthy domestic consumer and business spending that will support above-trend economic growth this year. The increased momentum in the economy reflects a significant improvement in labor market conditions, which is seen across a broad number of indicators. On average, firms added 246,000 jobs per month last year, up from an average of 194,000 in 2013 and 186,000 in 2012. Nonfarm payrolls are now 2 million above their pre-recession level. The unemployment rate is now 5.6 percent. This is down from a peak of 10 percent in 2009 and a full percentage point lower than it was last January. For several years now, the decline in the unemployment rate has been faster than many economists and policymakers thought it would be. For example, in 4 December 2013, participants on the Federal Open Market Committee projected that the unemployment rate would be between 6.2 and 6.7 percent by the end of 2014. We are now well below that range. Broader measures of the unemployment rate are also down considerably since the start of the expansion, and their rate of decline is increasing. These measures include those that track people who are working part time but would prefer a full-time job or people marginally attached to the labor force who say they want to work but aren’t actively looking. Improvements are also evident in measures that track the long- term unemployed – people who have been out of work for more than six months. While these broader measures are not yet down to their pre-recession levels, they have all fallen considerably. For example, the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ so-called U6 measure of the unemployment rate, which includes marginally attached workers and people working part-time who want full-time work, fell almost 2 percentage points last year. I continue to view the unemployment rate as a useful indicator of labor market conditions. However, for those who put less stock in it because of the confounding effect of cyclical declines in labor force participation, I point to the ratio of employment to population. As our population ages, this ratio will naturally decline. Yet last year the acceleration in hiring was enough to overcome the effect of demographics, and we saw a nice increase in the employment-to-population ratio. Labor market conditions in Ohio have also improved over time, although at a somewhat slower pace than in the rest of the nation. During the recession, Ohio saw a sharper rate of job loss compared to the U.S. Between the start of the recession in December 2007 and the start of the expansion in June 2009, Ohio lost nearly 7 percent of its payroll jobs, while the U.S. lost almost 5-1/2 percent of its jobs. Since the start of the expansion, job growth in Ohio has averaged 1 percent per year. While this is somewhat lower than the 1-1/4 percent per year job growth seen in the nation, it is pretty good performance for Ohio, which 5 usually sees slower job growth compared to the nation because of its industry mix and slower population growth. Despite the gains we’ve seen in labor markets, wage growth has remained subdued. However, as employment continues to grow, I anticipate that wages will accelerate and help support stronger consumer spending. Consumer price inflation also remains subdued and is running below the Fed’s 2 percent objective. The sharp drop in oil prices is showing up in much lower headline inflation numbers, and I expect inflation to decline further in the near term. So far, there has been only modest pass-through of those oil price declines to core measures of inflation that remove the volatile food and energy components. The Cleveland Fed’s median CPI measure has remained near 2-1/4 percent since last April, and as shown in Cleveland Fed staff research, this measure has some predictive power for headline inflation over the medium term.1 My expectation is that inflation will gradually move back up to 2 percent by the end of next year as economic activity continues to strengthen, oil prices stabilize, and inflation expectations remain anchored. I recognize that continued low readings on headline inflation have the potential to unsettle estimates of inflation expectations, so it is important that we carefully monitor developments on this front. Economists look at several different measures to help gauge inflation expectations. Market-based estimates of inflation compensation based on the spread between the yields on 10-year Treasury securities and 10-year Treasury inflation-protected securities, so-called TIPS, have fallen in recent weeks. However, in periods of highly volatile financial markets and flight-to-quality flows into U.S. securities, like those we’ve been experiencing, it is difficult to parse how much of the decline reflects a change in 1Brent Meyer, Guhan Venkatu, and Saeed Zaman, “Forecasting Inflation? Target the Middle,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, April 2013. 6 inflation expectations and how much reflects liquidity effects and changes in inflation risk premiums. In such times, I put more stock in the survey-based measures of inflation expectations, and these have been stable. In addition, while the Cleveland Fed’s own estimate of the 10-year expected inflation rate slipped from 1.85 percent in December to 1.66 percent in January, this reading is essentially in the middle of the range of readings we have seen since the financial crisis. Altogether, based on the various measures, my read is that inflation expectations remain anchored. And so long as that continues and growth doesn’t falter, I am comfortable with the forecast that inflation will move gradually toward the Fed’s 2 percent goal over the medium term, while lower oil prices drive down measures of headline inflation in the near term. Of course, this projection is dependent on appropriate monetary policy. So let me turn to that now. Monetary Policy In response to the financial crisis and deep recession, the Federal Reserve has run an extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy to promote its goals of price stability and maximum employment. The FOMC has kept its policy rate – the federal funds rate – at essentially zero since the end of 2008. This has lent important support to the economy, leading to the substantial progress we’ve seen in labor markets and the pickup in the pace of growth that underlie the projection that inflation will gradually return to our goal. The economy is moving back to more normal territory, and as it does, monetary policy should begin to do so too. Because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, policymakers need to be forward looking. We need to base our policy on both realized and expected progress toward our goals. Based on my forecast and the risks I see around that forecast, I believe it will soon be appropriate to begin moving rates up from zero. Because policy must be forward looking, in my view liftoff should occur before our goals are fully met. But even after liftoff, policy will remain very accommodative for some time, promoting attainment of both goals. Indeed, if incoming economic information supports my forecast, I would be comfortable with liftoff in the first half of this year, but as the FOMC has emphasized, policy 7 isn’t on a pre-set path. Both liftoff and the path of policy thereafter will be based on incoming information to the extent that it affects the economic outlook and progress toward our goals of maximum employment and price stability. A Tiered Approach to Banking Supervision and Regulation As I mentioned earlier, one of the headwinds that held back the pace of economic recovery was the considerable work that had to be done to improve the health of the financial system after the financial crisis. I wouldn’t want to conclude my talk to this group without acknowledging the key role that banks play in providing valuable credit, risk-management, and liquidity services to businesses and households. While banks are designed to take risks, operate with leverage, and are subject to oversight, we saw during the financial crisis that our system was not without flaws. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, signed into law in 2010, includes a number of provisions to strengthen the supervisory and regulatory framework, with the goal of promoting a more resilient financial system. Consistent with the act, the Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies are taking a tiered approach to banking supervision and regulation. This approach recognizes that the risk a banking organization poses to the financial system is likely to vary according to its size, range of activities, and complexity, and so supervision and regulation should vary as well. For example, individual community banks are subject to regulatory oversight to help ensure they remain sound and able to extend credit and other services to their communities. But the actions community banks take do not typically impose costs on the rest of the financial system or create the kinds of contagion that can put the entire financial system at risk. So community banks shouldn’t be subject to the same types of macroprudential rules and supervision aimed at the systemically important institutions. The tiered approach categorizes institutions based on their complexity and the level of risk they pose to the overall financial system, and then tailors oversight appropriately. Doing so will help to reduce the 8 potential costs bankers might face if made to comply with rules that don’t further the goal of a healthy and resilient financial system. It will also free up the bandwidth of examiners and supervisors so they can focus more of their attention on where the risks actually lie. The Federal Reserve has organized its supervision of institutions around four groups of banks: community banks, which are institutions with $10 billion or less in assets; regional banking organizations, with assets between $10 billion and $50 billion; large banking organizations; and systemically important institutions. By appropriately deploying our supervisory resources, we feel we can better promote a healthier, more resilient financial system. Several examples illustrate the tiered approach. Many of the new requirements under Dodd-Frank apply only to the 100 or so banks with more than $10 billion in assets. For example, the nation’s 5,700 or so community banks are not subject to requirements for annual stress testing or resolution planning, but for those banks to which they do apply, the requirements become more extensive for the largest and most systemically important firms. Community banks and smaller regional banks with $50 billion or less in assets are not subject to the quantitative minimum liquidity requirement the Fed approved last year, nor do they fall under the extensive enhanced prudential standards required under Dodd-Frank for bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in assets. Stronger capital requirements are an essential part of the new regulatory system. But the capital positions needed for systemically important banks are higher than those needed for community banks, and after consultations with community bankers, the rules adopted by the federal regulatory agencies reflect this. Another more recent example of the tiered approach involves the Federal Reserve Board’s policy statement that allows certain small, noncomplex bank holding companies to operate with higher levels of debt than normal so long as doing so doesn’t compromise safety and soundness. In a recent speech, Federal Reserve Governor Tarullo explained that while the Federal Reserve Board generally discourages the use of debt to finance acquisitions, it recognizes that debt is often needed to finance transfers of 9 ownership of small banks because they have limited access to equity financing.2 Last December, Congress raised the asset-size threshold for bank holding companies qualifying to operate with higher debt from $500 million to $1 billion. Last week, the Fed invited public comment on its proposed rule to implement this law. When final, this rule will raise the percentage of banks qualifying for the policy to nearly 90 percent from 75 percent. What I hope you will take from these examples is that the Federal Reserve recognizes the new regulatory environment poses challenges for bankers. We are committed to ensuring that our implementation of the Dodd-Frank Act does not put undue burden on community banks, but works to foster a healthier and more resilient financial system, which will benefit banks of all sizes and the overall economy. Conclusion In summary, I see the economy on firmer footing than it has been for some time. Although there are risks around my forecast, I see growth averaging about 3 percent over the next two years. While the drop in oil prices will lower inflation in the near term, as oil prices stabilize, output and employment growth continue, and inflation expectations remain anchored, I expect inflation to gradually move back to the Fed’s goal of 2 percent. Based on realized and expected progress toward our goals, I believe it will soon be appropriate to begin moving interest rates up from zero. The Committee will base its decision about the timing and path of interest rates on incoming economic information to the extent that it affects the economic outlook and progress toward our goals of maximum employment and price stability. As I noted earlier, it takes time for monetary policy to affect the economy. So the public won’t be able to immediately see whether a policy action taken by the Fed was a good one. That is one reason that I 2 Daniel Tarullo, “A Tiered Approach to Regulation and Supervision of Community Banks,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, remarks at the Community Bankers Symposium, Chicago, November 7, 2014. 10 believe clear communication about monetary policy is so important. It is incumbent upon policymakers to explain the rationale for their decisions, including their evaluation of economic conditions as well as their outlook for the economy. This is what I tried to do today. I would like to leave you with one final thought. Congress has set the Fed’s goals but it has also given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of those goals. That is, monetary policy decisions do not have to be approved by the president or Congress. This is consistent with a large body of research, both here and abroad, which shows that when central banks formulate monetary policy free from government interference and are held accountable for their decisions, better economic outcomes result. I believe that calls to audit the Fed are misnamed and misguided. Misnamed because they really aren’t about auditing the Fed – the Fed is already subject to many audits of its financial statements and activities, and Chair Yellen regularly testifies before Congress on monetary policy. Misguided because they really are about allowing political considerations to influence monetary policy decisions. This would be a tremendous mistake because it would ultimately lead to poorer economic performance. I strongly believe that the Federal Reserve’s independence in setting monetary policy is worth preserving.

Comments on “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future,” by James D. Hamilton, Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2015 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum Sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business New York, NY February 27, 2015 1 Introduction It is a real pleasure for me to participate in this year’s Monetary Policy Forum. As an attendee of this event for the past several years, I have been very impressed with the organizers’ ability to choose a year in advance the topic that turns out to be the issue policymakers are grappling with at the time the forum rolls around. Once again, the organizers have been able to do this, with the important paper by Jim Hamilton, Ethan Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Ken West. Another example of the value of being forward looking when it comes to monetary policy! In the time I have, I will discuss some of the highlights of the paper – some of which the authors have laid out as “lessons learned” from history. I’ll focus on measurement and implications for policy. Taking their lead, I’ll present five of my own lessons spurred by reading their interesting paper. Of course, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Measurement The authors have done a very good job of examining the question, “Is there a new neutral or equilibrium real federal funds rate?” This is a deceptively simple question that hits on bigger issues such as whether the U.S. has drifted into “secular stagnation” and what the implications for monetary policy normalization are. The first part of the paper is a thorough analysis of what the historical data and record can tell us. The authors have amassed an impressive data set on 21 countries, with annual data in some cases going back to 1858 and quarterly data back to 1958. Where the data are available, the authors use the discount rate set by the central bank as the interest rate of interest; in some cases, they have spliced together series. For example, in the U.S. for the annual dataset they use the discount rate over 1914-1953 and the average fed 2 funds rate during the last month of the year from 1954 to present. As anyone who has put together data sets for research knows, this effort is not trivial. Of course before the empirical analysis can commence, it is important to understand what is meant by the “equilibrium federal funds rate” or more generally, the “equilibrium policy rate.” It is a fuzzy concept. There are several definitions in the literature. Moreover, several different terms in the literature, such as the equilibrium rate of interest, natural rate of interest, and neutral rate of interest, refer to the same object. The paper’s definition is one that many economists use: the equilibrium real rate, r*, is that level of the policy rate that is consistent with full employment and stable inflation in the medium term. Sometimes instead of full employment a zero output gap or growth at potential is used. Presumably the stable inflation rate referred to is the policymakers’ target inflation rate. What’s undefined here is the meaning of “medium term.” This r* is an important concept in monetary policy as it gives one a way to think about the degree of policy accommodation. For example, in a Taylor rule, * ( *) ( *),t t t y t ti r y y           the equilibrium real rate, r*, is the intercept term. If inflation is at the target, π* (which in the case of the U.S. is 2 percent) and output, yt, is at potential, yt*, then the Taylor rule prescribes setting the real policy rate at r*. A real policy rate below r* would be considered accommodative; above would be considered tight. The big issue is that the equilibrium real rate, r*, is unobserved. Incidentally, so are the level of potential output and the natural rate of unemployment, which loom large in monetary policy discussions. The fact 3 that r* is unobserved has been recognized by many economists over many decades. The authors explore several time-series approaches to estimating the real rate. One approach is to estimate the real rate using averages over a cycle or longer of estimates of the ex ante real rate, defined as the nominal interest rate minus expected inflation, rt = it − πt exp. If policymakers are setting the nominal interest rate, so that on average, the output gap (or unemployment gap) is zero, inflation is equal to target, and expected inflation is equal to target, then the ex ante real interest rate will equal the equilibrium real rate as defined by the authors. To see this, suppose policymakers are following a simple Taylor rule, then: exp exp exp Ex ante real rate: Taylor rule: * ( *) ( *) * ( *) ( *) If, on average: *, *, and * Then, t t t t t t y t t t t t y t t t t t t t ri i r y y r r y y yy                                     on average: *trr The authors’ empirical investigation indicates that estimates of the ex ante real rate have varied considerably over time. They show that the correlations between estimates of the ex ante real rate and output growth vary over the sample period and are sensitive to the time period examined and countries included. They also include a narrative review of the history of the U.S. ex ante real rate. This is interesting because it points out some of the factors that theory tells us might influence the real rate of interest. Based on this analysis, drawing on the connection between the ex ante real rate and the equilibrium rate, the authors conclude that it would be a mistake to estimate the equilibrium rate using long historical averages (this is their history lesson 2). 4 It is hard to dispute this and I don’t find it surprising. Indeed, Wicksell, in his seminal work Interest and Prices, says: “The natural rate is not fixed or unalterable in magnitude...In general, we may say, it depends on the efficiency of production, on the available amount of fixed and liquid capital, on the supply of labour and land, in short on all the thousand and one things which determine the current economic position of a community; and with them it constantly fluctuates.” Knut Wicksell, Interest and Prices, 1898, p. 106 Which brings me to my first lesson from the paper: Lesson 1. The equilibrium real interest rate is an equilibrium concept. As such, it will vary with conditions that affect the demand for investment and the supply of savings. Because of this, it is difficult to estimate the equilibrium real rate using statistical approaches. Averaging real interest rates to estimate the equilibrium rate assumes that, on average, the real rate equals the equilibrium rate; that is, on average inflation and inflation expectations are at goal and output is at potential. But computing the average for a sample period for which this isn’t the case will yield biased estimates. For example, a sample period dominated by the 1970s in the U.S. would underestimate the equilibrium real rate since it was a period of rising inflation and growth above potential, implying the actual real rate was below the equilibrium real rate. Several other problems in estimating the equilibrium real rate, especially in real time, are discussed by Clark and Kozicki (2005) and Wu (2005). For example, using a filter, like the Kalman filter, to extract the trend based on a model such as the one in Laubach and Williams (2003) runs into problems. If we want to estimate the equilibrium rate today, we can use historical data, but we have no data on what will happen tomorrow. We face a one-sided filtering problem. As we step through time, we will have data beyond today which can be brought to bear in estimating today’s equilibrium rate, and that estimate could look quite a bit different from today’s estimate based only on data up to today. You can see the size of such discrepancies in Exhibit 1. 5 We should also keep in mind the data revisions that occur over time in some of the important macroeconomic variables such as output and PCE inflation. The authors of the current paper are using final revised data for their estimations, but the more recent data will be undergoing further revisions. These data revisions make it difficult to estimate the real rate in real time, adding another source of uncertainty to estimates. Clark and Kozicki (2005) show that the data revisions, as well as filtering, can lead to sizable revisions in estimates of the real rate. This measurement issue is related to the discussion of secular stagnation. As the authors suggest, we have to be careful in making inferences from the time series. For example, as shown in Exhibit 2, if we look at the authors’ chart of the ex ante real rate, we see a decline in recent years. We might be tempted to extrapolate that decline and conclude that we will experience a lower real rate and lower potential growth in the future – that is, secular stagnation. But we saw a similar decline of the ex ante real rate in the 1930s and 1940s, yet potential growth moved up in the 1950s and 1960s. This discussion of the issues that arise when using a purely statistical approach leads me to a second lesson: Lesson 2. Since the equilibrium real rate is endogenous, a theoretical model (or models) should be brought to bear to better understand the factors that will influence supply and demand and, therefore, the equilibrium rate. The natural rate in a DSGE model would be a good yardstick for evaluating the stance of monetary policy. I find dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) models helpful in thinking about the economy. Not because they necessarily produce the best economic forecasts but because they provide an organized way to examine certain policy questions owing to their structural nature. Because they are structural models, they are a tool for better understanding the general equilibrium aspects of the economy. In contrast to reduced-form models, they build up from micro foundations, specifying agents’ objectives and constraints. And because agents are forward looking, expectations of future economic conditions and 6 policy play a key role in determining economic outcomes. These expectations are endogenous and help determine agents’ decisions today, and therefore current economic outcomes. The models are stochastic in nature and economic shocks to supply and demand – e.g., changes in productivity, changes to the price of oil, changes to the rate of time preference, changes to the efficiency of financial intermediation – will generate economic fluctuations. Another important ingredient in the models is the presence of nominal rigidities – firms are price and wage setters, but are assumed not to be able to adjust prices instantaneously in response to a shock. So prices and wages exhibit some stickiness. Within the context of a New Keynesian DSGE model, the equilibrium real rate of interest, or natural rate of interest, is that interest rate that keeps the economy’s output at the level that would prevail if all wages and prices were flexible and in the absence of shocks to wage markups, price markups, technology, and preferences. In much of the DSGE literature, this level of output is called the efficient level of output, and it corresponds to the concept of the potential level of output in other models. It is this equilibrium rate that provides a metric for measuring the stance of monetary policy in a DSGE model (see Barsky, Justiniano, and Melosi, 2014). While the definition of the equilibrium rate in the DSGE model abstracts from some shocks, the economy is subject to a large number of other types of shocks. So this theoretical approach suggests that the equilibrium real rate should vary over time. Moreover, the equilibrium rate is likely to be more variable than the estimates derived from statistical trends, since the theoretical concept of efficient output is more variable than the statistical concept of potential output derived from a trend in the output data. Thus, I agree with the authors’ basic premise that the equilibrium rate should move with the economy. But I get there via a somewhat different route. 7 While the DSGE or other structural models provide a conceptual advance, we do not have a definitive model. Models vary with respect to the types of shocks and number of sectors incorporated. Estimates of the equilibrium rate will be model dependent. Hence, the uncertainty uncovered by the authors using the statistical approach is not resolved in this model-based approach. Implications for Monetary Policy After documenting the large amount of uncertainty around estimates of the equilibrium real rate, the authors then turn to the implications for monetary policy – as a general proposition and for current policy. The authors make a compelling case using simulations of the Fed’s FRB/US model that when the central bank is uncertain about r*, incorporating inertia into the policy rule it would use if r* were certain, i.e., basing the current policy rate prescription less on the uncertain measure of the equilibrium real rate and more on the past level of the policy rate, can lead to lower economic losses. As the authors point out, this result is consistent with work by Orphanides and Williams (2002, 2007) and others in the literature that shows that over-reliance on mismeasured objects such as output gaps, unemployment gaps, or equilibrium real rates can lead to poor policy decisions that induce undesirable fluctuations in the economy. Inertial policies can reduce the direct effect of the mismeasurement of r*, but they can also carry forward the policy errors generated by mismeasurement of the output gap. So it is not a given that inertia is always better; it will depend on the degree of mismeasurement and the structure of the model economy used in the analysis. This leads me to a third lesson: Lesson 3. Mismeasurement may be one reason to favor more inertial policy rules, but there are others, including the zero lower bound. 8 For example, Reifschneider and Williams (2000) show that when the policymaker has perfect credibility, then augmenting a baseline rule to incorporate a response to periods in which the rule had been constrained by the zero lower bound can reduce the bad effects of the zero bound. This would have the impact of delaying an increase in the policy rate from the zero lower bound. In Exhibit 3 I show this type of augmentation using the simple Taylor 1993 rule as the base rule. (Note, I chose Taylor 1993 for illustrative purposes and because it is simple and well known, not because I believe policy should necessarily follow this particular rule.) The top panel illustrates the rule for r* = 2 and the bottom panel for r* = 1.5. In both cases, the rules suggest a liftoff but one that is delayed from what the standard Taylor rule indicates. The longer the zero lower bound has been binding, the longer the delay. Essentially, the rule keeps the funds rate unusually low for a period of time immediately after an episode of zero interest rates; that is, it incorporates a Woodford (2012) period. While I find the authors make a plausible case for using more inertial rules when r* is measured with error, I find their conclusions for current policy less salient. In exercises such as this, one must generate a baseline from which to measure differences. The authors assume that Fed policymakers are using the Taylor (1999) rule, so their conclusions about the exact timing of liftoff are contingent on that assumption. Which brings me to my fourth lesson: Lesson 4. “More inertia” is a relative statement. Other factors argue against being too inert. These include less than perfect commitment and communication, (unmodeled) implications for financial stability, and uncertainty aversion. 9 The results on inertia depend on agents understanding the policymaker’s reaction function and the policymaker being committed to following that reaction function. If the policymaker hasn’t effectively communicated and the public doesn’t understand the reason for the central bank’s policy path, a delay in liftoff with steeper path after liftoff may be misinterpreted. The public might believe that central bankers are holding rates low for longer because they have a gloomy outlook; this would not necessarily yield better economic outcomes. In addition, while I am a firm proponent of using models to inform our policy decisions, there is some bias in the models. Our typical models can give us a pretty good sense of the employment and inflation costs of lifting off sooner rather than later. But they are less likely to be able to quantify the costs of waiting too long. For example, our models aren’t well enough developed to allow us to quantify the risks to financial stability of holding rates at zero for a long time, yet the crisis showed us that financial instability comes with a very high cost. The results on inertia also depend on how policymakers react to the uncertainty they encounter. In the paper, policymakers make policy decisions assuming a particular value of r* in their policy rule. If it turns out that that measure is incorrect, then there are economic losses. The authors show that a policy rule that incorporates inertia can lead to lower losses based on a quadratic loss function. But the world and decision making are more complicated than that. Policymakers know they don’t know the precise value of r*. Rather than a point distribution, they have beliefs over the value of r*. Only if their beliefs are described by a single distribution and the world is described by a linear-quadratic model would they base decisions on the mean of that distribution. Instead, if policymakers are aware of their own uncertainty about their models and data, and they are averse to uncertainty, then inertia need not be optimal. Giannoni (2002, 2007) shows that with forward-looking agents, if there is model uncertainty, then uncertainty-averse policymakers will follow a min-max strategy that aims to minimize the costs of 10 worst-case scenarios. Their optimal policy rule will react more strongly to fluctuations in inflation and the output gap than if there were no uncertainty. Policymakers would put more weight on stabilizing inflation and the output gap and less weight on stabilizing the nominal interest rate. This brings me to my final lesson: Lesson 5. Implications for the timing of liftoff depend on the rule adopted. A difference rule is an alternative to inertia for handling mismeasured levels of the equilibrium real rate and the natural rate of unemployment. The policy path from such a rule differs from that of the inertial rule. A difference rule, such as those suggested by Orphanides and Williams (2002), would allow the policymaker to avoid having to estimate natural rates of interest or unemployment. As seen in the top panel of Exhibit 4, where the red line is a smoothed version of the difference rule, such a rule would have avoided the mistakes of the 1970s, when policymakers kept the policy rate too low. The bottom panel zooms in on the current period. Such a rule would call for higher interest rates today. To conclude, I really appreciate the opportunity to comment on this fine paper. I recommend that everyone read it. The authors have provided a lot of food for thought. I have discussed five lessons I drew from their paper, but their work also underscores the importance of remembering what we don’t know and of remaining humble when it comes to setting monetary policy. 11 References Barsky, Robert, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi, “The Natural Rate and its Usefulness for Monetary Policy Making,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 104, May 2014, pp. 37- 43. Clark, Todd E., and Sharon Kozicki, “Estimating Equilibrium Real Interest Rates in Real Time,” North American Journal of Economics and Finance 16, 2005, pp. 395-413. Giannoni, Marc P., “Does Model Uncertainty Justify Caution? Robust Optimal Monetary Policy in a Forward-Looking Model,” Macroeconomic Dynamics 6, 2002, pp. 111-141. Giannoni, Marc P., “Robust Optimal Monetary Policy in a Forward-Looking Model with Parameter and Shock Uncertainty,” Journal of Applied Econometrics 22, 2007, pp. 179-213. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams, “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest.” Review of Economics and Statistics 85, 2003, pp. 1063-1070. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, “Robust Monetary Policy with Imperfect Knowledge,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 2007, pp. 1406-1435. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams, “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 2002, pp. 63-145. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams, “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, November 2000, Part 2, pp. 936-966. Taylor, John B., “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39, 1993, pp. 195-214. Taylor, John B., “A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules,” in J.B. Taylor, ed., Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999, pp. 319-341. Wicksell, Knut, Interest and Prices, 1898. Woodford, Michael, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 2012 Economic Policy Symposium, The Changing Policy Landscape. Wu, Tao, “Estimating the ‘Neutral’ Real Interest Rate in Real Time,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Economic Letter, No. 2005-27, October 21, 2005. 12 Exhibit 1 Source: Figure 3 from Tao Wu, “Estimating the ‘Neutral’ Real Interest Rate in Real Time,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Economic Letter, No. 2005-27, October 21, 2005. Source: Figure 3 p. 407: Todd E. Clark and Sharon Kozicki, “Estimating Equilibrium Real Interest Rates in Real Time,” North American Journal of Economics and Finance 16, 2005, pp. 395-413. 13 Exhibit 2 Source: J.D. Hamilton, E.S. Harris, J. Hatzius, and K.D. West, “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future,” February 2015. Real Potential Gross Domestic Product {CBO} % Change - Year to Year SAAR, Bil.Chn.2009$ 25201510050095908580757065605550 Source: Congressional Budget Office /Haver Analytics 5.25 4.50 3.75 3.00 2.25 1.50 0.75 5.25 4.50 3.75 3.00 2.25 1.50 0.75 14 Percent Percent r* = 2 r* = 1.5 Exhibit 3 Zero Lower Bound Adjusted Rule Base rule is Taylor 1993 rule: * 0.5( 2) 0.5( *)core avg t t t t t CBOi r y y       Source: David Reifschneider and John C. Williams, “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low- Inflation Era,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32, November 2000, Part 2, pp. 936-966. Author’s calculations -2.0 -1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 2000Q1 2001Q1 2002Q1 2003Q1 2004Q1 2005Q1 2006Q1 2007Q1 2008Q1 2009Q1 2010Q1 2011Q1 2012Q1 2013Q1 2014Q1 2015Q1 Fed Funds Taylor Rule 1993 Reif-Wms Alpha=0.25 -3.0 -2.0 -1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 2000Q1 2001Q1 2002Q1 2003Q1 2004Q1 2005Q1 2006Q1 2007Q1 2008Q1 2009Q1 2010Q1 2011Q1 2012Q1 2013Q1 2014Q1 2015Q1 Fed Funds Taylor Rule 1993 Reif-Wms Alpha=0.25 15 Exhibit 4 Difference Rule 11 1.3( 2) 7.8( )core avg t t t t ti i u u      and 4-quarter moving average of this rule Percent Percent Source: Athanasios Orphanides and John C. Williams, “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 2002, pp. 63-145. Author’s calculations -12.0 -10.0 -8.0 -6.0 -4.0 -2.0 0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 10.0 12.0 14.0 16.0 18.0 20.0 22.0 24.0 26.0 28.0 1960Q11961Q11962Q11963Q1 1964Q11965Q1 1966Q11967Q11968Q11969Q11970Q11971Q11972Q11973Q11974Q1 1975Q11976Q1 1977Q11978Q11979Q11980Q11981Q11982Q11983Q11984Q11985Q1 1986Q11987Q1 1988Q11989Q11990Q11991Q11992Q11993Q11994Q11995Q11996Q11997Q11998Q1 1999Q12000Q12001Q12002Q12003Q12004Q12005Q12006Q12007Q12008Q12009Q1 2010Q12011Q12012Q12013Q12014Q1 Fed Funds Rate Orphanides-Williams Robust Difference Rule MA of Orphanides- Williams -12.0 -10.0 -8.0 -6.0 -4.0 -2.0 0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 8.0 2000Q1 2001Q1 2002Q1 2003Q1 2004Q1 2005Q1 2006Q1 2007Q1 2008Q1 2009Q1 2010Q1 2011Q1 2012Q1 2013Q1 2014Q1 Fed Funds Rate Orphanides-Williams Robust Difference Rule MA of Orphanides- Williams
