Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Grand Forks, ND Watch the event livestream here from 5:30-6:30 pm CST. September 25, 2017 | 5:30 p.m. CT Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Grand Forks, ND | Gorecki Alumni Center, University of North Dakota Grand Forks , North Dakota Neel Kashkari President and CEO Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Grand Forks, ND Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Do you have a question about how the Federal Reserve affects you? Wondering about economic disparities, regulating big banks, or the Fed's recent interest rate decisions? Curious about how the Minneapolis Fed gathers data and informs its work within the Federal Reserve System? Join us for a conversation with Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari on these topics and more in Grand Forks, ND on September 25 at 5:30 pm. President Kashkari is a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, where the Fed sets interest rates. Since taking over as President of the Minneapolis Fed in January 2016, he has spearheaded several new initiatives, including releasing a plan to end the "Too Big to Fail" problem and launching the Federal Reserve's new Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, housed at the Minneapolis Fed. This event is part of the University of North Dakota's "Eye of the Hawk" lecture series. President Kashkari will give brief remarks, followed by an open-mic Q&A with the audience moderated by University President Mark Kennedy. This town hall forum with President Kashkari was a public event and discussion held in Grand Forks, North Dakota on September 25, 2017 . Video: Event in full Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Tribal Community Perspectives on Higher Education Remarks given at the Tribal Community Perspectives on Higher Education Conference September 27, 2017 | 8:15 a.m. CT Tribal Community Perspectives on Higher Education Conference | Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Minneapolis , Minnesota Neel Kashkari President and CEO Tribal Community Perspectives on Higher Education Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Thank you, Dick. About a year ago, I had the pleasure of welcoming a national audience to the Center for Indian Country Development’s Conference on Early Childhood Development in Indian Country. Today I’m pleased to welcome a new national audience to another CICD conference on education, this time on higher education. The CICD and I both see education as potentially a great equalizer in our society. A child born into poverty who receives a good education can climb out of poverty and reach his or her full potential. But the real power of education, even beyond transforming an individual’s life, is that it also breaks the cycle of intergenerational poverty that continues to devastate so many families and communities. In that sense, this conference’s focus on a community perspective is wise and important. I’ll come back to the topic of education, but let me first give you some background on the Federal Reserve System and the work of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. As part of that, I should note that the views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System. The Federal Reserve System, or the Fed, is a public institution serving the American people. We are the nation’s central bank. Our most fundamental responsibility is monetary policy in pursuit of two objectives—maximum employment and stable prices, the so-called dual mandate that Congress has established for the Fed. The Fed also has been given significant authority as supervisor of financial institutions and as a provider of payments services. All of these activities are common to many central banks around the world. What makes the Fed different, and what brings us together in Minneapolis today, is the Fed’s decentralized structure. One hundred four years ago, Congress created the Federal Reserve, our nation’s central bank. But they did something unique: They distributed the central bank across 12 regional, independent Federal Reserve Banks, rather than having it all housed at the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. Congress did this to ensure that different regions of the country were directly represented in economic policymaking and so that the many local varying conditions across the United States were appropriately considered. That’s why we have a Federal Reserve Bank in Minneapolis—to understand and represent the economic conditions in our region, which we call the Ninth Federal Reserve District. The Minneapolis Fed’s charge has always included a responsibility for understanding the economies of the 45 federally recognized Indian tribes in the Ninth District. To leverage our decades of experience with tribal communities, we established the CICD in 2015 as a national resource and thought leader within the Federal Reserve System on Indian Country issues across the entire country. That’s why today’s conference deals with tribal communities generally, not just those in the Ninth District. You may wonder, however, what does education have to do with the Fed? It comes back to our dual mandate of stable prices and maximum employment. Education is clearly a key determinant of employment outcomes and the economy’s maximum rate of growth. People who receive more and better education tend to have more job options and lower unemployment, and they are more productive workers. It is vital that we understand education if we want to understand the drivers of maximum employment. And while the Federal Reserve may not have policy tools that can directly affect education, we do have world-class independent research capabilities that might be able to help. We have researchers in the Federal Reserve studying productivity growth that we, as our nation’s central bank, cannot directly influence. Similarly, if the Fed can objectively analyze education models that can help more Americans get and keep good jobs, I believe it is important we do that research and share our findings with other policymakers. This research may help us achieve maximum employment nationally and in places, such as many tribal communities, where underemployment has been a persistent problem. I also bring a personal belief in the transformative power of education and the importance of providing a good education to all children. I’m a middle-class kid, the son of immigrants, who has lived the American dream simply because he was able to get a good education at a mixture of public and private schools and universities. It is essential to America’s future that the opportunities for quality education that I took advantage of are available to all of our youth on an equitable basis. Today, however, we see large gaps in educational outcomes by race. This conference will focus on higher education outcomes for American Indians and Alaska Natives. Their outcomes have improved in recent decades, but remain too far below those of, for example, non-Hispanic whites. In many ways, the American higher education system is the envy of the world, and I and many others have benefited from its array of choices and high quality. However, we must know more about why a system that works well for so many simultaneously leaves behind far too many American Indians, Alaska Natives and other minority or low-income youth. I want to know what you, here at this conference, think about the factors behind these persistent gaps and how we can eliminate them. My own thinking about education policy has focused on how our K-12 education system prepares young people for college, and I know you will be discussing that today too. I hold three strong views on the American K-12 education system. First, notwithstanding the good education that many American youth receive, the persistent racial, ethnic and socioeconomic achievement gaps are flat-out unacceptable. Second, because these gaps are unacceptable, we must act boldly and decisively to eliminate them. And I mean eliminate them, not just chip away at them. My own judgment, based on evidence to date, is that a combination of greater choice and greater accountability is critical to eliminating these gaps, as I argued in a speech at the Federal Reserve System’s Strong Foundations conference last March. But I have an open mind, consistent with my third strongly held view, that we need to devote more resources to detailed, hard-headed research on what really works in K-12 education. Let me close by illustrating some of what I find unacceptable today and discussing what the Minneapolis Fed is doing about it. Here is a chart, based on a decade of data from the Kids Count website, of the on-time graduation rates for Minnesota and Wisconsin high school students from three racial groups. Near the top of the chart, in the dotted orange line, you see that over 90 percent of non-Hispanic white students graduate on time in Wisconsin. The comparable rate in Minnesota, shown by the solid orange line, is only slightly lower. The green lines show that graduation rates for African Americans are much lower in both states, typically between 60 percent and 70 percent. This is already unacceptable and in need of research and evidence-based action. But look at the rates for American Indians, shown in the black lines. Wisconsin’s American Indian graduation rates are also unacceptably lower than for non-Hispanic whites. In Minnesota, however, they are not only far lower than for whites, but also far lower than for American Indians in Wisconsin or African Americans in either state. The enormous gap in graduation rates between American Indians and non-Hispanic whites in Minnesota is absolutely unacceptable. The corresponding gap in Wisconsin is much smaller, and we cannot explain that away by saying that Wisconsin’s graduation standards are systematically different, given that outcomes for whites and African Americans do not diverge much between the two states. An alternative explanation—that the data themselves are of poor quality and cannot be trusted—also would be unacceptable; we simply must have accurate measures of essential outcomes like high school graduation rates. In short, something is just not OK here, and something needs to be done. The Minneapolis Fed will not ignore these issues. Our approach will be to determine the causes of unacceptable gaps and then propose evidence-based solutions. To that end, we founded the Center for Indian Country Development, your conference organizer, in 2015. This year, we launched the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute. The mission of the institute is to conduct and promote research that will increase economic opportunity and inclusive growth for all Americans and help the Federal Reserve achieve its maximum employment mandate. The institute uses a multidisciplinary approach that includes the participation of leading academics from a variety of fields, including economics, education, law, public health, public policy and sociology. It is guided by a world-class Advisory Board that helps identify promising research topics and operates mainly by sponsoring research and dialogue. Specific components include a Visiting Scholar program, a series of research conferences and the publication of working papers. Detailed information about all of these, including our October 26 conference on segregation and inequality, is on our website at minneapolisfed.org. If you are a scholar working on issues of economic opportunity and inclusive growth, we want you, so please check out the website. I tell my staff here to think boldly and strive for big, transformational improvements. In your conference today, I encourage you to do the same. Look at the higher educational outcomes in your community. If you see evidence of the big gaps, like those for high school graduation rates in Minnesota, I hope you also will see the need for decisive action and improvement. One thing I learned in battling the 2008 financial crisis is that you can’t tackle a crisis with incremental measures. Tackling a crisis requires overwhelming force, so think boldly and in terms of not just reforming but rather of transforming your education system. I believe an education system that fails large numbers of our youth is a crisis, and it demands a crisis response. This is urgent work. Your communities and our nation cannot afford to shortchange the current generation of American Indian and Alaska Native students, let alone future generations. I promise you that as you seek the solutions that will work for you, I and my staff at the Bank and the Center for Indian Country Development will continue to support you through research, outreach and convenings like this. I am excited to be part of this conference and look forward to meeting and talking with you. Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

My Take on Inflation October 2, 2017 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO My Take on Inflation Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This essay is also available on Medium . Members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) 1 are trying to understand why inflation and wage growth are low, despite the headline unemployment rate having fallen from a peak of 10 percent during the Great Recession to 4.4 percent today. We would have expected a strong job market to lead to stronger wage growth and then higher inflation as businesses passed their increased costs on to customers. Yet that hasn’t happened. Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen offered her thoughts on this topic in a speech last week, and I appreciate her raising this discussion publicly. I draw somewhat different policy conclusions than she did, but I agree that this is an important issue that needs more analysis before we can have confidence in our understanding of why inflation is low. The following chart shows the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) measure of inflation, both headline and core, since 2006. Inflation has been consistently below our 2 percent target over the past five years and, perhaps even more surprisingly, has actually fallen this year. I believe the most likely causes of persistently low inflation are additional domestic labor market slack and falling inflation expectations. This essay will explore the causes of the latter, falling inflation expectations, and I will argue that the FOMC’s policy to remove monetary accommodation over the past few years is likely an important factor driving inflation expectations lower. This is not meant to be a criticism of the FOMC’s prior decisions. As I will explain below, we now know that policy was tighter and there was more slack in the labor market than the Committee realized at the time it started removing accommodation. The purpose of this essay is to argue that we should learn the lessons of recent years and proceed with caution before we tighten policy further. If one accepts the conventional view of how monetary policy affects the economy, one must concede that job growth, wage growth and inflation are all somewhat lower than they would have been had the FOMC not removed accommodation over the past three years. In addition, allowing inflation expectations to slip will give us less room to reduce interest rates in response to a future economic downturn because we will hit the effective lower bound more often than if we had preserved expectations at our 2 percent target. Monetary policy primarily works through expectations When people borrow money to buy a house, or businesses take out a loan to build a new factory, they don’t really care about overnight interest rates. They care about what interest rates will be for the term of their loan: 5, 10 or even 30 years. Similarly, when banks make loans to households and businesses, they also try to assess where interest rates will be over the length of the loan when they set the terms. Hence, expectations about future interest rates are enormously important to the economy. When the Fed wants to stimulate more economic activity, we do that by trying to lower the expected future path of interest rates. When we want to tap the brakes, we try to raise the expected future path of interest rates. Three monetary policy tools The primary tool the FOMC uses to set monetary policy is the federal funds rate (FFR), which is an overnight rate. I said earlier that borrowers and bankers don’t care too much about overnight rates, so why would adjustments of the FFR affect the economy? The answer is primarily through expectations about future interest rates. If the FOMC raises the FFR, it is a signal that rates will likely be higher in the future. If the FOMC lowers the FFR, it sends a message that rates will likely be lower. The second tool the FOMC uses to set monetary policy is forward guidance. Through our policy statement that we release after every FOMC meeting and through our quarterly Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), we give indications to the public about how we think the economy is likely to perform in the future and the likely path for interest rates. During the Great Recession, once overnight interest rates were effectively lowered to zero, the FOMC provided forward guidance that rates would likely stay low for a long period of time. That forward guidance gave households, businesses and bankers confidence that interest rates would be low for longer and thus, we believe, stimulated more economic activity than had the Committee not provided that guidance. The third tool the FOMC used in the aftermath of the Great Recession to affect monetary policy was quantitative easing (QE), or using the Fed’s balance sheet. Once the FFR was effectively at zero, the Fed embarked on its QE programs to directly drive longer-term interest rates down by buying longer-term bonds. One of the channels through which QE affects the economy is also expectations—by further signaling the FOMC’s commitment to stimulating the economy through accommodative monetary policy. Inflation expectations started falling in 2014 Inflation expectations held up remarkably well during the Great Recession—despite 10 percent unemployment and a terrible financial crisis. I credit the Federal Reserve’s policy responses with keeping inflation expectations anchored and preventing the U.S. economy from falling into a terrible deflationary spiral. But as you can see in the following chart, inflation expectations—as indicated by both market-based measures and the Michigan survey of consumers—did begin to fall in early 2014 soon after the FOMC began to remove monetary accommodation. The actual policy change of tapering QE began in December 2013, while then Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke began discussing the taper in May 2013. Removing accommodation is a form of tightening People have asked me: How can you argue that the Fed is slowing down the economy with interest rates still low relative to historical norms? My answer is that the economy would likely have performed better had the Fed not removed accommodation. In my view, the FOMC has taken three types of actions to tighten monetary policy in the following chronological order: Ending QE. I described earlier how QE affects the economy by driving down longer-term interest rates and through signaling a commitment to maintaining accommodative monetary policy in the future. When the Fed began discussing tapering QE in mid-2013, it effectively began the process of removing accommodation by significantly changing expectations of further QE. And once the taper was complete and the Fed’s balance sheet was fixed at $4.5 trillion, its stimulative effects began to shrink, albeit slowly, relative to the growing U.S. economy. In addition, the end of QE also signaled an end of the commitment of the FOMC to use extraordinary measures to support economic activity at that time. That also would likely have a contractionary effect on the economy through expectations of tighter monetary policy. Hawkish forward guidance. For several years, the FOMC, through its SEP, put forward rate paths that were very aggressive compared with what the economy ended up needing (and even higher than what markets had been expecting at the time). For example, in December 2014, the SEP set the expectation that by December 2016, the FFR would be at 2.50 percent, when, in fact, the FFR ended up at only around 0.6 percent. With the benefit of hindsight, this guidance ended up being far too hawkish and likely had a somewhat contractionary effect on economic activity by signaling significantly higher interest rates in the future. Four rate hikes. The FOMC began actually raising the FFR in December 2015 and followed up with three more hikes through June 2017, despite muted wage and inflationary pressures. The signal from this activity suggests a strong desire to raise rates, even with an absence of inflationary pressures. We know that monetary policy operates with a lag. I believe these actions to remove various forms of accommodation are now having an effect on the economy by lowering inflation expectations. In my view, inflation expectations declined because actual inflation was below target for a long time, and the Fed’s actions to reduce accommodation led to a weakening of confidence that it was serious about bringing inflation back to target in a reasonable time frame. Reassessing neutral I just argued that FOMC policy over the past few years has likely led to falling inflation expectations and somewhat slower job growth, wage growth and inflation. Why did the FOMC remove accommodation during this time? I believe it is because the Committee thought it was providing more stimulus than it actually was. Members of the FOMC (including me) now believe that both the neutral real interest rate (the interest rate that neither stimulates nor contracts the economy) and the natural rate of unemployment (the rate that represents maximum employment) are lower than we had realized in prior years. The Committee has been gradually lowering its estimates for both over time. Here is a chart showing how the median FOMC participants’ estimates of the long-run FFR and maximum employment have changed. The implication of these revisions, admittedly with the benefit of hindsight, is that monetary policy was less accommodative than we previously thought. And over the past five years, we have overestimated inflation and underestimated how long it would take to return to our 2 percent target. I believe it is also important to note that even if the short-term policy rate is set at a lower level than the neutral short-term interest rate, overall monetary policy might not be accommodative if the Federal Reserve is simultaneously setting expectations for higher rates in the future. What might be wrong with my analysis? A number of explanations for low inflation have been offered by economists and policymakers, including: (1) transitory factors (which essentially mean one-offs that don’t signal an underlying trend), (2) technology development that is driving production costs lower, (3) a global supply of labor that is keeping U.S. wages down, (4) additional domestic labor supply that is not captured by the headline unemployment rate and (5) falling inflation expectations. It is important to note that many advanced economies have been experiencing low inflation in recent years. It is not simply a U.S. experience. This is important because any explanation for low inflation ought to be able to explain what is happening around the world. This suggests that the transitory factors explanation, such as falling cell phone service pricing in the United States, is not likely a good explanation for consistently low inflation in Europe. Ongoing technology development is not a new phenomenon, nor is a large group of workers, from China for example, entering the global labor market. So I struggle to see how those factors can explain the recent low inflation. In addition, productivity in advanced economies has been low for some time. It is hard to reconcile low productivity growth with a burst of new technology that is keeping prices low. So how does my story of FOMC tightening explain low advanced-economy inflation? While advanced-economy central banks are not formally coordinating policy, they do tend to move in the same direction. The Fed, European Central Bank and Bank of England all pursued very low interest rates, hitting their own effective lower bounds at roughly the same time. They have also been signaling a desire to remove accommodation and return to more normal policy. Another important issue some people point to is that financial conditions as measured by various indexes have strengthened as the FOMC has removed accommodation. Some suggest this indicates that the FOMC has not in fact removed accommodation during this time. I don’t find this argument compelling. I believe that the apparent easier financial conditions are likely a reflection of the market’s own recognition that equilibrium long-term real rates have fallen. A lower future interest rate environment could justify higher asset prices and seemingly easier financial conditions today by virtue of markets’ discounting cash flows with a lower interest rate. Finally, some argue that inflation expectations haven’t fallen, pointing to the Survey of Professional Forecasters, where inflation expectations have been solidly anchored at the Fed’s 2 percent target for years. I don’t find this survey as compelling as the data I referenced above because it is limited to a very small set of forecasters. We need to understand the expectations underlying millions of individual wage negotiations between employees and employers, which I believe are better captured by broader measures. Implications for future monetary policy If I am correct that the Fed’s own actions are an important factor driving surprisingly low inflation and falling inflation expectations, the implication is that our policy should focus on supporting inflation to ensure that we are on track to return to our 2 percent target. My preference would be not to raise rates again until we actually hit 2 percent core PCE inflation on a 12-month basis, unless we have seen a large drop in the headline unemployment rate signaling that we have used up remaining labor market slack, or a surprise increase in inflation expectations. Of the five possible explanations I mentioned for low inflation, four of them (global labor supply, technology development, more domestic labor slack and falling inflation expectations) all suggest there is no reason to raise rates until we start to see wages and inflation climb back to target. The only explanation that would potentially call for further policy tightening is the transitory factor explanation. But the longer low inflation persists (here and around the world), the more tenuous that story becomes. Job growth, wage growth, inflation and inflation expectations are all likely somewhat lower than they would have been had the FOMC not removed accommodation over the past three years. Allowing inflation expectations to slip further will mean that we will have less powerful tools to respond to a future economic downturn. I believe these are significant costs that we must consider as we contemplate the future path of policy. Endnote 1 These comments are my own and do not necessarily reflect the views of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. More On Inflation Monetary Policy Policy More On Inflation Monetary Policy Policy Related Content Initially delayed, the pass-through of tariffs to consumer prices has arrived Article Inquiring minds: Q&A with Laura Castillo-Martínez Article Regional Economic Indicators Data Related Content Initially delayed, the pass-through of tariffs to consumer prices has arrived Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

StarTribune Op-Ed: We must weed out Minnesota's lousy charter schools Choice and competition should help close the gap. But something's not working. October 18, 2017 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO StarTribune Op-Ed: We must weed out Minnesota's lousy charter schools Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter In February, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis announced a new research initiative , the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, whose mission is to conduct research to inform policies that will improve the economic well-being of all Americans. One of my biggest surprises moving to Minnesota in 2016 was to discover the size of its persistent economic gaps, along both racial and geographic lines. These challenges have been around for a long time and are complex, touching education, housing, health care and finance, among other issues. Our new institute will utilize the Federal Reserve’s research capabilities to try to unravel these important problems. Making progress won’t be easy, but I committed to updating the public as we gained insights and identified policy solutions. This essay is my first such update, focusing on education disparities. On average, Minnesota schools are good, ranking sixth in the nation in reading and third in math. Yet Minnesota has some of the nation’s worst racial disparities in education. To try to close those terrible gaps, Minnesota has embraced various forms of school choice and is the birthplace of charter schools. More choices should be better. But, while it turns out Minnesota has some excellent charter schools, it also has some lousy ones, such that charters in Minnesota perform worse on average than traditional public schools. What’s going on? More choice should lead to more competition, which should lead to better performance. Well, it appears that compared with some other states, Minnesota is far too lenient on its charters, allowing the poor performers to keep operating. This hurts the kids in those schools and masks the good performance of Minnesota’s excellent charters. My conclusion: We need to shut down Minnesota’s failing charter schools in order to allow our good ones to thrive. Let’s start by looking outside Minnesota, where charters are, indeed, helping kids to achieve better academic performance. In New York City in 2016, charter school students performed significantly better on average than students in traditional public schools in both math and English. And, because of that strong performance, those charters were substantially oversubscribed, with three times as many applicants as available seats. The high-performing Success Academy schools were oversubscribed almost 6 to 1. Parents of all backgrounds want a better life for their kids. Sending their kids to good schools is essential to achieving that goal. New York clearly needs more charter capacity to meet demand, but these facts suggest that it is headed in the right direction. Choice, competition and informed parents are leading to better outcomes for New York kids. Now let’s contrast that with what I’ve learned about charters here. A light bulb went on for me while visiting one of Minnesota’s high-performing charter schools, the Hiawatha Academies in south Minneapolis. Students at Hiawatha perform substantially better on average than their traditional public school peers and they are disproportionately minority and low-income. When I asked the executive director, Eli Kramer, “How long is Hiawatha’s waiting list?”, he said there is no waiting list. They have capacity. How can this be? Minnesota has some of the worst education disparities, yet parents aren’t flocking to its high-performing schools. A broader look at the available data on Minnesota’s charters suggest that Hiawatha is not an outlier. The state’s highest-performing charters tend to have unused capacity. Discussions with educators and parents suggest that, given the wide range of quality among Minnesota’s charter schools, it is hard for parents to know which ones are doing well and which are performing poorly. The cost of keeping lousy charters around is twofold: First, obviously, the students in those schools are hurt by attending a poorly performing school. Second, the low average results of Minnesota’s charters are masking the remarkable performance of its good charters, leading to confusion among parents on where to send their kids. If this state were to rigorously and dispassionately assess school performance and then proactively shut down failing charters, it would help parents find better schools for their children, and it would direct state education resources to the schools that are helping kids to succeed. I do believe choice and competition are key ingredients to closing education gaps. But they must be paired with dispassionate accountability to weed out poor performers. Minnesota Nice is hurting the kids who need the most help. The Minneapolis Fed is now looking into the best practices for bringing rigorous accountability to school choice programs, and I will update the public on our findings. Neel Kashkari is president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. See Neel Kashkari's Op-Ed in the StarTribune. More On K-12 Education Monetary Policy Policy More On K-12 Education Monetary Policy Policy Related Content How education transformed opportunity in America Article Inquiring minds: Q&A with Angela Crema Article The Geography of Opportunity: Education, Work, and Intergenerational Mobility Across US Counties Research Related Content How education transformed opportunity in America Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Town Hall with Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari in Winona, Minnesota Open town hall held in Winona on November 27 at 5:30 pm. November 27, 2017 | 5:30 p.m. CT Town Hall with Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari in Winona, Minnesota | East Hall, Kryzsko Commons, Winona State University Winona , Minnesota Neel Kashkari President and CEO Town Hall with Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari in Winona, Minnesota Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Do you have a question about how the Federal Reserve affects you? Wondering about economic disparities, regulating big banks, or the Fed's recent interest rate decisions? Curious about how the Minneapolis Fed gathers data and informs its work within the Federal Reserve System? Join us for a conversation with Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari on these topics and more in Winona, MN on November 27 at 5:30 pm. President Kashkari is a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, where the Fed sets interest rates. Since taking over as President of the Minneapolis Fed in January 2016, he has spearheaded several new initiatives, including releasing a plan to end the "Too Big to Fail" problem and launching the Federal Reserve's new Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, housed at the Minneapolis Fed. President Kashkari will give brief remarks, followed by an open-mic Q&A with the audience moderated by Winona State President Scott Olson. This town hall forum with President Kashkari was a public event and discussion held in Winona, Minnesota on November 27, 2017 . Video: Event in full Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
