1 Confidence, Expectations and Implications for Monetary Policy Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Global Interdependence Center’s Rocky Mountain Economic Summit Victor, Idaho July 11, 2019 Good morning. Thank you very much for inviting me to speak with you today. I’d like to start by telling you a little bit about my background and my perspective. Then I’ll share some thoughts on the economy and the Federal Reserve’s progress on meeting our dual mandate objectives. I’ll close with some comments on the implications for monetary policy. Before I say more, I have to note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System.1 I joined the Richmond Fed last January after a 30-year career in consulting at McKinsey, where I had roles including chief financial officer and leading our offices in the South. I’ve spent my professional life helping firms make decisions about hiring, compensation and prices, and I’ve made a lot of those decisions myself. So I hope I’m bringing a different perspective to the FOMC. My colleagues on the committee are some of the most talented macroeconomists, bankers, academics and financial regulators in the country. But as the only committee member coming from management, I approach things differently. Consumer and Business Confidence One thing I’ve learned, both from my experience in business and from my time at the Fed, is that confidence matters. As a consultant (and as a CFO myself), I saw clearly that confidence was critical for businesses to want to invest and for markets to be willing to finance that investment. Now, I hear the same thing as I meet with business leaders throughout my District. It’s true on the consumer side as well. Common sense suggests—and economists have shown— that confidence is also essential for consumers to spend on big-ticket items. A sudden pullback in their expectations could easily affect consumer spending. -2- I also believe that today confidence is both more important and more volatile than it used to be. Both good and bad news diffuse significantly more quickly and broadly. We surf the news on our phones 10 times (or more!) per day, and the business media is everywhere, even on planes. But more news doesn’t necessarily equate to more confidence. Relative to a few decades ago, consumers are more exposed and therefore more sensitive. They’re more directly invested in the stock market, particularly in index funds that move with the market rather than with company fundamentals. Many households might also still be scarred from the Great Recession; overall, they are saving at rates twice what they did in 2007. In addition, the business reaction function has gotten faster. Short-termism has increased as activism in the market for corporate control has shifted companies’ focus. Just as with consumers, I think firms’ resilience is down. They start with lower confidence—another “hangover” from the Great Recession. At the same time, businesspeople tell me the length of the current upturn makes them nervous that another recession might be right around the corner. The speed of the reaction function may be exacerbated by higher leverage. Corporate debt as a percentage of GDP is at an all-time high. Levered companies—and their creditors—have a bias toward taking action on negative news. This can mean cutting costs, reducing staff or pricing for volume. Taken together, all these factors lead to an asymmetry in which firms are much more cautious about the downside than they are optimistic about the upside. Perhaps both consumers and businesses have a higher bar for spending decisions. It’s possible that some of the tepid recovery from the Great Recession was a self-fulfilling lack of belief in the strength of the economy. Firms’ fear of failure could have prevented them from making investments even in the presence of reasonable returns. -3- This negative tilt, or asymmetry, continues today. Firms are frustrated with political polarization and uncertainty about trade and regulation. This limits their pricing courage and caps the upside on their spending and investment decisions. For these reasons, a drop in confidence could lead to lower investment, lower output and eventually lower employment. If employment is placed at risk, consumption won’t be far behind. And that would place us in more serious difficulty. Put another way, I don’t discount the idea that we could talk ourselves into a recession. Economic Outlook In fact, I think the economy is struggling with confidence today. 2018 was great. The unemployment rate reached historic lows, the economy added an average of more than 220,000 jobs a month, inflation ran for a time at our 2 percent target and GDP growth was stronger than it has been in years. But as we entered 2019, I started to hear a lot of concern. The times were good, but the mood was bad. There were certainly a number of things to be uncertain about, including trade tensions, a slowdown in China, Brexit and market volatility, to name just a few. And especially in the United States: politics. The federal government shutdown hit confidence hard, and I believe this impacted the numbers at the beginning of the year. But the shutdown ended. Brexit was delayed. Trade deals looked to be settling. International economies seemed on the mend. Markets bounced back. Perhaps the FOMC’s shift to a patient stance helped. Accordingly, we saw consumer confidence indices bounce back and that showed up in the consumption data. Consumers still feel confident, have jobs and are willing to spend. But the roller coaster for business confidence continues. Trade tensions have escalated again, and threats of Mexico tariffs hit business confidence hard—how can you manage your supply chain when you don’t know what its cost will be? Mexico may have seen a reprieve most recently, but -4- uncertainty remains around trade talks with the European Union, Japan and, of course, China. And, if tariffs are indeed a tool for a variety of objectives, we will be in a persistently more uncertain place. More broadly, Brexit is back, with the potential to be even messier than we were anticipating. International economies are weakening again. The federal debt ceiling hasn’t been lifted. And, even more than a year out from the next presidential election, I hear business leaders getting nervous about the political noise. All these anxieties have the potential to build. All told, business confidence is fragile, uncertainty is increasing and I’m increasingly concerned about both. If they deteriorate further, that could affect growth, investment, pricing and employment. Inflation In the presence of fragile confidence, what can a central bank do? We can aim to deliver on our mandates for maximum employment and price stability, which in turn create an environment stable for businesses and stable for consumers. In such an environment, few consumers face the risks of job loss and disruption. Low and steady inflation makes tomorrow’s prices uninteresting, so that business as usual can continue today. At present, I think it’s safe to say we are doing well on our employment mandate. Of course, there are still people who want to work who can’t find a job and troubling disparities across racial, ethnic and regional lines—but overall, the labor market is historically strong. With respect to price stability, core PCE inflation has been running persistently below our 2 percent target. To be frank, I’m torn as to how large a concern this presents. On one hand, some of the current low inflation is due to transitory factors, such as changes in the methodology for calculating apparel prices. Part is also due to the first quarter “confidence shock” I discussed, which likely limited firms’ pricing courage. -5- On the other hand, running systemically below the target feels like a problem that should be addressed. But, if you will give me a third hand, if we just reported with no decimals, we would be at target and would have been in most years. You might say we’re a victim of our own high standards. I’m old enough to remember the 1970s and 1980s and the painful lengths the Fed went to in order to tame inflation. Running within a few tenths of a point of target would have seemed unimaginable to the Fed leaders at that time. Looking at the big picture, inflation has been, and continues to be, low and steady and not the concern of businesses nor consumers—and that is the real goal. Let me turn now to some of the factors that determine inflation. The standard economic theory is clear enough about the short run: Interest rate moves affect the real economy, with some lag. In turn, these changes in the real economy affect inflation through the Phillips curve. As firms pay more for labor, they raise prices accordingly. Over the longer run, credible monetary authorities set and build a track record of delivering against inflation expectations, which become a benchmark for businesses and consumers. I was in business for 30 years. How do I think inflation works in practice? Most companies in most industries have settled pricing routines that are slow to change. These routines begin with inflation expectations and are also grounded in what firms perceive about their competitors’ and customers’ reaction functions. Costs matter, of course, as the Phillips curve implies, and are particularly important when they’re highly visible and industry-wide, as in the case of steel tariffs or a spike in oil prices. But right now, the Phillips curve doesn’t look to be having the effect on pricing one might expect. Part of that is perhaps because the labor share of content has declined in many industries, making labor costs less of a factor. I would also point to what firms perceive about their ability to raise prices for their customers. This isn’t a big issue in many service businesses, like construction or a barber shop, where higher wages create a margin squeeze that more directly drives higher prices. But it’s worth taking a look at consumer goods, particularly durable goods, where inflation has been basically -6- nonexistent for 25 years. Big-box stores have taken share by building their strategy around low prices, and they achieve that strategy by exerting significant pressure on their suppliers. Firms’ purchasing departments have become increasingly sophisticated, leveraging global supply chains and private label alternatives. Internet transparency has made it easy for consumers to shop around and for new entrants to challenge established firms on price. And, as I’ve discussed, even with inflation expectations well-grounded for the economy as a whole, lack of confidence can affect firms’ willingness to raise prices in their particular sector. But corporate margins are up. How can this be happening when prices are being squeezed? Firms are investing significantly in efforts to capture more “effective” prices without raising list prices. Reducing the thread count in a sweater, introducing new “premium” products, reducing discretionary terms or adding on extra fees have all been ways firms have been able to maintain or even increase their margins without raising prices. Our metrics reflect some, but not all, of these practices. Implications for Monetary Policy What are the implications of this for monetary policy? Expectations are deeply grounded in firms’ pricing routines. This became clear in 2009 during the downturn when prices didn’t drop as much as one might have feared and again last year when they didn’t increase as much as expected, despite a strong economy. Expectations are very hard to shift. Recognize this as success, not failure. As a result, short-term interest rates are a blunt instrument. I do believe they work over time but with long lags and an imprecise impact. Small rate moves are unlikely to do much to move settled routines. And large moves run the risk of targeting 2 percent but delivering 4 percent. What’s happening sector-by-sector in the real economy can help or hurt the transmission of any rate moves. Right now, with productivity up relative to the past few years, accommodation is not having its usual effect. The consumer sector factors I discussed earlier also dampen inflation -7- today, as do health care regulation, the decline in unionization and industries (like utilities) that passed tax cuts on to customers. There is some potential offset from tariffs; but retaliatory tariffs and resulting industry overcapacity could take pricing the other way. Net, today, these “real” drivers may be having a much more significant impact than monetary ones. As a result, humility is a monetary policy virtue. The data aren’t perfect, and inflation may well be closer to target than one might think, as suggested by measures like the Dallas trimmed mean. It strikes me as tricky to intervene in pursuit of an imprecise benefit; if one tries too hard to use low rates to get reflation, you might end up, not for the first time, with excess leverage and frothy valuations. And, with the Phillips curve so “flat,” there are likely especially long lags in the effects of rate moves. The FOMC shifted its stance in January; it will take inflation some time to react to the significant flattening signaled in the future rate path—even as we may experience even lower unemployment. I want to help lower the volume. The more one says you’re short of target, the more you risk convincing people that you won’t hit that target. Firms don’t move their expectations a tenth of a point at a time, they move them in whole numbers. In that context, inflation expectations are pretty stable. I hope to help keep them that way by not messaging a self-fulfilling prophecy. Finally, we all have to avoid complacency. The Fed has worked hard over the past three decades to keep inflation expectations anchored, but as future generations forget about the Great Inflation, we have to remember that anchored expectations are not a right—they are earned. An economy can run so hot for only so long before creating conditions you’ll regret. The Fed held a recent conference on potential monetary policy frameworks. The perspectives just outlined inform my views. I support changes that acknowledge the imprecision of what the FOMC is trying to do, say by establishing a target range for inflation and looking at multiple metrics, as Canada has done. But I’m wary of trying to do too much. I’m not yet convinced about strategies (beyond zero lower bound forward guidance) that commit to taking actions in the future. Will those strategies really be understood and believed? Given settled routines and embedded expectations, will they have the desired impact? And if not, what will future -8- policymakers be signed up for? I note the research that suggests multiple equilibria given the zero lower bound2 and fear that moving too quickly while focused on inflation risks could, in turn, focus attention on inflation in ways that lower expectations, creating a low rate/low inflation scenario like that found in Europe and Japan. Now, the question you’re really waiting for me to answer—what does all this mean for the path of interest rates? In my view, with inflation muted, there isn’t much case for stepping on the brakes. With unemployment so low and consumer spending so healthy, it’s equally hard to make a case for stepping on the gas. As I’ve discussed today, I don’t see the current levels of inflation or inflation expectations as a trigger for additional accommodation. The potential to use rate changes to alter firms’ settled routines is small, and the potential cost of overreaching, as I outlined earlier, feels real. That said, I am tracking closely the environment for growth, which includes not only hard data, but also the softer—and vital—information on consumer and business sentiment. If confidence falters sharply, I would certainly make the case to my peers that we should pay attention to it and do what we can to support continued economic expansion. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1 Thank you to Kartik Athreya and Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Jess Benhabib, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé, and Martín Uribe, “The Perils of Taylor Rules,” Journal of Economic Theory, January 2001, vol. 96, nos. 1-2, pp. 40-69.

-1- Fostering Entrepreneurship Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond West Virginia Chamber of Commerce 2019 Annual Meeting and Business Summit White Sulphur Springs, West Virginia August 28, 2019 Thank you for inviting me to join you today, and thank you for the kind introduction. It’s an honor to be here with so many leaders from throughout West Virginia. Since joining the Richmond Fed last year, I’ve made it a priority to travel our District, which spans from Maryland to the Carolinas and includes most of West Virginia. I’ve seen small towns that represent the best of what our country has to offer. But I’ve also seen many communities that have lost ground. They deserve our attention, and I think the Richmond Fed has a real opportunity—and responsibility—to improve our understanding of the challenges they face and to search for ways to make a difference. To that end, we’ve spent the past year talking to business leaders, educators, community leaders and residents to learn what it will take to move the needle in smaller communities. Today, I’ll share some of what we’ve learned, in particular about the potential to foster entrepreneurship. Before I say more, I have to note that the views I express are my own and do not reflect the views of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System.1 -2- Moving the Needle Let me start with a few words about the economy. If you look at the data, the national economy appears great. Unemployment is at 50-year lows, GDP growth is solid and consumers feel confident and are spending. International economies are weaker, though, and uncertainty— particularly around trade—is elevated. Business investment dropped in the second quarter. In that context, and with the risk of inflation muted, the FOMC decided earlier this month to make a mid-cycle reduction in interest rates, with the goal of providing a little insurance for the continued growth of the economy and strength of the labor market. We are monitoring its impact. In West Virginia, I’ve been pleased to see recent growth. Employment growth started to accelerate at the beginning of 2018, although this growth has not been evenly distributed across counties. During the first quarter of 2019, personal income grew 5.6 percent, the fastest rate in the country. Some of this growth is due to temporary jobs, such as those in pipeline construction, but some is due to employers such as Toyota and Hino expanding recently. At the same time, we all know West Virginia faces a number of challenges. The unemployment rate is elevated relative to the rest of the country—at 4.7 percent, it’s a full percentage point higher than the national rate. The employment-to-population ratio, which accounts for both unemployment and labor force participation, is the lowest in the country at 51 percent. And we are all too familiar with the ravages of the opioid epidemic. -3- What can be done to help West Virginia address these challenges and build on its recent growth? We believe there are four themes that matter if you want to move the needle. The first is education, or more broadly, preparing people to enter the workforce. In the United States, 35 percent of urban residents between the ages of 25 and 64 have a four-year degree, compared with 22 percent of people in smaller towns. The rate is 21 percent across all of West Virginia. All else equal, the Richmond Fed has estimated that if educational attainment in small towns equaled that of bigger cities, the employment-to-population gap in our District would shrink by 40 percent. Of course, we can’t just send more kids to college, because roughly 40 percent of those who enroll don’t graduate.2 Also, a four-year college isn’t the right fit for everyone, and there are well-paying jobs that don’t require a degree. So we’re intrigued by the growing number of business partnerships with high schools and community colleges that allow students to choose the path that’s best for them. And I’m encouraged by growing state support for community colleges, such as the new West Virginia Invests program. We also have to focus on preparing students for college and the workplace. That begins even before kids enter kindergarten, with high-quality early childhood education. I know West Virginia has invested in that. Second, we’re looking at addressing the effects of geographic isolation. By this, I don’t mean that there aren’t strong social networks in small towns—the opposite is often true. But there may be informational and institutional gaps that don’t exist in larger cities. For example, it might be -4- more difficult to learn about training opportunities in other places. Or if you live in a town where fewer adults have gone to college, you might not view college as a viable option for yourself. One major issue is the loss of “anchor institutions,” such as hospitals and schools. Almost a dozen hospitals have closed across the Fifth District since 2010.3 Here in West Virginia, hundreds of schools have closed their doors since the early 1990s. These institutions provide civic leaders and highly educated workers who can raise the aspirations of those around them. They invest in their communities. They supply amenities that attract talent. They signal a community’s vibrancy to potential business owners and residents. So when one closes, much more than jobs are lost. Third, we’re studying barriers to participation, such as addiction and disability. I mentioned the opioid epidemic a few minutes ago. In the Fifth District, average opioid prescription rates are almost 30 percent higher in smaller towns versus bigger cities, and overdose death rates are higher as well. There’s no easy solution, but there are promising addiction-to-work programs that help mitigate the effects of addiction. Similarly, we’re studying disability-to-work incentives. This insurance is a vital safety net for many people, but rural residents are more likely to receive disability insurance than urban residents and the rates increased significantly during the last downturn. Finally, we’re looking at connection, by which I mean facilitating workers’ access to good jobs. This will be my focus today because, at the end of the day, people need places to work. Today’s tight labor market presents a great chance to connect more people to jobs, including people who -5- might have had difficulty finding employment in the past. But a more rural state like West Virginia faces some unique challenges when it comes to attracting large employers. So how do we get more West Virginians off the sidelines of the labor force? I believe that supporting rural entrepreneurs—understanding the unique obstacles they face and working to remove those obstacles—may be a way to help rural communities get more in the game. Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth Before I discuss what policymakers might do to encourage entrepreneurship, let me make the case that entrepreneurship matters for growth. Entrepreneurs do more than just create jobs for themselves. Evidence strongly suggests that increases in entrepreneurship boost not only the number of people who are self-employed, but also the number of people employed overall in a local market.4 Nationwide, small businesses account for more than 60 percent of net jobs created each year.5 It’s true that the most dramatic job growth comes from transformational, high-growth firms—the companies that eventually grow into a Microsoft or a Google.6 But researchers at the Atlanta Fed concluded that a higher percentage of employment in small, locally owned businesses is associated with higher employment overall, greater income growth and lower poverty rates.7 Of course, increasing entrepreneurship isn’t a silver bullet to creating economic prosperity. But it is an important piece of the puzzle, particularly in more isolated areas where attracting a large outside employer is a remote possibility and many working-age people are in need of work. There are benefits beyond jobs as well. When a community grows its own economic -6- development, it puts residents in charge of strengthening and diversifying their own economy, thereby increasing economic resilience in the face of global economic forces. Over the past several decades, however, entrepreneurship has declined in the United States. The startup rate—the share of incorporated firms that are less than a year old—fell from almost 14 percent in the late 1970s to 8 percent in 2016. And the self-employment rate, including both incorporated and unincorporated businesses, has dropped from 12 percent of employment in the mid-1990s to just under 10 percent in 2015. What is behind this trend? Some point to demographic changes, such as a decline in the number of immigrants—who typically have higher rates of self-employment—or slowing population growth overall.8 It’s also possible that the fixed costs of starting a business, such as meeting an array of regulatory requirements or making the technology investment required to compete, have increased over time.9 The dominance of big-box retailers or risk aversion in the wake of the Great Recession are other factors that could be at play. The decline has been widespread geographically, and West Virginia is no exception. Over the past 30 years, the startup rate in West Virginia has fallen more than in the country as a whole, and in 2014, it was nearly 3 percentage points below the national average. West Virginia has ranked in the bottom 10 states for self-employment in 23 out of the last 25 years.10 And the state ranks last for the average number of jobs created by startups in their first year, at just under three per 1,000 people. -7- At the same time, I believe West Virginia has several things going for it that make it ripe to promote entrepreneurship. The cost of doing business here is relatively low. In addition, you already have a foothold in several industries that are predicted to have large increases in self- employment over the next few years, such as personal care services, construction and health care support. Construction in particular has shown very strong growth over the past year, although that could slow since pipeline construction has stopped. Finally, you’ve got people on the sidelines and—counterintuitively, perhaps—that’s a leading indicator of entrepreneurial activity. Fostering Entrepreneurship in West Virginia How can we harness those strengths to create tangible change? What does it take to create an environment that supports aspiring business owners and helps their businesses thrive? We’ve had a number of conversations with entrepreneurs and community development professionals throughout the Fifth District and specifically in West Virginia. We’ve heard a lot is underway that could be supported by three key themes. Entrepreneurs need a stronger infrastructure platform, they need better access to capital and they need a richer community around them. Infrastructure Let’s start with infrastructure. For entrepreneurs and small businesses to succeed, they need to either get their goods and services to their customers or bring their customers to them. Historically, and to some extent today, West Virginia’s geography has made transportation a challenge. But the development of the highway system in Appalachia has boosted West Virginia’s access to markets and increased jobs in professional services, tourism, education and health services. And when a critical portion of the highway system connecting Northern Virginia -8- to West Virginia is completed, it’s forecasted to generate almost 2,000 new jobs. In addition, the 2017 Roads to Prosperity amendment represents a massive commitment by West Virginians to develop the state’s highways. I’m hopeful these projects will enable growth. Today, of course, businesses don’t necessarily need a physical road to reach their customers: The highway of the 21st century is broadband. With broadband, a small business can reach exponentially more customers and suppliers. They get access to information and expertise. With broadband, you can run any kind of business anywhere. Measurements of broadband access are notoriously inaccurate. So while we know there is a digital divide, it’s hard to know just how big this divide is. Still, it seems clear that West Virginia is on the wrong side of it. From 2013-17, more than one-quarter of West Virginia households—a higher percentage than in all neighboring states—had no internet subscription at all, broadband or otherwise. Here in Greenbrier County, nearly 30 percent of households have no internet access. The biggest barrier to broadband is cost. The issue is twofold. First, it’s expensive to build new infrastructure in areas with low population density and challenging terrain, and the costs to internet service providers may outweigh their returns. But even if broadband is available, not every household can afford it. This is evident here in West Virginia, where less than half of all households making below $20,000 annually have a broadband subscription but 90 percent of households making at least $75,000 annually have one. -9- How can we overcome the cost barrier? New funding has been made available in the past year and a half to communities in West Virginia.11 But these communities need accurate data on who is unserved or underserved, and they need connections to the resources that are available to help them access this funding. The West Virginia Broadband Enhancement Council is working to provide accurate data and is helping communities connect to local and national resources. In the meantime, communities have come up with some inventive ways to get internet access to those who don’t have it or can’t afford it. The Kanawha County Public Library, for example, just rolled out a mobile hot spot device that can be checked out for two weeks. Essentially, anyone who doesn’t have access to internet at home can take it with them. It seems to me that closing the divide is an entrepreneurial exercise in itself. It’s going to take individuals in West Virginia coming up with creative, local solutions to get broadband to people through public/private partnerships and local cooperatives. It’s going to take people starting businesses that get computers and technology to people who need them. And it’s going to require new ways to deliver digital skills training so that communities can fully realize the potential that broadband offers.12 Financing Capital is critical to entrepreneurs and small businesses—and it can be hard to come by in smaller towns. A report by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition found that every county in West Virginia could be considered a small business lending “desert,” where only a very small proportion of small businesses receive loans. Community development financial -10- institutions, or CDFIs, can step in to bridge the gaps left by traditional banks, but there is relatively little CDFI funding here. Between 2010 and 2016, less than 2 percent of CDFI funding in the Fifth District was in West Virginia. The good news is, there are groups looking to invest in this state, including federal grant programs, venture capital firms and angel investor networks. For example, West Virginia Forward has published an “entrepreneur’s toolkit” that includes 100 different ways entrepreneurs can find the capital they need to realize their goals. I believe that if we have some initial successes, more investors will be drawn in. Success begets success. The challenge, of course, is accessing this capital. Trying to sift through the myriad of financing sources, each with separate eligibility requirements and application processes, all while trying to start a business, is a daunting task. I’m encouraged by programs like the West Virginia Hive in nearby Beckley, which provides one-on-one coaching to educate entrepreneurs about their financing options, among other things. And because entrepreneurs in West Virginia often can’t walk down the street and bump into other entrepreneurs, as their urban counterparts can, the Hive also routinely brings together new and future business owners from the area to trade stories and share ideas. This is just one of many programs in West Virginia working to support startups. Ecosystem This brings me to the third theme. If we want people to become successful entrepreneurs, we need to provide them with a startup environment. That includes business and technical assistance, a startup-friendly culture and a quality workforce. It begins with exposure to successful entrepreneurs. As I said at the beginning, family, friends, neighbors and coworkers play a fundamental role in people’s aspirations and decisions about education and work. We -11- need to promote role models so that a high school student sees entrepreneurs and thinks, “I can do that. That could be me.” This exposure can include coaching, both formal and informal, like that provided at the West Virginia Hive. Entrepreneurs also need technical assistance, which could include support in writing business plans, applying for patents, conducting market research or, as I’ve mentioned, applying for funding. Incubators and community college programs often serve as the connective tissue in communities that don’t have a high concentration of entrepreneurs. For example, Eastern West Virginia Community and Technical College operates the NewBiz Launch Pad accelerator program and the Institute for Rural Entrepreneurship and Economic Development, which supports new businesses in agriculture, manufacturing, arts, tourism and technology. It’s also important to foster regional collaboration so that such efforts can scale. I recently visited a region in the Fifth District where economic development efforts have stalled because neighboring cities view them as a zero-sum game. That’s not the way to build a thriving region. Finally, a skilled workforce is critical. You need people who have the skills to create and run a business, and they need people to hire. Here in West Virginia, the low employment-to-population ratio implies that there is no shortage of people available to work. But it’s also the case that many of these individuals face the obstacles to employment I discussed at the outset, such as addiction, disability or low educational attainment. Tackling these interrelated obstacles is easier said than done and will require innovation and cooperation among employers, schools, health care providers and policymakers. But there’s great experimentation going on—for example, I -12- recently learned of an employer who offers addiction treatment to job applicants who fail their drug tests. Where It’s Working Nothing I’ve described so far is simple. But it can be done, and we’ve seen it done in Taylor County, roughly 40 miles south of Morgantown. Unemployment and poverty are both lower in Taylor County than in West Virginia or Appalachia as a whole and are trending down. And it’s not because they lured some big employer away from a neighboring town or state: Nearly one- third of the job growth in Taylor County since the Great Recession is accounted for by self- employment. Over the past five years, Taylor County has seen 27 percent growth in new businesses, the second-fastest growth in the state. That is 221 new businesses in a county of just under 17,000 people.13 The county has some natural advantages. Proximity to Morgantown might provide easier access to the resources a college town provides; and it’s not too far east of Highway 79. Still, I think much of Taylor County’s success can be explained by the themes I’ve described today. In 2014, the town of Grafton in Taylor County was one of the first communities to participate in Turn This Town Around, a one-year campaign intended to help West Virginians identify and resource projects that would make a big difference in their communities—from cleaning storefronts, to building walking trails, to creating a community garden. After that program ended, Grafton launched its own group, All Aboard Grafton, to maintain the momentum. The connection to entrepreneurship might not be immediately obvious, but these initiatives created a -13- local network of committed residents who met weekly to share ideas, make plans and reinvigorate their community. That created an environment where people were striving for more and were more able and willing to take risks. As I said, success begets success—it doesn’t matter if the first success is clean windows. Three years after “Turn This Town Around,” Grafton was selected to participate in the Energizing Entrepreneurial Communities Program (E-Communities). This is a three-year program designed to encourage entrepreneurs and businesses. A critical part of this program is that the community is paired with a coach who, among other things, talks with local entrepreneurs to find out what the community needs and connects the community to resources, including funding sources and peers and experts across the state. Stories like that of Taylor County make me hopeful. Communities have within themselves the ability to grow. All they need is a little support. Thank you, and now I welcome your reactions and questions about entrepreneurship or about the economy more broadly. 1 Thank you to Abigail Burns, Nina Mantilla and Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Graduation is defined as obtaining a bachelor’s degree within six years of matriculating. 3 This number does not include Washington County Hospital in North Carolina, which closed in February 2019 and reopened in May 2019. 4 Zoltan Acs and Catherine Armington, “Employment Growth and Entrepreneurial Activity in Cities.” Regional Studies, 2004, vol. 38, no. 8, pp. 911-927. 5 The Small Business Administration defines a small business as one with fewer than 500 employees. 6 Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2014, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 3-24. 7 Anil Rupasingha, “Locally Owned: Do Local Business Ownership and Size Matter for Local Economic Well- being?” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Community and Economic Development Research paper no. 01-13, August 2013. 8 Steven F. Hipple and Laurel A. Hammond, “Self-Employment in the United States,” Bureau of Labor Statistics Spotlight on Statistics, March 2016; and Fatih Karahan, Benjamin Pugsley, and Ayşegül Şahin, “Demographic Origins of the Startup Deficit,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 25874, May 2019. 9 Nicholas Kozeniauskas, “What’s Driving the Decline in Entrepreneurship?” Manuscript, January 2018. -14- 10 Sarah Flood, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles and J. Robert Warren. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018. 11 West Virginia Broadband Enhancement Council, “2018 Legislative Report,” December 31, 2018. 12 Jeremy Hegle and Jennifer Wilding, “Disconnected: Seven Lessons on Fixing the Digital Divide,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Community Affairs Department, July 2019. 13 Data accessed July 12, 2019.
