The Economy, the Pandemic, and Machine Learning The Economics of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum Philadelphia, PA (virtual) September 29, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 1 The Economy, the Pandemic, and Machine Learning The Economics of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum Philadelphia, PA (virtual) September 29, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia G ood morning from the East Coast of the United States. I know we’re joined by an international audience today, so good … well, whatever time it happens to be wherever you are. On behalf of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, I’m sincerely thrilled to welcome you all to this virtual conference. The original plan was for me to greet you in person in our Bank in Philadelphia ― instead I’m in the more cramped confines of my home office here in New Jersey. We’re still planning on having a full-scale conference in Philadelphia with our partners from the OMFIF around this time next year, which we’re all looking forward to. So, stay tuned for details on that. Now, even though we’re meeting in strange circumstances today, many of the same old rules apply. Here is one of them: The views I express today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System. We’ve gathered today to hear a distinguished panel provide what I’m sure will be a fascinating discussion on developments in artificial intelligence and machine learning. But before we get to that, I want to set the table by giving you a brief overview of where the economy has been and where it might be heading, recent actions by the Federal Reserve, and a few of my own considerations on machine learning. 2 The State of the Virus All of these topics, of course, have been deeply affected by the same scourge that has kept us physically apart today: COVID-19. So let’s begin, then, with where we are with the virus. As you well know, still less than a year after COVID-19 first emerged, the virus has infected more than 30 million people around the world and killed nearly 1 million. The United States has been particularly hard hit. Because of our country’s unique inability to control the virus, we’ve suffered approximately 21 percent of the world’s deaths, despite housing only about 4 percent of the world’s population. Infection rates have come down from the highs we saw in the spring and summer, but the virus is still circulating widely in large swaths of the country. And even within this disproportionately hard-hit country, certain communities have suffered more than others. Racial minorities, particularly African Americans and Hispanics, have been sickened from the coronavirus at a far higher rate than other groups. They have also died at a higher rate. And in the ensuing economic contraction, they have lost their jobs at a higher rate. The State of the Economy A virus as contagious, deadly, and frankly as mysterious as COVID-19 was bound to have a significant economic impact. Even before state and local governments took action this spring, many Americans had stopped dining out, getting on airplanes, and checking in to hotels. State and local governments then compounded the economic misery when ― and I want to stress, in a responsible attempt to protect public health ― they shuttered many businesses deemed nonessential. The upshot? In the second quarter of this year, the U.S. suffered its worst quarterly GDP drop in recorded history when the economy contracted at an annualized rate of nearly 33 percent. Twenty-two million jobs evaporated. Those with low-wage jobs, particularly racial and ethnic minorities, were hardest hit. The good news is, following that contraction, the economy has rebounded faster than many of us had projected. Stay-at-home orders have been lifted, and though large segments of the economy remain depressed, millions of Americans have returned to their jobs. Indeed, about half of those 22 million residents who were suddenly out of work earlier this year are now back, enough to nudge the unemployment rate down from 10.2 percent to a still-catastrophic 8.4 percent. 3 For now, I expect this recovery to continue, though not fast enough that, by the end of this year, GDP will have returned to where it was before the pandemic struck. That will take more time. And segments like tourism and hospitality will remain subdued for a long time to come, presenting an overall drag on GDP and employment growth. Employment, unfortunately, probably won’t be back to pre-pandemic levels until 2023. I want to caution that this forecast is freighted with uncertainty because, once again, of COVID-19. The scenario of continued growth that I have presented depends on a sustained decline in the rate of new infections ― probably a result of nearly universal mask-wearing, especially indoors ― that ensures only sporadic new outbreaks. We’re also assuming that a vaccine becomes widely available sometime mid to late next year. But COVID-19, as the world has learned all too painfully, is difficult to control. And so the path of the economy largely depends on the path of the virus. It depends in no small part, too, on the path that the federal government choses to take. When COVID- 19 first struck, it brought forth a policy response that, in my view, was commensurate to its gravity. Early on, Congress provided significant fiscal support for the economy through the CARES Act. That blunted the pain of the contraction. Unfortunately, that relief has now expired, and I would urge lawmakers to consider providing additional support soon. The Role of the Fed For our part, the Federal Reserve’s role in responding to the crisis has been robust. But our main power is lending. We cannot simply spend money or issue grants. That is Congress’s role. The Fed’s role in mitigating this crisis has been to use those lending powers to maintain our underlying economic infrastructure by making sure that every sector of the economy has access to liquidity. Moreover, our lending facilities are meant as backstops to the private sector. We don’t want to disintermediate the private sector ― we simply want to be there to support market functioning. So, what have we done? First and foremost, we lowered our policy interest rate to near zero fast and early. We kept this stance unchanged at this month’s FOMC meeting and indicated that we plan to keep those rates very low for a very long time. In August, we also announced a long-considered change to how we will balance inflation and employment going forward. Following a nearly two-year review, the Fed announced we will no longer 4 head off higher inflation by preemptively raising interest rates. Moreover, after long periods of sub-2 percent inflation ― as we now find ourselves in ― we will accept periods of above-2 percent inflation. Tolerating the risk of slightly higher inflation, in our view, is worth it if it helps us achieve our employment goals. Using the discount window, we are also actively encouraging banks to borrow money from the Fed at ultralow interest rates, to make sure they have the funds they need to serve their customers at this critical time. In order to keep markets functioning, beginning in March, we started buying large amounts of Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities. We have now purchased more than $2 trillion of these products. The markets have largely stabilized, and we’ve slowed the rate of purchases. As a backstop, we have also purchased some corporate debt, and as the economy and credit markets heal, we will disengage from that market as prudently and as expeditiously as possible. Backed by credit protection from the U.S. Treasury, we’ve also launched the Main Street Lending Program, which provides support for small and midsize businesses that were in good financial standing before the COVID-19 pandemic. The program was recently expanded to include nonprofit organizations, such as universities and nonprofit medical institutions, which tend to be very important anchor institutions in their communities. There has been somewhat limited interest in Main Street ― only about 400 banks have registered to participate in this program. But in a way, that’s actually a good sign for the economy because it means that firms have access to capital without having to use the Fed. Because if you recall, in all of this, we are simply a backstop. On the other hand, if there is another major downturn in the economy, these facilities will still be in place to offer funding. We’re also bolstering the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) by supplying liquidity to financial institutions that are issuing loans to those businesses that are receiving aid through the program. PPP is now closed to new applications. But when it was open, it drew a lot of interest. More than 5 million loans were issued to the tune of more than $520 billion. Under our program, the Fed provided liquidity to institutions issuing about 17 percent of those loans. This is another positive sign for the economy and the financial sector, as it shows the vast majority of banks have sufficient liquidity to extend credit. 5 We’ve also rolled out a program to help cash-strapped local governments. The Municipal Liquidity Facility, whereby we buy bonds from municipalities and states whose tax revenues have collapsed, is designed to provide essential liquidity as they navigate the twin crises of the pandemic and the economic downturn. The State of Illinois has already tapped this, and we are also opening it to multistate agencies like the Port Authority of New York and other transit authorities. While so far only the State of Illinois has tapped this facility, the Fed by merely announcing its existence did a lot of work in getting private markets functioning again. Machine Learning COVID-19 has affected everything from health care to tax receipts to tourism. And so, of course, it has also had an impact on the subject of today’s panel discussion: artificial intelligence and machine learning. Algorithms are built on precedent, and so it’s little surprise that as COVID-19 caught governments unawares, it also significantly affected the artificial intelligence that is increasingly used to power large segments of our economy. The algorithms ― like all of us ― had simply never experienced the set of circumstances that COVID-19 presented. And so many algorithms have seen a deterioration in their performance during this period. Take credit scores. One would assume that in a time when 22 million Americans had lost their jobs and millions more Americans had their hours cut that credit scores would have declined. But in fact, the opposite happened: Credit scores have, in the aggregate, risen during this period. One reason for this is that even in this economic downturn, delinquencies are actually down because the aforementioned CARES Act mandated loan forbearance. That was absolutely the right thing to do but lead the currently used algorithms to the counterintuitive conclusion that default probabilities have in fact decreased. Another consideration going forward will be to ensure that algorithms do not serve to perpetuate the kinds of discrimination that we have seen historically in our financial sector. Will machine learning perpetuate long-standing inequities in, for instance, the rate at which certain racial groups are turned down for loans? This issue will require a conversation spanning academic fields ― computer science, law, economics, and others. And it will also require action from not just regulators but probably lawmakers, too, given 6 that many of the laws governing discrimination date back to 1961, when computers couldn’t even fit inside a single room. Conversations like the one we are hosting today hold important implications for the future of our economy ― and making sure that we are building an equitable future for all of us. And in the meantime, we can be rest assured the development of artificial intelligence and machine learning will continue ― though I hope it stops before they figure out a way to replace Fed presidents with robots. Thank you very much.

News Release Fed President Patrick Harker Says Growth of the Economy Depends on Decline of COVID-19 Infections and Continued Fiscal Support 29 Sep ’20 Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told an audience at the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum that the economy was recovering more strongly than originally anticipated, but that significant risks related to COVID-19 and fiscal policy remain. Share For immediate release Contact: Daneil Mazone, Manager, Media Relations, 215-574-7163 Philadelphia, PA — Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told an audience at the Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum that the economy was recovering more strongly than originally anticipated, but that significant risks related to COVID-19 and fiscal policy remain. Harker, delivering a keynote address at a conference focused on artificial intelligence and machine learning, addressed the forum virtually. Harker, a voting member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) this year, projected continued GDP growth through this year and next, although he added that employment would likely not return to pre-pandemic levels until 2023. He further cautioned that continued growth depended on wearing a mask indoors and introducing a vaccine for COVID-19 in the middle or latter part of next year. Harker added that fiscal support for the economy would likely be necessary to support growth. Reflecting on artificial intelligence and machine learning, Harker observed that COVID-19 had significantly impacted algorithms used to evaluate credit risk. He also urged lawmakers and regulators to consider methods of redressing racial inequities that might carry over into algorithmic decision-making. Read the speech . Related Content Inclusive Growth News Release Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told a webinar audience that the COVID-19 pandemic and ensuing economic shutdown have heightened inequities that were already present in American society. Regional Economics News Release Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told the Delaware State Chamber of Commerce that he foresees an uneven economic recovery for the state. He presented his remarks via conference call. Inclusive Growth News Release Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told an audience at the Center City Proprietors Association that the path of the U.S. economy for the rest of the year depends largely on developments involving COVID-19.

The Fed: A For-Purpose Organization HOPE Global Forum Operation HOPE Atlanta, GA (virtual) October 19, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 1 The Fed: A For-Purpose Organization HOPE Global Forum Operation HOPE Atlanta, GA (virtual) October 19, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Go od afternoon! It’s an honor to be joined by all of you here today. As a Fed president, I’m not sure my star power can match that of some of my fellow panelists. I’ll admit I’m no Deepak Chopra or T. D. Jakes, but I’m also pretty thrilled to rub shoulders with them ― even if only virtually. But on a serious note, Operation HOPE’s mission of ensuring financial uplift and economic inclusion for all Americans could not be more important ― or timelier, given present circumstances ― so I am very excited and frankly flattered to be a part of this great series of events this week. I’m also excited to sketch out a few thoughts on our present circumstances and to chat with John Bryant. But before I can get to that, there is something else I have to do. We call it the standard Fed disclaimer: The views I express today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System. It’s no secret to anyone here that we’re in the middle of twin crises the likes of which none of us has ever experienced. COVID-19 has sickened tens of millions of our fellow Americans and killed hundreds of thousands of them. And the virus, unfortunately, is still circulating widely throughout the country. The pandemic also spurred an economic downturn so severe that, in the second quarter of this year, we experienced the sharpest contraction of gross domestic product (or GDP) in recorded American history. Millions of Americans lost their jobs, and millions more had their hours cut. We see the scars everywhere ― in the miles-long lines at foodbanks that indicate massive suffering and in the shuttered storefronts and restaurants that now dominate so many of our commercial districts that just a few months ago were bustling. 2 It’s also no secret that the effects of this unprecedented crisis have fallen most harshly on those least able to bear them. Racial minorities ― particularly Hispanic and Black Americans ― have been more affected by both the health crisis and the economic crisis than other groups. Hispanics and Black Americans have been sickened by COVID-19 at a rate disproportionate to their population. They have also died at a higher rate. Those same groups also are more likely to hold jobs that one can’t perform from home, which is probably one of the reasons their infection rates are higher than other groups. They are also more likely to have held jobs that have either been replaced by automation or that have simply been eliminated. This is a five-alarm fire. The one thing I truly admire about Operation HOPE is that it doesn’t just call itself a non-profit organization. It calls itself a for-purpose organization. The Federal Reserve is also a for-purpose organization. Since the Fed is the nation’s central bank, Congress has mandated us to provide for maximum employment and stable prices ― that is, lots of jobs and low inflation. But another purpose I believe we can work toward is narrowing the yawning racial disparities that continue to plague our society. So, how do we do that? Given that I am a Fed president, you probably guessed that I might say monetary policy. And I do think that’s part of the solution. That’s why I’m pleased that, in late August, following a nearly two-year review, the Fed announced a shift in our approach to fulfilling that dual mandate that I mentioned earlier. Here is the upshot: No longer will we head off higher inflation by preemptively raising interest rates before we have achieved full employment. Moreover, after long periods of sub-2 percent inflation (as we now find ourselves in), we will accept periods of above-2 percent inflation. Tolerating the risk of slightly higher inflation, in our view, is worth it if it helps us achieve our employment goals. That’s important because one of the salutary trends of the pre-COVID-19 economy was that economic gains, at least on a limited basis, were finally being enjoyed by lower-wage workers, a disproportionate 3 percentage of whom are racial minorities. We still had a very, very long way to go, of course. But it’s clear that we must achieve full employment if we are going to make progress on this issue. We also need to do a better job of transitioning workers into careers that offer solid pay and strong future prospects. Here at the Philadelphia Fed, we’ve been thinking hard about how to get workers into what we call opportunity occupations ― that is, jobs that pay the median wage or better and that don’t require a college degree. I’d like to share the results of just one study we’ve done because I think the results are truly exciting. The study began when Philadelphia Fed researchers, in partnership with the Cleveland Fed, asked a question: How do we transition workers in jobs most likely to disappear into stable, higher-wage positions? They came up with an ingenious idea: They looked at the skill sets of people who are holding those jobs that are most at risk of disappearing. They then matched those skills to jobs that would pay at least 10 percent more than their current wage and that don’t require a traditional four-year degree. The findings were incredibly encouraging. Looking at 33 metro areas nationwide, they found that nearly half of lower-wage employment can be paired with at least one higher-paying occupation requiring similar skills. For transitions connecting the most similar occupations identified in the study, the pay differences are significant, with an average bump in wages of almost $15,000 — a 49 percent increase in salary. The opportunities for public‒private partnerships to initiate these kinds of transitions are obvious, and I’m proud to say that the Philadelphia Fed helped launch one with Comcast and Philadelphia Works, our local workforce development board. That’s just one project, of course, but if it proves to be replicable across cities and industries, I really think we can begin to move the needle. There is a division within the Federal Reserve that has defined racial equity as “the just and fair inclusion in an economy in which all can participate, prosper, and reach their full potential, and race can no longer predict life outcomes.” That’s a lofty goal, of course, but a really profound one, I think: the idea that we can one day decouple race from life outcomes. If we get there, I know that Operation HOPE will have played a role. So, thanks again for having me, and now I’m happy to chat with John Bryant.

News Release Fed President Patrick Harker Forecasts Moderate Growth Through Rest of the Year 02 Dec ’20 Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told a virtual audience at the Wharton Private Equity and Venture Capital Alumni Association that he expects moderate economic growth for the rest of this year and the first half of 2021. Share For immediate release Contact: Daneil Mazone , Manager, Media Relations, 215-574-7163 Philadelphia — Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told a virtual audience at the Wharton Private Equity and Venture Capital Alumni Association that he expects moderate economic growth for the rest of this year and the first half of 2021. With the introduction of a widely available and effective vaccine for COVID-19, he predicts robust growth through the second half of 2021 and through 2022. Harker observed that the U.S. economy has largely tracked the spread of the virus. Harker, this year a voting member of the Federal Open Market Committee, also suggested that the Federal Reserve’s lending facilities continue into next year. Although they were not always “tapped as often as we may have expected at the outset, their mere existence was useful in getting private markets flowing,” he said, citing an announcement effect . “At this point, the fewer changes we make to the lending facilities, the better,” he said. Related Content Monetary Policy Speech 2020 CIO Leaders in Alternative Investments Summit, Wharton Private Equity and Venture Capital Alumni Association | Virtual Event

The Certainty of Uncertainty 2020 CIO Leaders in Alternative Investments Summit – A Virtual Experience Wharton Private Equity and Venture Capital Alumni Association Philadelphia, PA (virtual) December 2, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 1 The Certainty of Uncertainty 2020 CIO Leaders in Alternative Investments Summit – A Virtual Experience Wharton Private Equity and Venture Capital Alumni Association Philadelphia, PA (virtual) December 2, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Good morning! It’s great to be back among so many of “my people.” You might say, after all, that I have at least a minor connection to Wharton, and to Penn in general. I went to Penn for undergrad. And I also have a master’s from Penn ― two of them actually. And a Ph.D. from Penn. I was a professor at Penn. Oh, and as many of you know, I was also dean of the Wharton School. I should probably also mention that my wife went to Penn. And so did two of my three children. And Penn doctors recently performed surgery on my foot to rectify an old injury that I sustained … playing football at Penn. So, yes, it’s wonderful to be back ― in some form ― at what feels an awful lot like a second home. Now, before we proceed, I need to give you my standard Fed disclaimer: The views I express today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System. My plan for this morning is to share a few thoughts on where the economy is now and where it’s headed. I’ll also offer some observations on how we can build a durable and equitable recovery as we emerge from this period. After that, we’ll open things up for a fireside chat with some Q&A, which I’m really looking forward to. I especially welcome the hard questions, such as what on Earth is going on with Carson Wentz? 2 The State of the Virus It’s no secret that the economy has been profoundly affected by the same scourge that has kept us physically apart today: COVID-19. The three most important things affecting the economy are: the virus, the virus, the virus. So, let’s begin with where we are with COVID-19, given that the virus itself ― more than anything else ― is determining the trajectory of the economy. In the space of about a year, the virus has infected more than 60 million people around the world and killed more than 1.4 million. In the U.S., the death toll has now surpassed 260,000. The math is stark: With 4 percent of the world’s population, we’ve suffered 20 percent of the world’s fatalities. And even within this disproportionately hard-hit country, certain communities have suffered more than others. Racial minorities have been sickened from the coronavirus at a far higher rate than other groups. They have also died at a higher rate. And in the ensuing economic contraction, they have lost their jobs at a higher rate. While the number of infections and deaths fell during the warmer months, cases have been on the uptick since the week ending September 8. Deaths ― a lagging indicator ― are unfortunately now back to the highs we had not seen since the first wave in the spring. We are clearly in the midst of a second wave that, while not unexpected, is still shocking and heartbreaking in its viciousness. The State of the Economy COVID-19’s resurgence is bound to have an economic effect, both as local governments introduce measures to curtail the spread and as consumers change their behavior. The latter is a crucial point that sometimes gets lost. If people don’t feel safe, they won’t engage in the broader economy. And so, even before state and local governments took action this spring, many Americans had stopped dining out, getting on airplanes, and checking into hotels. That’s a trend that has continued throughout the pandemic. Some local governments, including Philadelphia, have recently introduced measures to curtail indoor restaurant dining. But even before that, data showed that people had begun dining out less. Some people may have traveled over the Thanksgiving holiday, but TSA data indicated that passenger traffic was still down by more than half of what it was last year. In short, government actions to stop the spread of COVID-19 are somewhat of a lagging indicator as well. 3 It isn’t surprising, then, that the economy has largely tracked the spread of the virus. In the second quarter of this year, as the U.S. experienced its first wave of COVID-19 and as state and local governments implemented various shutdown measures, the U.S. experienced its worst quarterly GDP drop in recorded history. The economy contracted at an annualized rate of nearly 32 percent; 22 million jobs evaporated. Those with low-wage jobs, particularly racial and ethnic minorities, were hardest hit. Following that contraction, the economy rebounded quite nicely. Stay-at-home orders were lifted, and millions of Americans returned to their jobs. Indeed, a little more than half of those 22 million residents who were suddenly out of work earlier this year are now back, enough to nudge the unemployment rate down from 14.7 percent in April to 6.9 percent, which is still disastrously high. The recovery has been uneven, with segments like manufacturing and housing outpacing hospitality and leisure. For now, I’m forecasting moderate growth for the rest of this year and the first quarter of 2021 that keeps us below the prepandemic trend. Indeed, we are currently seeing signs of plateauing in the economy. That’s attributable both to COVID-19’s continued circulation and to the evaporation of fiscal support ― particularly for low-income households ― that the federal government provided at the onset of the pandemic. I recently had a conversation with a major banker who expressed deep concerns about the fast-approaching “fiscal cliff,” as many Americans will soon lose their unemployment benefits and begin to face hardships like eviction and foreclosure. Unemployment claims are already on the uptick. My forecast calls for growth to pick up in the second half of 2021 and through 2022 before a light tapering in 2023. But that comes with two important caveats. For one, my forecast is premised on a safe and effective vaccine for COVID-19 ― or perhaps, multiple vaccines ― becoming available sometime in the spring or summer of next year. We’ve had very encouraging news on that front in recent weeks. My forecast also expects an additional $1 trillion of fiscal support for the economy. There, the news has been less encouraging recently, which is my way of saying this forecast is very, very uncertain. The Fed’s robust actions in dealing with this crisis ― cutting rates fast and early and establishing a number of lending facilities ― were effective in blunting the contraction. Even when those lending facilities, such as our fund that was set up to aid state and local governments, were not tapped as often as we may have expected at the outset, their mere existence was useful in getting private markets flowing. We witnessed a so-called announcement effect. Markets that were largely frozen thawed when we announced the establishment of those facilities. 4 In my opinion, those facilities should stay open past the end of this year. Until we get through this pandemic, the economy needs to be supported. At this point, the fewer changes we make to our lending facilities, the better. Rising Automation Now before we move to the discussion, I’d like to say a few words about the changes in our society that the virus is spurring. Fundamentally, rather than fully changing things, this pandemic has had the effect of accelerating trends that were already present in our society. Categories like department stores were already struggling ― and COVID-19 only served to expedite their demise. Racial minorities like Black Americans were already more likely to be unemployed than other groups, though one of the salutary trends of the prepandemic economy was that this gap was narrowing. Unfortunately, COVID-19 has erased that progress. Similarly, trends in labor markets like the increased use of automation are not new. They are simply happening at a more rapid clip since the onset of the pandemic. For decades, the U.S. economy has seen increasing automation in industries spanning manufacturing to food service to office work. But the COVID-19 pandemic has ensured that those transitions are now occurring at lightning speed. Researchers at the Philadelphia Fed have been closely studying the effect of the pandemic on labor markets and automation and have made several key ― if still rather preliminary ― findings. I would like to share some with you. Some of their findings have been predictable: It turns out that the most automatable jobs are those that do not permit remote work and those that carry a high risk of COVID-19 transmission. Obviously, machinery and software are not susceptible to the virus, so they have often become more attractive options than human workers during the pandemic. Think of meatpacking and slaughterhouse jobs, for example, which are increasingly automated. Or, closer to home, think of the Pennsylvania Turnpike laying off more than 500 workers this spring as it switched to automatic tolling. 5 Other findings are more surprising and deeply alarming. You might expect that a lot of the jobs that were eliminated because of COVID-19 might come roaring back after the virus passes, for example. But this might not be the case. Fed researchers have found, based on precedent dating to prior recessions, that, in fact, many of the jobs that the pandemic eliminated may never return ― even after the virus has passed. They will instead be automated. Those Pennsylvania Turnpike workers were permanently laid off, for instance. Our researchers have also found that minority workers are more likely than other groups to hold jobs that could be lost ― permanently ― to automation. And that leads to the alarming conclusion that pandemic-induced automation will ― as we have in fact seen ― only serve to accentuate preexisting disparities in our society. We can’t stop technological progress, of course. But this wave of automation will require each of us to think hard about how we can transition affected workers into new, stable careers filled with opportunity. At the Philadelphia Fed, we’re working hard on designing programs that can upskill people who are experiencing labor force dislocation, which I’m happy to talk more about during our discussion. It’s my firm belief that we can seize the opportunity as we emerge from this tragic period. So, thank you, and now let’s open this up for discussion.
