Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Correcting ‘Dodd–Frank’ to Actually End ‘Too Big to Fail’ June 26, 2013 Washington, D.C. Speech in PDF Chairman Hensarling, Ranking Member Waters, and Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify at this hearing on “Examining How the Dodd–Frank Act Could Result in More Taxpayer-Funded Bailouts.” Before I begin, I want to recognize the common goal that we all share—ending “too big to fail” (TBTF) and taxpayer-funded bailouts. However, as iconic patriot Patrick Henry said in one of his greatest speeches, “Different men often see the same subject in different lights.” I recognize and respect a difference of opinion on this critical issue of how to eliminate taxpayer-funded bailouts. But I trust that in the marketplace of ideas and after careful deliberation—such as this hearing—our democratic process will shine through and decisions will be made that are in the best interest of our country. In the same speech, Patrick Henry also appealed to all perspectives to do right: “This is no time for ceremony,” he said, for it “…is one of awful moment to this country.” The great patriot was, of course, addressing the injustice of perpetuating the rule of the British Crown. This morning, I want to address what I consider the injustice of perpetuating financial institutions that are so large, complex and opaque that they are seen as critical to the proper functioning of our economy and are therefore considered TBTF. I will argue that these institutions operate under a privileged status that exacts an unfair and nontransparent tax upon the American people and represents not only a threat to financial stability, but to the rule of law as well as principles of fair and open competition—hallmarks of the democratic capitalism that makes our country great. I will argue that the effort crafted by Congress to correct the problems of TBTF—known as the 2010 Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd–Frank)—is, despite its best intentions, ineffective, burdensome, imposes a prohibitive cost burden on the non-TBTF banking institutions and needs to be amended. It is an example of the triumph of hope over experience. And, lastly, I will argue that dealing with TBTF is a cause that should be embraced by Republicans, Democrats and Independents alike. For regardless of your ideological bent, there is no escaping the reality that TBTF banks’ bad decisions inflicted harm upon the American people in the excessive credit boom through 2007 and particularly during the “awful moment” of the 2008–09 crisis. [1] The American people will be grateful to whoever liberates them from the risk of a recurrence of taxpayer bailouts and the serious threat of another Great Depression. Federal Reserve convention requires that I issue a disclaimer here: As is our practice, I speak only for myself, not for others associated with our nation’s central bank. There are different views on this issue even within the Fed; like Patrick Henry’s co-patriots, we too “see the same subject in different lights.” In addition to Jeff Lacker, President of the Richmond Fed, who is here with us today, the chairman of the Fed, Ben Bernanke, and three other governors, Jeremy Stein, Daniel Tarullo and Jerome Powell, all good friends and men I greatly admire, have expressed different views than ours in Dallas about how to address the problem of TBTF. You should consider their views, as well as those of Mr. Hoenig and Ms. Bair who join Mr. Lacker and me on this panel. [2] Today, I’ll simply give you the views that have been thought through over several years by my colleagues and me at the Dallas Fed. What’s the Problem? Less than a dozen megabanks—a mere 0.2 percent of all banking organizations—control two-thirds of the assets in the U.S. banking industry. The concentration of assets has been ongoing for more than 30 years, but it picked up pace in the 1990s and greatly intensified during the 2008–09 financial crisis, when several failing giants were absorbed, with taxpayers’ support, by larger, presumably healthier ones. The result is a lopsided financial system, and the episode we all experienced in 2008–09 is one we are still in the process of recovering from. None of us ever wish to experience another catastrophe such as occurred in fall 2008. Yet, given the well-intentioned but impracticable reforms forged in the crucible of the crisis, I believe the likelihood and severity of another crisis have risen rather than receded. Here are the facts: Today, we have about 5,500 banking organizations in the United States. Nearly each and every one of these bank holding companies represents no threat to the survival of our economic system. But less than a dozen of the largest and most complex banks are each capable—through a series of missteps by their management—of seriously damaging the vitality, resilience and prosperity that has personified the U.S. economy. Any of these megabanks, given their systemic footprint and interconnectedness with other large financial institutions, could threaten to bring down the economy, again. This 0.2 percent of banks, deemed candidates to be considered “too big to fail,” is treated differently from the other 99.8 percent and differently from other businesses ( Figure 1 ). Implicit government policy has made these megabank institutions exempt from the normal processes of bankruptcy and creative destruction. TBTF is a euphemism for a financial institution so large, interconnected and/or complex that its functions are seen as critical and policymakers think its demise could substantially damage the financial system and economy if it were allowed to fail. Without fear of closure, these banks and their counterparties can take excessive risks. We regularly see this reported in the press: Megabanks are too often driven by a culture directed more toward the generation of revenue growth to inflate their share price, without sufficient regard to prudent risk management. Executives and investors capture the upside; the taxpayers bear the downside risk (although this is not measured in our federal budget). In our capitalist economic system, when companies that experience difficulties fail, their business models are rationalized, streamlined and reorganized. The highly diverse economic engine of growth that is the United States has become robustly dynamic upon the currents of what the renowned economist Joseph Schumpeter termed “creative destruction”—a “reap what you sow,” free-market process of success and failure, innovation and obsolescence. Viable business models should be given the opportunity to compete and prosper on their own merits, while unattractive strategies should be allowed to fail. Subverting the ability to fail, on the taxpayers’ dime, is a perversion of American capitalism. Advantages to being Too Big, Too Complex, Too Opaque The playing field is tilted to the advantage of the megabanks that can raise capital more cheaply than their smaller competitors due to perceived taxpayer support. Studies, including those published by the International Monetary Fund and the Bank for International Settlements, estimate this advantage to be as much as 1 percentage point, or some $50 billion to $100 billion annually for U.S. TBTF banks, during the period surrounding the financial crisis. [3] In a popular post by editors at Bloomberg, the 10 largest U.S. banks are estimated to enjoy an aggregate longer-term subsidy of $83 billion per year. [4] Andy Haldane, executive director for financial stability at the Bank of England, estimates the current implicit TBTF subsidy to be roughly $300 billion per year for the 29 global institutions identified as “systemically important.” [5] Large banks and their allies have pushed back against these points, producing a flurry of counter-claims in recent months. My staff and I have reviewed these arguments and have found them to be assertions lacking merit. Given this range of estimates, Sens. Sherrod Brown of Ohio and David Vitter of Louisiana have asked the Government Accountability Office (GAO) to calculate just how much of a cost-of-funds advantage the big banks have over the mid-sized and smaller community banking organizations that make up the 99.8 percent that are not implicitly protected from failure. As pointed out by Simon Johnson, the MIT economist and former chief economist at the International Monetary Fund, all one has to do is ask people in the credit markets if they think lenders to the biggest banks have some degree of protection offered by the government, and you will hear a resounding “yes.” [6] At the Dallas Fed, we believe that whatever the precise subsidy number is, it exists, it is significant and it encourages the biggest banking organizations, along with their many nonbank subsidiaries (investment firms, securities lenders, finance companies), to grow larger and riskier. This entire arrangement is patently unfair. It makes for an uneven playing field, tilted to the advantage of Wall Street against Main Street, placing the financial system and the economy in constant jeopardy. The Problem Magnified, Not Solved The Dodd–Frank Act was a well-intentioned response to the problem. We respect its drafters and those who crafted it in an earnest attempt to address much needed reform in the financial services industry. However, its stated promise to end too big to fail rings hollow. Running 849 pages and with more than 9,000 pages of regulations written so far to implement it, Dodd–Frank is long on process and complexity but short on results. Consequently, nearly three years after Dodd–Frank was signed into law, very little positive reform has been implemented. Regulators cannot enforce rules that are not easily understood. Nor can they enforce these rules without creating armies of new supervisors. This venerable Committee on Financial Services aggregates information from the Federal Register that estimates the cumulative hours needed for the affected agencies, like the Fed, to fulfill new requirements called for by Dodd–Frank. This Committee presently estimates that it will take 24,180,856 hours each year to comply with new rules already finalized for implementation of the act. [7] And we have yet to complete the rulemaking process! I work every day with my colleagues at the Fed to craft the monetary conditions to help the economy create jobs. This is not the kind of job creation I would hope for. I doubt anyone seriously believes that an additional several thousand pages of regulations, on top of the nine thousand already written, will provide clarity, procedural focus and the proper incentives to end TBTF and to “Just Say No” to more government bailouts. Complex regulations create barriers to entry and encourage firms to morph into even more complex and opaque structures. Further, regulatory supervision, by definition, is always at least one step behind the actions taken by market participants. The more complex the rules, the more difficult it is to bridge the gap due to the complexities of financial markets. None of this is helpful for financial stability. Bailout Concerns Linger Briefly, I believe the current legislative solution to ending TBTF has actually exacerbated the issue and potentially codified TBTF, rather than eliminated it. As soon as a financial institution is designated “systemically important” as required under Title I of Dodd–Frank (and becomes known by the acronym “SIFI”), it is viewed by the market as being the first to be saved by the first responders in a financial crisis. In other words, these “SIFIs” occupy a privileged space in the financial system (one pundit referred to the acronym as meaning “Save If Failure Impending”). As a corollary, a banking customer has a disincentive to do business with smaller competitors, because a non-SIFI does not have an implied government funding lifeline. Even if a SIFI ends up funding itself with more equity capital than a smaller competitor, the choice remains for where you would like to hold important financial relationships: with an institution with a government backstop or one without? Thus, the playing field remains uneven; the advantages of size and perceived subsidy accrue to the behemoth banks that will continue to grow larger and become even more of a systemic risk. Dodd–Frank does not eliminate this perception and in many ways perpetuates it as reality. Further, some have held out hope that a key provision of Title I requiring banking organizations to submit detailed plans for their orderly resolution in bankruptcy, without government assistance, will provide for a roadmap to avoid bailouts. However, these “living wills” are likely to prove futile in helping navigate a real-time “systemic” failure. Given the complexity and opacity of the TBTF institutions and the ability to move assets and liabilities across subsidiaries and affiliates (as well as off-balance sheet, including through huge and fast-moving derivative positions), a living will would likely be ineffective when it really mattered. I do not have much faith in the living will process to make any material difference in TBTF risks and behaviors—a bank would run out of liquidity (not capital) due to reputational risk quicker than management would work with regulators to execute a living will blueprint. Adding insult to injury, Title II of Dodd–Frank describes and designates the Orderly Liquidation Authority (OLA) as the resolution mechanism to handle the disposal of a giant, systemically-disruptive financial enterprise. The three letters themselves evoke the deceptive doublespeak of an Orwellian nightmare. The “L,” which stands for liquidation, will in practice become a simulated restructuring, as would occur in a Chapter 11 bankruptcy. In reality, rather than fulfill Dodd–Frank’s promise of “no more taxpayer-funded bailouts,” the U.S. Treasury will likely provide, through the FDIC, debtor-in-possession financing to the failed companies’ artificially-kept-alive operating subsidiaries for up to five years, but perhaps longer. Under the single point of entry method, the operating subsidiaries remain protected as the holding company is restructured. So if a company does business with the operating subsidiaries, say, through derivatives transactions, then this company is even more confident that their counterparty is TBTF. Some officials refer to this procedure as a “liquidity provision” rather than a bailout. Call it whatever you wish, but this is taxpayer funding at far-below-market rates. At the Dallas Fed, we would call this form of “liquidation” a nationalized financial institution. During the five-year resolution period, this nationalized institution does not have to pay any taxes of any kind to any government entity. To us, this looks, sounds, and tastes like a taxpayer bailout, just hidden behind different language. If it waddles like a duck and quacks like a duck, it's a duck. Moreover, if the reorganized company cannot repay the Treasury for its debtor-in-possession financing, Title II suggests that the repayment should be clawed back via a special assessment on the company’s SIFI competitors. But that assessment is then written off as a tax-deductible business expense, thereby reducing revenue to the Treasury. This is a "rob Peter to pay Paul" chain of events, with the taxpayer playing the role of Peter. Although I have not seen the Congressional Budget Office run the numbers for the plausible scenarios, I suspect that the impact on our federal deficit and debt would be significant, not to mention the potential effects from the concomitant recession that would likely occur. This does not sound like a “no taxpayer-funded bailouts” solution. One form of explicit intervention appears to have been replaced by Title II of Dodd–Frank, a disguised form of taxpayer bailout. Title II promotes and sustains an unnatural longevity for zombie financial institutions—and this is an acute issue in other financial systems, including parts of Europe today. Title II imposes a competitive disadvantage onto small- and medium-size financial institutions, and it does so for potentially several years at taxpayer expense. It is these smaller financial institutions that, by the way, provide the primary financial lifeline so vital to the small- and medium-size businesses in your Congressional districts that, in turn, provide the bulk of innovation and job creation in the United States. [8] This Committee’s Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations held a hearing on May 15, 2013, in this very room that focused on Title II in great detail. The four witnesses who testified that day gave a very informative and expert critique of the shortcomings of Title II, and I respectfully refer you to that hearing. [9] A Simple Proposal Where does the current reform effort leave us and how should we forge a path forward? Despite the plethora of new rules and regulations created by Dodd–Frank, market discipline is still lacking for the largest financial institutions, as it was during the last crisis. Why should a prospective purchaser of bank debt or other type of counterparty practice due diligence if, in the end, regardless of new layers of regulation and oversight, it is widely perceived that the issuing institution and its subsidiaries will not be allowed to fail? There is a great deal of moral hazard at all levels of decision-making in our current financial system. We must change this status quo. The return of marketplace discipline and effective due diligence of banking behemoths is long overdue. My colleagues and I at the Dallas Fed offer a modest proposal to that end, with a goal of leveling the playing field for all. Here is a simple graphic of the basic organizational structure of a typical financial holding company ( Figure 2 ). Note the highlighted commercial bank operation within that structure. To begin with, we would roll back the federal safety net—deposit insurance and the Federal Reserve’s discount window—to where it was always intended to be, that is, to traditional commercial bank deposit and lending intermediation and payment system functions. [10] Thus, the safety net would only be available to traditional commercial banks and not to the nonbank affiliates of bank holding companies or the parent companies themselves. This is how the law needs to be applied, even in times of crisis. [11] Second, customers, creditors and counterparties of all nonbank affiliates and the parent holding companies would sign a simple, legally binding, unambiguous disclosure acknowledging and accepting that there is no government guarantee—ever—backstopping their investment ( Figure 3 ). They are on their own, and they know it. A similar disclaimer would apply to banks’ deposits outside the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. (FDIC) protection limit and other unsecured debts. Knowing where the federal government guarantees begin and end would properly realign incentives and reinvigorate a degree of creditor discipline that has been dormant at large, complex financial institutions for far too long. Third, we recommend that the largest financial holding companies be restructured so that every one of their corporate entities is subject to a speedy bankruptcy process, and in the case of the banking entities themselves, that they become an appropriate size, complexity and geographic footprint that is “too small to save.” [12] Addressing institutional size is vital to maintaining a credible threat of failure, thereby providing a convincing case that policy has truly changed. This step gets both bank incentives and structure right, neither of which is accomplished by Dodd–Frank. Our third step would provide a more level playing field with reduced regulatory costs for all competitors, encourage greater innovation by all members of the banking industry and minimize the downside consequences to the economy of megabank failures. The downsized, formerly too-big-to-fail banks would then be small and simple enough (just like the other 99.8 percent) that, with adequate planning, the FDIC could close and then reopen the bank in short order with new management and new private-sector ownership. “Closed on Friday and reopened on Monday” is the customary process administered by the FDIC that we would like to see applicable for all depository financial institutions. No bank would remain so significant and interconnected to the financial system that its demise would spell the unraveling of the financial system. In these new circumstances, all banks that warranted closure would fail the old fashioned way; they would be gone, with their stockholders’ equity written down to zero, their bondholders saddled with haircuts and their insured depositors left unharmed. What’s The Way Forward? The aim of our three-step proposal is simple: All banks would be subject to regulatory oversight that fits its business model—and most important, all banks would be subject to the market discipline exercised by owners and creditors. Given this more explicit treatment of creditors of regulated commercial banks, creditors of unregulated shadow banks should begin to understand that government guarantees don’t apply to their transactions with the affiliates of regulated commercial banks nor with unregulated financial companies that offer similar products and services. Market discipline could then begin to reinforce and even somewhat replace regulatory discipline. Some argue that these three steps are already at work within the current regulatory and legal framework. Others cautiously warn that we should wait to see how all of the rules and regulations of Dodd–Frank are implemented before we attempt any improvements. Both perspectives might underappreciate the urgency we feel to correct the current imbalance and perversion of capitalism before the next crisis, not after. Arguments to “give Dodd–Frank a chance” or to simply address TBTF with higher capital requirements (and not complementary structural changes) fall short of necessary action. Living wills and higher capital requirements are potentially very helpful tools but are not sufficient to ensure the survival of a company, and they will not eliminate massive losses that can choke off liquidity and disrupt financial markets and the economy. Banks are levered institutions and are vulnerable given that they are usually levered with short-term debt like deposits and repo-like funding vehicles. Thus, capital helps to maintain confidence that the institution can sustain some losses and still remain open for business tomorrow. But once investors and creditors begin to fear that losses have been understated or forthcoming at that institution or similar institutions, confidence begins to rapidly diminish, and almost no amount of capital is sufficient to forestall a collapse of confidence and a liquidity crisis. When confidence begins to wane, liquidity dries up quickly. And the plunge in confidence is contagious, often having little to do with the underlying situation of each company. That’s where the lender of last resort function of the Federal Reserve comes into play—the central bank lends to solvent companies, those with positive capital and good collateral. But such capital is only a small element in saving a company from extinction. Confidence matters even more. Within the category of capital, it is loss-absorbing capital that buttresses confidence the most. Equity capital is the first to absorb losses; hence, it is the most expensive capital to raise. Debt doesn’t absorb losses except in bankruptcy, at which point the company is dead. Risk-weighted capital is somewhat meaningless—and sometimes deeply misleading—in the context of loss absorbency; any asset that incurs losses must be written off against equity capital, whether the loss was in business loans, mortgage loans, municipal bonds or agency debt. If losses thin out the capital cushion to the point of undermining confidence, the future viability of the company slips. Nobody knows the magic capital ratio that will prevent a loss of confidence, and I do not believe regulators will suddenly become better equipped to set higher magical ratios in the future for the largest, most politically-connected banking institutions. Capital is necessary for viability (nonfailure), and I support higher capital requirements (particularly for any institution that could become of systemic importance), but it is not sufficient. We concede that our proposal doesn’t have all the answers either. It would not eliminate financial crises—that would be an impossible or even foolish goal—but it should reduce their frequency and severity. Nor will it alter the human DNA of those who serve as “first responders” during the next crisis. Our proposal should make the magnitude of the problems regulators face, and the tasks they need to perform, far more manageable. Under our plan, supervisory agencies would oversee several thousand community banks, a few hundred moderate-size banks (by today’s standards) and no megabanks. The nonbank and shadow bank components of a large financial holding company would still operate but without subsidy and access to the safety net and with long-overdue market discipline imposed by at-risk creditors. There will always be some banks that are larger than the rest, and consequently, there will be temptation for regulators to label the “biggest few” as systemically important. The fluctuating nature of human resolve and political fortitude, as well as the problem of “regulatory capture,” has been present in U.S. bank policy at least since the intervention/bailout of Continental Illinois and its creditors in 1984. Our proposal may not prohibit regulators from intervening to support the unsecured creditors of a failing banking institution. But our proposal reduces the dimensions of the problem—asset size and systemic interconnectedness—by an order of magnitude and thereby should diminish the tendency to intervene out of fear of unknown systemic risks. Our plan would dramatically reduce the costs of nonintervention. The elimination of TBTF along the lines we have proposed will not, as the megabanks suggest, diminish our nation’s competitive advantage in global financial markets. If anything, our proposal may help drive innovation in our financial system by leveling the playing field. The former safety net implicitly covered too much of a selective part of the credit intermediation system, promoting perverse risk-taking incentives. We believe that had the Dallas Fed plan I have articulated today been in place a decade ago, it would have altered the insidious behaviors that contributed to the crisis, avoiding the bailouts and their aftermath, the cost of which our nation’s citizens will endure for years to come. [13] We believe that had our plan helped guide the restructuring of the banking and financial services industry before the crisis began, neither Citigroup, Bank of America, nor others would have been positioned to receive hundreds of billions of dollars of extraordinary government assistance; the parts of these companies that got into trouble would have been sold off, closed or run through a standard bankruptcy process. The taxpayers would never have been involved. The same could be said of Bear Stearns; the first shadow bank to require government assistance back in March 2008 would have been governed by market discipline and unable to call upon giant banking institutions to find an over-the-weekend, government-assisted acquisition because there would have been no megabanks to invite to the table. Further, the more disciplined financial marketplace that would result from the adoption of our proposal likely would have helped prevent a concentration of risks and imbalances of the magnitude that occurred at AIG. This is the ultimate test and counterfactual thought experiment for any proposal to end TBTF. The GAO and others estimate that the cost of the financial crisis, measured in lost consumption and jobs, could exceed $14 trillion, or roughly one whole year of U.S. output. [14] We do not think Dodd–Frank would have averted the 2008–09 financial crisis and its horrendous costs and consequences had the act been in place and implemented in the years before the crisis began. Were we to have another crisis today, we believe that the cost would be even greater because, in effect, rather than in theory, Dodd–Frank entrenches and perpetuates TBTF banks that are now even bigger than they were before. An Appeal for Action In my introduction, I referred to Patrick Henry. In the speech I quoted, he went on to say, “It is natural to man to indulge in the illusions of hope. We are apt to shut our eyes against a painful truth, and listen to the song of that siren till she transforms us.” I implore the members of this important committee and the Congress to not succumb merely to the illusion of hope. Don’t listen to the siren song of the megabanks and their lobbyists. Take action to deal with the unfair advantages that these institutions enjoy. They will spend millions of dollars to try to perpetuate their brand of crony capitalism. Resisting their entreaties is the right thing to do. Leveling the playing field is a just cause for 99.8 percent of American banks and for all Americans. The potential taxpayer burden of dealing with TBTF institutions might be addressed by a still-growing army of bank supervisory personnel trying to enforce the rigid, complex and probably easy-to-evade rules of Dodd–Frank. However, this would be oversight without the benefit of supplemental reinforcement from market discipline and increased due diligence. In March of this year, the Dallas Fed released an annual report on “Vanquishing Too Big to Fail.” [15] The contents of this report explored the merits of community banks, the adverse effects of current reform efforts and the urgency of reasserting market discipline for all institutions—large and small—to compete on a more level playing field. Accompanying these essays is a series of responses to the questions and criticisms we have received about our proposal, including those raised by proponents for the megabanks. This “Q&A with Richard Fisher on TBTF” can be found at www.dallasfed.org/microsites/fed/annual/2012/ar12c/index.cfm . Unfortunately, a subsidy once given is nearly impossible to take away. Overcoming entrenched oligopoly forces, in combination with customer inertia, may require government-sanctioned reorganization and restructuring of the TBTF firms in order to accelerate the imposition of effective market discipline. We advocate using as little government intervention and statutory modification as possible to restructure the largest institutions to a size that is effectively disciplined by both market and regulatory forces—so that every corporate entity is subject to a speedy bankruptcy process and every banking entity is “too small to save.” This would underscore to customers and creditors that a credible regime shift has taken place, that all banking organizations are without subsidy and are governed by the market discipline of creditors at risk of loss, and that the reign of TBTF policies has truly ended. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. The recent recession began in 2007 but cascaded into crisis in fall 2008, the effects of which we still grapple with today. Some examples of other thoughts on ending TBTF within the Federal Reserve System, include “Regulating Large Financial Institutions,” speech by Jeremy C. Stein, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, at the "Rethinking Macro Policy II," a conference sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., April 17, 2013, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20130417a.htm ; “Ending ‘Too Big to Fail’,” speech by Jerome H. Powell, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Institute of International Bankers 2013 Washington Conference, Washington, D.C., March 4, 2013, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20130304a.htm ; “Financial Stability Regulation,” speech by Daniel K. Tarullo, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, at the Distinguished Jurist Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Oct. 10, 2012, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/tarullo20121010a.htm ; and “Fostering Financial Stability,” speech by Chairman Ben S. Bernanke, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, at the 2012 Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Stone Mountain, Ga., April 9, 2012, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20120409a.htm . For one example of the TBTF advantage observed in the spreads paid for longer-term debt, see “BIS Annual Report 2011/12,” Bank for International Settlements, June 24, 2012, pp. 75–6, www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2012e.htm . See “Why Should Taxpayers Give Big Banks $83 Billion a Year?” Bloomberg, Feb. 20, 2013, www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-02-20/why-should-taxpayers-give-big-banks-83-billion-a-year-.html . See “On Being the Right Size,” speech by Andrew Haldane, Bank of England, at the 2012 Beesley Lectures, Institute of Economic Affairs’ 22nd Annual Series, London, Oct. 25, 2012, www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2012/speech615.pdf . See “Big Banks Have a Big Problem,” by Simon Johnson, New York Times , March 14, 2013, http://economix.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/03/14/big-banks-have-a-big-problem . See “Dodd–Frank Burden Tracker,” U.S. House Financial Services Committee, http://financialservices.house.gov/burdentracker . See “Does Size Really Matter?: The Evolving Role of Small Firms in the U.S. Economy,” by Nathan Sheets and Robert A. Sockin, Empirical & Thematic Perspectives, Citi Research, Dec. 10, 2012. These international economists noted that “well-established results in the empirical literature have shown a special link between small firms and small banks. As such, this sustained and sizable decline in the role of small banks as providers of credit—reflecting the ongoing consolidation of the U.S. banking system—is very likely a factor contributing to the downtrend in the share of credit provided to small firms.” Further, the authors conclude that they “would be inclined to support public policies designed to ensure a level playing field between firms of various sizes and, in addition, measures to incentivize small-business creation and the allocation of credit to young firms.” We at the Dallas Fed agree with this conclusion and promote competition across industries, including financial services. Hearing entitled “Who Is Too Big to Fail: Does Title II of the Dodd–Frank Act Enshrine Taxpayer-Funded Bailouts?” Testimony by Professor David A. Skeel, Professor John B. Taylor, Mr. Joshua Rosner and Mr. Michael Krimminger, May 15, 2013, www.financialservices.house.gov/calendar/eventsingle.aspx?EventID=333122 . The Fed’s discount window offers three secured lending programs to depository institutions: primary credit, secondary credit and seasonal credit. Primary credit is a very short-term (usually overnight) loan to depository institutions in generally sound financial condition. Depository institutions not eligible for primary credit may apply for secondary credit to meet short-term liquidity needs. Seasonal credit is extended to relatively small depository institutions that have recurring intrayear fluctuations in funding needs. This would not prevent the Federal Reserve from serving its lender of last resort function in a liquidity crisis by lending to solvent companies with good collateral at a penalty interest rate on a temporary basis. This restructuring would be designed and implemented by the companies’ top management team within the timeframe established by legislation and/or regulation. Richard W. Fisher and Harvey Rosenblum, “How to Shrink the 'Too-Big-to-Fail' Banks,” Wall Street Journal , Mar. 11, 2013, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324128504578344652647097278.html . See “Financial Crisis Losses and Potential Impacts of the Dodd–Frank Act,” Government Accountability Office, GAO-13-180, Jan. 16, 2013, www.gao.gov/products/GAO-13-180 . Also, “How Bad Was It? The Costs and Consequences of the 2007-09 Financial Crisis,” by Tyler Atkinson, David Luttrell, and Harvey Rosenblum, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Staff Papers, forthcoming, 2013. The essays included in the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 2012 Annual Report , can be found at www.dallasfed.org/microsites/fed/annual/2012/indexw.cfm . Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Horseshift! (With Reference to Gordian Knots) Richard Fisher's remarks before the National Association of State Retirement Administrators 59th Annual Conference August 5, 2013 Portland, Oregon Speech in PDF Thank you for that kind introduction, Dana [Bilyeu]. It is somehow comforting to speak to the National Association of State Retirement Administrators. For you, like my colleagues and me at the Federal Reserve, are faced with some very serious challenges. Angst, if not misery, does love company, especially in a beautiful setting such as Portland, Oregon, in August. Your anxious predicament—somehow untying the Gordian Knot of underfunded state retirement systems—is summarized for the lay reader in this week’s cover article in the Economist magazine. I will not attempt to advise you on how to manage the problems written about in that highly respected magazine, as I am sure there will be abundant discussion about funding gaps throughout this conference. Our predicament at the Federal Reserve is also widely written about. We too have a Gordian Knot to untangle. Like yours, it is anxiety inducing. Let me explain it to you, and in so doing, suggest that we share a common interest in the Fed succeeding in its mission. A Brief Backgrounder on the Fed First, a little background on the Federal Reserve. The Fed is the central bank of the United States. We operate under a license given to us by Congress one hundred years ago, a license that has been amended on occasion but has, for the most part, remained intact. The Fed provides the fuel for the nation’s economic engine: We print money, supplying the liquidity needed for job creators to put people to work and expand the wealth and output of the nation. And we are charged with regulating deposit-taking institutions to make sure they are transmitting monetary policy efficiently and operating prudently. We have to be careful in deploying the fuel we create, for like all fuels, ours is combustible. Employed recklessly or without safeguard, it can lead to an explosion of inflation; if we are too miserly, we risk an implosion of deflation. We can spark a destructive outbreak of speculation or induce excessive risk aversion. We can enhance financial stability or exacerbate systemic instability. There are 12 Federal Reserve Banks; together we operate the business of the Fed. We make loans to banks. We distribute Federal Reserve notes, more commonly known as “dollars,” to banks. (As an aside, if you look at a dollar bill you can see by the letter printed to the left of George Washington which Federal Reserve District it originally came from: Those with an “L” are the ones ordered from the Bureau of Engraving and Printing by the San Francisco Fed for Oregon and other states that make up the Twelfth Federal Reserve District; those with a “K” are from the Dallas Fed’s Eleventh District, covering principally Texas—these, of course, are the most coveted!) And the 12 Federal Reserve banks house the ground forces of bank examiners who supervise and regulate banks, bank holding companies, and savings and loan companies that lend and provide other services to Main Street. It might interest you to know that none of the 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents or their staff is a federal employee, though we work under the watchful eye of the Federal Reserve Board whose governors and staff are. I serve at the pleasure of a nine-person board of directors, chaired by the founder of Southwest Airlines, Herb Kelleher; I do not serve at the pleasure of the president of the United States, nor was I confirmed by the U.S. Senate. The seven members of the Board of Governors, led by Ben Bernanke, are federal employees who are appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate. This is the way the Federal Reserve was set up by Congress under President Wilson so as to balance power between the political exigencies of Washington and the financial and economic needs of Main Street. Making Monetary Policy In addition to doing the Main Street work of the Federal Reserve System, the presidents of the 12 Fed Banks sit down with the seven Governors of the Fed Board in a body called the Federal Open Market Committee (the FOMC) to decide the nation’s monetary policy. Together, we decide how much fuel to inject into America’s $16 trillion economic engine. Just as you and your trustees bear the fiduciary duty of properly managing and protecting the value of the pensions under your administration, we at the Fed are charged with the fiduciary duty of managing and protecting the value of our nation’s money supply. And just as your job is conditioned by decisions made by politicians outside of your control, so too is the Fed’s. Let me explain. By law we are charged by Congress with protecting the purchasing power of money from the ravages of inflation or deflation, a directive we’ve been reasonably successful in satisfying over the past 20 years or so. If we create too much money, we spur inflation; if we create too little, deflation ensues. But Congress has also mandated that we conduct monetary policy so as to achieve full employment, a charge that we have the power to influence but cannot control. Much of the impetus for creating the conditions for full employment depends on how fiscal and regulatory actors incent job creators—where and how much to tax and spend and how businesses are regulated. These decisions are made by politicians the people elect, not by me and my colleagues at the nation’s central bank. As long as inflation is held at bay, the Federal Reserve can put the monetary pedal to the metal, but the vehicle of job creation will not move forward if the fiscal and regulatory authorities have their foot firmly on the brake. Years of Extraordinary Measures For six of my eight years at the Fed, we have been working to bring the nation’s economy out of recession. The fiscal authorities have for the most part been AWOL during this time, having left the parking brake on during their absence. This has placed the onus on the Bernanke-led Federal Reserve. We have undertaken extraordinary measures, first to get the economy out of the emergency room after the financial system seizure of 2008-09, and more recently, to goose up the private sector to expand payrolls. Toward this end, the Fed cut interest rates to their lowest levels in the nation’s 237-year history by initially cutting the base rate for overnight interbank lending—the “fed funds rate”—to near zero, and then by purchasing massive amounts of U.S. Treasuries and bonds issued or backed by U.S. government-sponsored enterprises (obligations of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac). This later program is referred to as quantitative easing, or QE, by the public and as large-scale asset purchases, or LSAPs, internally at the Fed. As a result of LSAPs conducted over three stages of QE, the Fed’s System Open Market Account now holds $2 trillion of Treasury securities and $1.3 trillion of agency and mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Since last fall, when we initiated the third stage of QE, we have regularly been purchasing $45 billion a month of Treasuries and $40 billion a month in MBS, meanwhile reinvesting the proceeds from the paydowns of our mortgage-based investments. The result is that our balance sheet has ballooned to more than $3.5 trillion. That’s $3.5 trillion , or $11,300 for every man, woman and child residing in the United States. The theoretical mechanics behind QE are straightforward: When the Fed buys Treasuries and MBS, it pays for them, putting money into the economy. A key intent of this unprecedented program was to drive down interest rates to such a degree that businesses would achieve a financial comfort level that would induce them to put back to work the millions of Americans that were laid off in the Great Recession. Thus far, only 76 percent of the jobs lost during 2008-09 have been clawed back in the more than three and a half years of modest to moderate payroll gains. This 76 percent figure does not include the 3 million or so jobs that would normally be created to absorb growth in the working-age population. Muscling the Yield Curve … The efficacy of this effort is the subject of significant debate, even internally within the FOMC. Some who question the efficacy, including myself, note that the effect of our purchasing MBS and driving down mortgage rates has certainly assisted a robust recovery in housing, and with it, construction jobs and manufacturing and transportation of materials that go into homes. This was clear from reading the components of the Institute for Supply Management’s manufacturing index released last Thursday, which showed the biggest one-month jump since 1996. Very liberal financing terms for automobiles that we have induced have coincided with an aging of the nation’s auto fleet to regenerate domestic auto sales to the 15.7 million units level. And the Fed’s muscling of the yield curve has brought what has been a 30-year-long bond market rally to a crescendo, as shown in the right-hand bottom corner of these slides. The historically low interest rates engineered through the Fed’s QE programs have allowed American businesses to recapitalize their balance sheets. Any CEO or CFO worth their salt—running a company that is large, medium or small, whether publicly or privately owned—has by now taken advantage of this to restructure the liability side of their balance sheet. Publicly held companies have benefitted even more as lower rates have driven a raging bull market for stocks. As equity prices break new ground daily, the S&P 500 has soared 153 percent from its March 2009 trough. And yet job creation has been slow in coming. On this crucial front—the second leg of our dual mandate—we do not seem to have achieved much with the trillions of dollars we have poured into the economy through our three QE programs. … Is Accompanied by Costs Counteracting whatever benefits one can trace to the Fed’s unorthodox policies are some obvious costs. First, savers and others who rely on retirement monies invested in short-maturity fixed-income investments, such as bank CDs and Treasury bills, have seen their income evaporate while the rich and the quick, the big money players of Wall Street have become richer still. Second, the standard return assumptions of 7.5 to 8 percent for retirement pools, as you well know, have been dashed (though I have always felt they were already calculated on an imaginary and politically convenient basis rather than a realistic one). Third, accompanying the Fed’s growing balance sheet we have seen a dramatic expansion in the monetary base—the sum of reserves and currency. Currently, much of the monetary base has piled up in the form of excess reserves of banks who have not found willing or able borrowers. Other forms of surplus cash are lying fallow on the balance sheets of businesses or being deployed in buying back shares and increasing dividend payouts so as to buttress company stock prices. A basic understanding of demand-pull inflation is “too much money chasing too few goods.” Thus, the excess, currently nondeployed money could prove the kindling of an inflationary conflagration unless the Fed is nimble in managing its effect as it works its way into the economy’s production and consumption of goods and services. A corollary of reining in this massive monetary stimulus in a timely manner is that financial markets may have become too accustomed to what some have depicted as a Fed “put.” Some have come to expect the Fed to keep the markets levitating indefinitely. This distorts the pricing of financial assets, encourages lazy analysis and can set the groundwork for serious misallocation of capital. The Challenge of Untying the Monetary Gordian Knot The challenge now facing the FOMC is that of deciding when to begin dialing back (or as the financial press is fond of reporting: “tapering”) the amount of additional security purchases. In his press conference following our June FOMC meeting, speaking on behalf of the Committee, Chairman Bernanke made clear the parameters for dialing back and eventually ending the QE program. Should the economy continue to improve along the lines then envisioned by Committee, the market could anticipate our slowing the rate of purchases later this year, with an eye toward curtailing new purchases as the unemployment rate broaches 7 percent and prospects for solid job gains remain promising. Kindly note that this does not mean that the Committee would envision raising the shorter term fed funds rate simultaneously; indeed, the Committee has said it expects this pivotal rate to remain between 0 and ¼ percent at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 percent, intermediate prospects for inflation are reasonable, and longer-term inflationary expectations remain well anchored. Having stated this quite clearly, and with the unemployment rate having come down to 7.4 percent, I would say that the Committee is now closer to execution mode, pondering the right time to begin reducing its purchases, assuming there is no intervening reversal in economic momentum in coming months. This is a delicate moment. The Fed has created a monetary Gordian Knot. You can see the developing complexity of that knot in this sequence of slides tracing the change in our portfolio structure with each phase of QE. Whereas before, our portfolio consisted primarily of instantly tradable short-term Treasury paper, now we hold almost none; our portfolio consists primarily of longer-term Treasuries and MBS. Without delving into the various details and adjustments that could be made (such as considerations of assets readily available for purchase by the Fed), we now hold roughly 20 percent of the stock and continue to buy more than 25 percent of the gross issuance of Treasury notes and bonds. Further, we hold more than 25 percent of MBS outstanding and continue to take down more than 30 percent of gross new MBS issuance. Also, our current rate of MBS purchases far outpaces the net monthly supply of MBS. The point is: We own a significant slice of these critical markets. This is, indeed, something of a Gordian Knot. Those of you familiar with the Gordian legend know there were two versions to it: One holds that Alexander the Great simply dispatched with the problem by slicing the intractable knot in half with his sword; the other posits that Alexander pulled the knot out of its pole pin, exposed the two ends of the cord and proceeded to untie it. According to the myth, the oracles then divined that he would go on to conquer the world. There is no Alexander to simply slice the complex knot that we have created with our rounds of QE. Instead, when the right time comes, we must carefully remove the program's pole pin and gingerly unwind it so as not to prompt market havoc. For starters though, we need to stop building upon the knot. For this reason, I have advocated that we socialize the idea of the inevitability of our dialing back and eventually ending our LSAPs. In June, I argued for the Chairman to signal this possibility at his last press conference and at last week’s meeting suggested that we should gird our loins to make our first move this fall. We shall see if that recommendation obtains with the majority of the Committee. As administrators of our states’ retirement funds, you have a vested interest in the Fed’s success. After all, the promises made to the good people who have worked for your states can only be kept if financial stability reigns, employment increases and economic growth improves. I believe we are capable of achieving these things, despite suggestions by some that we are locked into a secular trend of subpar growth; I believe that the U.S. is capable of significant economic growth going forward. But only if the nation’s fiscal authorities get their act together and develop policies that complement rather than retard the good that prudent monetary policy can achieve. The fiscal folks need to end the behavior parodied in this little video clip. Our elected officials’ traditional approach to fiscal matters has been about as cavalier as what you just saw. Given their dissolute behavior, against the background of the problems that beset Europe, the long-standing stagnation of Japan, and the challenges that face China and the emerging market economies that have prospered from supplying the materials needed for Chinese growth, I have often said that “the U.S. is the best-looking horse in the glue factory.” Weak as we have been, we are the best compared to all the rest. I have argued that the principal force holding us back from being the absolute best economy, bar none, has been fiscal management that seems incapable of providing job creators with tax, spending and regulatory incentives to take advantage of the cheap and abundant fuel the Fed has provided so that businesses can put the American people back to work. I have argued that whatever success we have achieved in clawing our way out of the “Great Recession” has been despite the fiscal and regulatory authorities. Ask any businessman or woman what holds him or her back and they will tell you it’s not monetary policy; it is that they can’t operate in a fog of total uncertainty concerning how they will be taxed or how government spending will impact them or their customers directly. And as to asking their opinion of the impact of regulation on their businesses, don’t even go there, unless you delight in hearing profanities. Horseshift! We needn’t be condemned to the glue factory. As I said, American companies publicly held and private—large, medium and small—have taken advantage of the cheap and abundant money made available by the Fed’s hyper-accommodative monetary policy to create lean and muscular balance sheets. In response to the deep recession and the challenges of fiscal and regulatory uncertainty, they have rationalized their cost structures and ramped up productivity, leveraging IT, just-in-time inventory management and new production structures to the max. I believe American businesses today are, far and away, the most efficient operators in the world. We have countless businesses in every sector of goods and service production that are the equivalents of the Secretariats, Man o’ Wars, Citations, Seabiscuits or any great thoroughbred that has ever graced the track. They just need to be let out of the starting gate. That gate is controlled by Congress, working with the president. If they would just let 'em rip, we would have an economy that would soar. We would experience what, tongue firmly but confidently in cheek, I would call “horseshift”: from being the stuff of an economic glue factory to becoming the wonder-horse that would outpace the rest of the world, putting the American people back to work and renewing the wonder of American prosperity. If you and your fellow citizens from whatever state you hail from insist upon it, it will be done. Thank you. And now, I would be pleased to avoid answering any questions you might have. The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Placing Manufacturing in Context Richard Fisher's remarks before the U.S. Manufacturing Summit August 22, 2013 Orlando, Florida Speech in PDF Every morning there is a quote of the day on the ubiquitous Bloomberg screens. Monday’s was especially apt for today’s conference. It was from Frank Sinatra: “The best revenge is massive success.” Bill Simon asked me to provide context for your discussion of a manufacturing revival in the U.S.A. I am delighted to do so. It is well-nigh time for us to once again become a “massive success” in manufacturing. But there are obstacles to doing so. If our manufacturing sector is to experience a lasting renaissance, significant changes in fiscal policy and regulation that emanate from Washington are sorely needed. First, some historical context. Look at this chart: U.S. manufacturing production was ramped up to fight the Second World War and, as you can see, declined precipitously after the war’s end. Then starting in 1947 or thereabouts, manufacturing output in America picked up slowly at first, adjusting to a post-WWII world, before accelerating to an expansion rate of 4.6 percent per annum from the time of the election of President Kennedy until Paul Volcker’s Fed broke the back of inflation and engineered a recession at the end of the 1970s. During the high-tech revolution of the 1990s, manufacturing production took off at a torrid pace, then bounced back from the tech wreck of the early 2000s until hitting the brick wall of the financial panic of 2007 and the severe recession that ensued. The downturn in U.S. manufacturing output during the 2007–09 recession was on the order of 20 percent, the worst setback but for the defense-related decline following WWII and the 54 percent decline experienced during the Great Depression. Manufacturing output today is still about 5 percent below its December 2007 business-cycle peak.[ 1 ] As for employment, manufacturing payrolls fell 16.6 percent between December 2007 and January 2010. They are still 12.9 percent below where they stood 5 ½ years ago. This raises the issue of productivity enhancement. Look at this chart: Since the end of the post-WWII recession, manufacturers’ share of the nation’s payrolls has been in continual decline. Whereas at war’s end they represented 33 percent of nonfarm payrolls, today they account for less than 10 percent. To be sure, this reflects a rise in our nation’s prosperity: As nations grow richer, they produce and consume more services. Today, manufacturing accounts for only about 12 percent of gross domestic product. The divergence between trends in job and output shares is largely accounted for by a relentless drive by manufacturers to increase productivity. Workers today are dramatically more productive than the workers of our parents’ and grandparents’ generations because technology has enabled them to produce more with fewer hours worked and at less cost. This is not going to change. The iconic economist, Joseph Schumpeter, coined the phrase “creative destruction.” In plain English, this means “out with the old, in with the new.” Americans are masters of replacing outdated methods with new ones. And it is by mastering new technology, new methodologies, and new techniques that we have the hope of revitalizing and bringing back to our shores a greater amount of the world’s manufacturing, regaining what was lost since the recession and— perhaps —bending upward the long-term manufacturing employment curve. Now here is more recent history: I have been saying for the past few years that the United States is the “best-looking horse in the glue factory.” This is certainly true in manufacturing. We have actually been outperforming the rest of the world on the manufacturing front as the recovery from the Great Recession has gained traction. For the past three years, we have outperformed the “emerging” countries: And we have outperformed the “advanced” countries: But in the last two years gains have been choppy. Notice how manufacturing growth slowed not only when Europe’s woes began to crimp confidence, but also when fiscal infighting dominated behavior in Washington. So, two questions: How do we continue to outperform other nations? How do we reignite and sustain the manufacturing renaissance? Monday’s front-page article of the Wall Street Journal pointed to some of the sources of strength in U.S. manufacturing, citing my old friend Ernie Preeg (who used to supervise me in writing economic policy decision memoranda for President Carter—which means Ernie must be 110 years old by now, a miracle of science!) and the work done by Hal Sirkin and his colleagues at the Boston Consulting Group. The article cited a critical factor influencing our destiny: the revolution occurring in oil and gas production. Thanks to a Houstonian named George Mitchell and other Schumpeterian practitioners who defied conventional wisdom and threw out the old and embraced the new, we have developed an abundance of natural gas and liquids production that are the stuff of production and the enablers of consumption. This is captured graphically here: The Journal article also cited better relationships with unions and with workers in crafting flexible and innovative labor contracts, the rising cost of labor relative to productivity in China and the “world is our oyster” capacity for sales of exported U.S. manufactured goods, noting as examples the overseas sales of Hypertherm and Graco. What the Journal article failed to cite is a historically profound enabler: Cheap and abundant money made possible by the Federal Reserve. I promised Bill Simon I would not venture into monetary policy today, and I won’t. But I will say this: While there are many risks in the policy that the Fed has been pursuing (and God and anyone who has suffered through my speeches the past few years knows I fret about those risks), every manufacturer of goods in America has been given a great gift by your central bank—the lowest cost of money in 237 years, an extension of the roaring bond market rally that has now run 32 years, and a broad stock market rally that began in March of 2009 and has gone on to bust through all previous record highs.[ 2 ] Look at this chart of the three-decade-old bond market rally: Our manufacturers, like all businesses public and private—large, medium and small—have also been given more than abundant natural gas and other sources of energy for their operations: They have been given abundant, super-cheap monetary fuel needed to stoke up their production engines and expand their businesses. So what is holding us back from bending the curve of historical manufacturing production that I first showed you and extending our recent superior performance on the manufacturing front? The Journal article I just mentioned noted inhibiting factors such as a shortage of skilled workers and the draw of growing markets like China, India and Brazil for plant location. And of course there’s the slowdown in Europe and in some emerging markets. But the article skirted the most vexing and self-inflicted inhibitor of all: fiscal and regulatory policy of the gang that can’t shoot straight in Washington. I have spoken of this for years. The Constitution unambiguously gives the Congress of the United States control of the fiscal purse strings. Yet all they have done under both Republican and Democrat presidents and the leadership of both parties in the upper and lower houses is spend and regulate with abandon. Let’s cut to the chase: The remaining obstacle to being the absolute best economy for manufacturers and other businesses, bar none, has been fiscal and regulatory policy that seems incapable of providing job-creating manufacturers and other businesses with tax, spending and regulatory incentives to take advantage of the cheap and abundant fuel the Fed has provided. After recovering most of the losses from the Great Recession, manufacturing growth has, on net, decelerated in the last two years. Ask any manufacturer what holds him or her back and they will tell you that they can’t operate in a fog of total uncertainty concerning how they will be taxed or how government spending will impact them or their customers directly. And as to asking their opinion of the impact of regulation on their businesses—from the Affordable Care Act to the thousands of other regulations enumerated in the Federal Register—don’t even go there, unless you delight in hearing profanities. I thought my college classmate Tom Stemberg, the founder of Staples, was remarkably constrained in his Wall Street Journal op-ed piece today as he pointed out that the 50,000 jobs he created from scratch might never have occurred under what he called today’s “blizzard of bureaucratic red tape.”[ 3 ] We needn’t be condemned to the glue factory. American companies publicly held and private—large, medium and small—have taken advantage of the cheap and abundant money made available by the Fed’s very-accommodative monetary policy to create lean and muscular balance sheets. In response to the deep recession and the challenges of fiscal and regulatory uncertainty, they have rationalized their cost structures and ramped up productivity, leveraging IT, just-in-time inventory management and new production structures to the max. Their workers are more productive than ever. I believe American manufacturers today have the potential, far and away, to be the most efficient operators in the world. We have countless manufacturers in every sector of goods production and assembly that are the equivalent of the Secretariats, Man o’ Wars, Citations, Seabiscuits or any great thoroughbred that has ever graced the track. They just need to be let out of the starting gate. That gate is controlled by Congress, working with the president. If they would just let ’em rip, we would have an economy that would take off. Instead of settling for being the “best-looking horse in the glue factory,” we can become the wonder-horse that outpaces the rest of the world, putting the American people back to work and renewing the unparalleled magnificence of American prosperity. Here is an image I want engraved in your minds. It is of Secretariat winning the Belmont Stakes by 31 lengths in 1973, leaving his competitors in the dust. I want our manufacturers to be Secretariats, beating out the rest of the world by a stunning margin. We can do it. We must do it. We must insist that Congress practice a little Schumpeterianism of its own: throwing out old, counterproductive fiscal and regulatory policies and ushering in new ones that unleash job creators from the starting gates. Then we will experience a “massive success.” And as Old Blue Eyes said, that massive success will be “the best revenge”—sweet revenge, indeed, on those who say that a true renaissance of American manufacturing is beyond our reach. Thank you. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. An alternate measure of output, called the value-added production series, shows that manufacturing output has nearly recovered its prerecession level. See remarks before the Ninth Annual Redefining Investment Strategy Education Forum, Dayton, Ohio, March 26, 2009, www.dallasfed.org/en/news/speeches/fisher/2009/fs090326.aspx . “A New Law to Liberate American Business,” by Thomas G. Stemberg, Wall Street Journal , Aug. 22, 2013, p. A15. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.
