Governor Lael Brainard At the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Richmond Community Listening Session, Richmond, Virginia Share It is good to be here in Richmond today. 1 I appreciate my colleague, Tom Barkin, leading this event, and it is a pleasure to also be with Sherrie Brach Armstrong , CEO of the Community Foundation for a greater Richmond; Tim Davey, Timmons Group economic development manager; Shawn Smith , director of workforce development at Goodwill of Central and Coastal Virginia; and Robert Ukrop , chairman and CEO of Ukrop's Homestyle Foods. Today's community listening session is part of a series called "Fed Listens." The Federal Reserve is undertaking a review to make sure we are carrying out the monetary policy goals assigned to us by the Congress in the most effective way we can. 2 In conducting this review, we are reaching out to communities around the country in sessions like this to understand how you are experiencing the economy day to day. Two Goals So what are the monetary policy goals the Congress assigned us? Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve to use monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and price stability. These two goals are what we refer to as our dual mandate. By price stability we mean moderate and stable inflation. Specifically, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)—the group at the Fed responsible for determining monetary policy—has announced that our goal is to keep inflation around 2 percent over time. The maximum employment part of our dual mandate is straightforward: The Congress has directed us to achieve the highest level of employment—and thus the lowest level of unemployment—that is consistent with price stability. While the Congress has specified the goals for monetary policy and a set of tools or authorities to pursue them, it has allowed the FOMC to determine how to best go about achieving those goals. Reviewing How We Conduct Monetary Policy Last year, core inflation was very close to our goal. And the unemployment rate is at a 50-year low. We are undertaking our review to ensure we are well positioned to meet our goals for many years to come. We also want to make sure that the way we are setting monetary policy is keeping up with the way the economy is changing, which I have been referring to as the "new normal." 3 There are a few key features of that new normal. For example, interest rates have stayed very low in recent years not only in the United States, but also in many other advanced economies. For a variety of reasons, it seems likely that equilibrium interest rates will remain low in the future. Low interest rates present a challenge for the traditional ways of conducting monetary policy. That is especially true in recessions when, in the past, the Federal Reserve has typically cut interest rates by 4 to 5 percentage points in order to support household spending and business investment. But when equilibrium interest rates are low, we have less room to cut interest rates and thus less room to buffer the economy using our conventional tool. For example, following the most recent recession in 2008 and 2009, we kept interest rates as low as the Committee thought they could go, which was close to zero, for many years. Another big change in the economy is that inflation doesn't move as much with economic activity and employment as it has in the past. This is what economists mean when they say the Phillips curve is very flat. In many ways, the flatter Phillips curve has advantages: It means that the labor market can strengthen a lot and pull many workers that may have been sidelined back into productive employment without an acceleration in inflation, unlike what we saw in the 1960s and 1970s. Similarly, inflation doesn't fall as much in recessions. But there is an important risk with today's low sensitivity of inflation to slack: It makes it more difficult to boost inflation to our objective of 2 percent on a sustainable basis. And, as we know from other countries, if inflation consistently falls short of the central bank's objective, lower inflation tends to get embedded in people's expectations. Expectations that inflation will remain low in turn can create a self-fulfilling dynamic with actual inflation, making it even more difficult for the central bank to boost inflation. And because inflation is reflected in nominal interest rates, that, in turn, can also reduce the amount of policy space the central bank has available to prevent the economy from slipping into recession. In fact, in recent years, central banks around the world have had to use a larger variety of policy tools than they traditionally used to respond to the financial crisis and support economic expansion. Some Issues to Explore Given the new normal of low equilibrium interest rates and low sensitivity of inflation to slack, it is prudent to assess how well various approaches worked both here and around the world, with a view to identifying the best ways to promote the goals the Congress assigned to us. As such, we will be looking widely at our tools and strategies, assessing not just the various approaches that were undertaken, but also approaches that have been proposed but not tried. One of those is the idea that the Federal Reserve should explicitly promise to "make up" for the fact that interest rates can't be cut as much as during past recessions. The Federal Reserve could hold interest rates lower after a recession is over, perhaps by promising not to raise interest rates until inflation or the unemployment rate have reached a particular level. A related idea is average inflation targeting, meaning the Fed would aim to achieve its inflation objective on average over a longer period of time—perhaps over the business cycle. So if inflation fell short during a recession, the Federal Reserve would aim at inflation above target during the recovery and expansion. This approach would also have aspects of a make-up policy, as policy would likely be kept easier—that is, more accommodative—than otherwise during the period where inflation is above target. While such approaches sound quite appealing on their face, they have not yet been implemented in practice. There is some skepticism that a central bank would in fact prove able to support above-target inflation over a sustained period without becoming concerned that inflation might accelerate and inflation expectations might rise too high. Another idea I would like to hear more about involves targeting the yield on specific securities so that once the short-term interest rates we traditionally target have hit zero, we might turn to targeting slightly longer-term interest rates—initially one-year interest rates, for example, and if more stimulus is needed, perhaps moving out the curve to two-year rates. Under this policy, the Federal Reserve would stand ready to use its balance sheet to hit the targeted interest rate, but unlike the asset purchases that were undertaken in the recent recession, there would be no specific commitments with regard to purchases of Treasury securities. Similar to make-up policies, such an approach could help communicate publicly how long the Federal Reserve is planning to keep rates low. I should emphasize that these are just a few ideas; there may be other good ideas, and part of the process we are engaged in involves looking around for other ideas. Most, if not all, of the ideas have both advantages and disadvantages, and we will have to consider them carefully as our review progresses. Of course, we may find that the preferred approach is modest enhancements to the tools that proved their worth during the crisis. Listening Now, how does today's event fit into all of this? Just as the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond is sponsoring today's event with representatives of its local community, so too are other Reserve Banks sponsoring similar events. We are making sure to hear from people across the country. We will also hold a national-level conference in Chicago in June. And, in addition to presentations from prominent outside experts, we made sure to add panels to hear from community organizations, training institutions, and other groups that can give us insights on how monetary policy is affecting Main Street. Since I arrived at the Fed, I have put a premium on visiting communities all over the country to get a direct sense of how they are experiencing the economy. In fact, my first such visit was in this District with community development staff from the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. Due to the wisdom of the Fed's original architects, the Federal Reserve System derives tremendous value from interacting with communities from all around the country. In 2015, we created a Community Advisory Council at the Federal Reserve Board, where we hear from a broad variety of community groups and others. And many of the regional Federal Reserve Banks have similar councils, including the Richmond Fed's Community Investment Council. In our review this year, we are listening broadly and are seeking perspectives at the community level. So today we want to hear from you. How is your community experiencing today's economy? Is everyone who wants a job able to get one? Can they get the necessary training? Are businesses finding it relatively easy to hire the workers they need? What about inflation and pricing power? And what about the availability and cost of credit—whether it be to start or expand a small business, buy a car to get to work, or invest in owning a home or getting a degree? I look forward to hearing your views on these and other questions. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Janet L. Yellen, " Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications ," remarks at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, November 13, 2012. Richard H. Clarida, " The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices ," remarks at the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York, February 22, 2019. Jerome H. Powell, " Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead ," remarks at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, March 8, 2019. Return to text 3. Lael Brainard, " The "New Normal" and What It Means for Monetary Policy ," remarks at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois, September 12, 2016. Return to text Related Content Fed Listens Events Last Update: May 08, 2019 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At "Renewing the Promise of the Middle Class" 2019 Federal Reserve System Community Development Research Conference, Washington, D.C. Share Watch Live It is good to be here at the Federal Reserve System's Community Development Research Conference. This year, our conference is focusing on renewing the promise of the middle class, a topic that goes to the heart of the American dream and underpins the vibrancy of our democracy and society. 1 What Does It Mean to Be Part of the Middle Class? Before I dig into the data, I want to touch on what it means to be a part of the middle class, recognizing aspirations differ from person to person. From a purely economic perspective, being middle class commonly means having financial security and the ability to invest for our futures and for our children. In turn, having a strong middle class implies that families with average incomes have the purchasing power to consume and the savings to invest. So a strong middle class is often seen as a cornerstone of a vibrant economy and, beyond that, a resilient democracy. 2 In recent years, households at the middle of the income distribution have faced a number of challenges. That raises the question of whether middle-class living standards are within reach for middle-income Americans in today's economy. There are a number of ways to define middle income. I will primarily focus on households between the 40th and 70th percentiles of the income distribution. In 2018, these households had incomes between $40,000 and $85,000. 3 To explore the issues associated with financial resilience and intergenerational financial well-being, it is necessary to go beyond measures of income and better understand household assets and liabilities. Today I will share with you findings from a promising new data resource developed by Federal Reserve staff, the Distributional Financial Accounts (DFAs). These accounts combine household-level data on balance sheets, incomes, and demographic characteristics of families in the United States from the triennial Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) with aggregate data from the Financial Accounts of the United States to track the distribution of these household assets and liabilities on a quarterly basis. 4 The timeliness of the data, which are currently available through the fourth quarter of 2018, can provide valuable insights into how different types of households are faring over the business cycle. I will also share some new results from the 2018 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), which deliver further insights on the financial resilience of households, particularly those with low and moderate income, on an annual basis. 5 These results are slated for release soon. Wealth across Households Let us start by taking a look at how the wealth of middle-income households has evolved over recent years. 6 Over the past three decades, the wealth of middle-income households increased an average of about 1 percent per year, adjusted for inflation ( figure 1 ). 7 That compares with average annual growth of 2.6 percent in real gross domestic income over this period. By comparison, the average wealth of the households in the top decile of the income distribution has increased three times faster per year, on average, than the wealth of middle-income households, more than doubling over the period as a whole. The past decade is even more sobering. Middle-income families still have not fully recovered the wealth they lost in the Great Recession. On average, households at all levels of income lost wealth as a result of the declines in asset prices and rise in unemployment during the crisis ( figure 2 ). But the recovery in wealth since the Great Recession has been much less for middle- and lower-income households than for higher-income households. The wealth of the top 10 percent of households is 19 percent higher than before the recession, even after factoring in the decline in stock prices at the end of last year. In contrast, the wealth of middle-income families still has not returned to its pre-crisis level, and lower-income families have a wealth shortfall of 16 percent. 8 The gap is also large in absolute terms. At the end of 2018, the average middle-income household had wealth of about $340,000, while the average households in the top 10 percent of the income distribution had wealth of about $4.5 million ( figure 3 ). The average wealth of the top income decile is now 13 times higher than that of the middle-income group, while it was 7 times higher in 1989. Given these developments, it is no surprise that the share of wealth held by middle-income households has declined over the past three decades. However, the extent of the decline is nonetheless striking: Today the 30 percent of households between the 40th and 70th percentiles of the income distribution hold 13 percent of all wealth, down from 19 percent over the past three decades ( figure 4 ). The top 10 percent of households by income now own 57 percent of all wealth—up from 47 percent 30 years ago. The 10 percent of households with the highest income hold more of the national wealth than the remaining 90 percent of households combined. Do Middle-Income Households Have Middle-Class Economic Security? Having sketched out the contours of the overall level and growth of wealth owned by middle-income households, let us now turn to economic security. Basic financial security is one important marker of the middle class. Wealth is an important source of economic resilience for households, allowing them to handle unexpected expenses as well as providing them with the financial security to manage the usual changes in income over a lifetime. When we dig into the various liquid savings, assets, and liabilities that underlie the overall wealth numbers for middle-income households, the picture suggests limited room to absorb volatility in cash flows. Many middle-income families have relatively little in easily accessible, or liquid, savings, carry a significant amount of debt, and are concerned about the adequacy of their retirement savings. Liquid savings By drawing from several household surveys conducted by the Federal Reserve, we can gain important insights into how assets and liabilities of middle-income households affect their economic security. Research based on the 2016 SCF shows that only about one-fourth of middle-income households have enough liquid savings to cover six months of expenses—the amount often recommended by financial advisers—and only 4 in 10 could cover three months of expenses. 9 The majority of middle-income households thus do not have sufficient liquid savings to weather a typical material financial disruption—for instance, one associated with a temporary job loss or illness. Even modest unexpected expenses could be disruptive for many middle-income families. According to the forthcoming results from the 2018 SHED, one-third of middle-income adults said that they would borrow money, sell something, or not be able to pay an unexpected $400 expense ( figure 5 ). 10 Drilling down further indicates that while 6 percent of middle-income adults said they would not be able to pay the expense using any means, 27 percent would borrow or sell something to pay the expense. The reliance on credit to meet unexpected expenses is pronounced among those already carrying a balance on their credit cards. Nearly 3 in 10 middle-income adults carry a balance on their credit card most or all of the time, and the same households are five times as likely to borrow if faced with a $400 expense as those who never carry a balance. Borrowing money is not the only way that middle-income households cope with unexpected expenses. In 2018, one-fourth of middle-income adults said they skipped some kind of medical care because of its cost, suggesting insufficient savings can have implications for physical health as well as financial health. Thus, low levels of savings can create a challenging cycle when material disruptions in income, or even smaller unexpected expenses, spiral into a broader financial setback. Financial security in retirement A key component of middle-class financial security is the cushion of savings to cover retirement. Here, the DFAs suggest some progress. One of the innovations of the DFAs is that they include defined benefit plans from the Financial Accounts in addition to defined contribution plans, whereas measures of household pension wealth in the SCF are confined to the latter. The balances in defined contribution plans, such as 401(k)s, in which retirement savings accumulate in an account, are typically simpler to measure. By contrast, the value of defined benefit plans requires estimating how much the future fixed payments each year in retirement are worth today. These future payments are a sizable asset for households, currently estimated at about $15 trillion, or about 70 percent of total pension assets. 11 The DFAs indicate that the average pension wealth for middle-income households—including both types of plans—has increased 2.5 percent per year over the past three decades ( figure 6 ). Pension assets are now the largest asset held by middle-income households, representing 40 percent of their wealth, substantially exceeding the 22 percent share of home equity in their wealth. In part, the growth in pension balances reflects the sustained decrease in long-term interest rates over this period, which has boosted the value of the future fixed payments associated with defined benefit pensions. It reflects the aging of the population, since households near or in retirement age have the largest accumulated levels of pension savings and are also likely hold a relatively greater share of defined benefit plans ( figure 7 ). How do we square the growth in pension assets with survey evidence indicating that many households in the middle of the income distribution are concerned that they will not have enough to live on in retirement? Only 35 percent of middle-income adults, who are not retired, say that their retirement saving is on track, and 16 percent of middle-income adults do not have any money saved for retirement. 12 In part, this may reflect the long-term shift by employers to defined contribution plans and away from defined benefit plans, especially in the private sector. While in 1989 more middle-income households had a defined benefit pension than a defined contribution plan, the reverse has been true since 1989. 13 With defined contribution plans, employees have to decide how much they will save and how they will invest, and they face uncertainty regarding how much savings will be available in retirement. Those who save and invest effectively can help secure their retirement. But those who opt out, save too little, or make investment choices that turn out to yield low returns may find themselves unprepared as retirement approaches, despite years of hard work. Two-thirds of middle-income adults who hold self-directed accounts, including defined contribution plans and individual retirement accounts, say that they have little or no comfort in managing the investments. 14 Assets and liabilities Stepping back, it is instructive to look at the evolution of the underlying assets and liabilities of middle-class households more broadly. The liabilities of the average middle-income household have nearly doubled over the past three decades, while assets have increased only 50 percent ( figure 8 ). The gap between the relative growth of liabilities and assets peaked during the financial crisis and has narrowed somewhat for middle-income households more recently. While mortgages rose and fell sharply around the Great Recession, the rise in consumer debt, such as credit cards, auto loans, and student loans, has been relatively steady. The rapid growth in liabilities reflects both short-term cash flow management and longer-term investments. Taking on debt is an important way for middle-income families to help buffer unexpected expenses or a temporary loss of income, as indicated by the 8 in 10 middle-income adults who are at least somewhat confident that they could obtain an additional credit card if they applied for it. 15 Debt is also a critical mechanism for making key middle-class investments, which I turn to next. Investing in the Future There is a palpable sense that the opportunity to reach the middle class and remain in it is receding for many middle-income households. Many households find it challenging to make key middle-class investments because incomes at the middle are not keeping up with the rising costs of education and homeownership, and it is difficult to save enough. Often, making these investments requires having some savings in the first place—for instance, to make a down payment on a home, forgo income for a few years while paying tuition, or secure credit for a small business. Disparities by race and ethnicity This challenge is compounded for some racial and ethnic minority groups that have experienced large and persistent racial gaps in wealth. In 2016, the average wealth of white households ($933,700) was seven times the average wealth of black households ($138,200) and five times that of Hispanic households ($191,200). Even among households at the middle of the income distribution, the average wealth in 2016 of white households ($277,200) was roughly one and a half times that of black households ($179,700) and nearly three times that of Hispanic households ($95,400). 16 Differences in educational attainment cannot fully account for these disparities: The average wealth of black households in which the head had a bachelor's degree ($271,200) was 26 percent less than that of white households in which the head did not attend college ($367,800). 17 This matters not least because disparities in wealth often are inherited. 18 The prospects that a young person will reach the middle class often depend on attributes he or she inherits—such as the income, wealth, education, age, race, and ethnicity of his or her parents. 19 Beyond financial wealth, children inherit intangible assets that affect their ability to access information and social networks that help in obtaining jobs and taking advantage of educational and other wealth-building opportunities. Homeownership Owning a home has been a key marker of middle-class status for many Americans. The accumulation of equity in a home is the primary form of wealth building and economic security for many middle-class families. Homeownership is valued for nonfinancial reasons as well, such as protection against unwanted moves and the freedom to make alterations and investments in the home. 20 However, the financial crisis brought into focus that there are also risks associated with homeownership. Home equity—defined as the difference between the house value and the mortgage balance—for an average middle-income household peaked at $90,200 in late 2005, then declined by almost two-thirds through 2011 ( figure 9 ). By the end of 2018, after several years of rising house prices, the home equity of the average middle-income family was still below the pre-recession peak and not much above the value in 1989. Middle-income households saw such steep declines in their average home equity during the Great Recession because they had taken on a high level of mortgage debt relative to their house values. 21 This high leverage amplified the effect of the fall in house prices on their wealth. Moreover, the homeownership rates of middle-income households also declined during the recession, so they did not benefit as much from the subsequent rebound in house prices since 2013 as did higher-income families. The recent decline in homeownership rates does not appear to reflect a change in attitudes toward homeownership, as recent surveys show that the desire to own a home remains strong. 22 Instead, it appears house prices are rising faster than income for many middle-income families, putting homeownership out of reach. By 2017, the median sales price for a single-family home was about four times median household income, up from three times median income in 1988. 23 The homeownership rate for middle-income families was 68 percent in 2016, down from its peak in 2004 of 74 percent. 24 For black households, the declines during and after the recession erased a decade of increases in homeownership—the homeownership rate for black households across the income spectrum was 42 percent in 2018, the same as the rate in the mid-1990s. 25 The homeownership rate of Hispanics also declined with the recession but has recovered somewhat, reaching 47 percent in 2018. With homeownership lower and home prices rising faster than incomes, renting is also taking a bigger slice of many middle-income households' earnings, leaving less savings for a down payment, an unexpected expense, or other investments. From 2007 to 2018, the share of income spent on rent rose from 18 percent to 25 percent for middle-income renters. 26 Many middle-income families struggle to afford rent, particularly in the high-demand areas where jobs are most available, underscoring the need for more workforce housing. One way to increase the supply of middle-income housing is to reduce exclusionary zoning and other land-use restrictions that limit the supply of housing and keep prices high. 27 Often put in place in areas with single-family homes to block the development of affordable, multifamily housing, these policies also have contributed to the persistence of racially segregated neighborhoods. The challenge is to increase accessibility to workforce and affordable housing in ways that address legacy disparities. 28 Skills, education, and student debt Manufacturing and the skilled trades have provided an important pathway to the middle class for many workers, enabling them to own their homes, educate their children, and retire securely. Today, though, many face uncertainties associated with the decline in manufacturing jobs, the erosion of employee benefits, and reduced bargaining power. Increasingly, the onus is on individuals to ensure that their skills are marketable and up-to-date in a highly competitive global marketplace with growing automation. Juan Salgado, the chancellor of the City Colleges of Chicago and our closing keynote speaker, has emphasized the role of community colleges in offering affordable, quality education and training. 29 Students can begin with a certificate program in advanced manufacturing and continue either to a bachelor's degree in engineering at a nearby public university or to the workplace, acquiring marketable skills likely at lower cost than if they had started at a four-year college. Similar programs around the country help provide accessible pathways to the middle class. For others, college is seen as an important pathway to middle-class economic security. The average wealth of households with a college degree significantly exceeds the average wealth of those without a college degree ( figure 10 ). A key reason is that college graduates generally have higher incomes. Graduates with a bachelor's degree have median weekly earnings that are about 65 percent higher than high school graduates and unemployment rates that are 2 percentage points lower, and they are often better positioned to adapt to changes in the labor market. 30 However, the cost of higher education has been rising, placing an increasing financial burden on many middle-income households. Between 2008 and 2018, tuition and fees at four-year public colleges rose more than six times faster than real median incomes. 31 Moreover, as Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago President Evans discussed, while there are benefits associated with attending college, there are also some financial risks, and the returns to education vary widely. While two-thirds of individuals with a bachelor's degree or more say that the lifetime financial benefits of their education exceed its costs, those who do not complete their degree are half as likely to report net benefits from their studies. 32 And some groups face higher barriers in accessing college: Children of parents who did not attend college are far less likely to attend college due to financial and informational barriers, and those who do start college are more likely to drop out. 33 For many middle-income families, affording post-secondary education means taking on a sobering amount of student debt. Total student loan debt, in inflation-adjusted terms, more than doubled from 2006 to 2018 ( figure 11 ). 34 Repayment of student loans can be challenging. In 2018, 2 in 10 middle-income adults with education debt were behind on their payments, and those who did not complete a degree were nearly twice as likely to be behind. 35 Repayment status also differs by the type of institution attended. Among middle-income adults with education debt, 30 percent who attended for-profit institutions were behind on student loan payments, compared with 17 percent of those who attended public institutions and 12 percent who attended not-for-profit private institutions. Investing in higher education may come at the cost of deferring or forgoing other investments. For example, higher tuition costs—reflected in increasing student loan debt—together with the rising costs of homeownership, have left many middle-income households in a poor position to save for a down payment or handle a mortgage. Researchers at the Fed have estimated that roughly 20 percent of the decline in homeownership among young adults can be attributed to their increased student loans since 2005. This suggests that more than 400,000 young individuals would have owned a home in 2014 had it not been for the rise in student debt. 36 Businesses and stock ownership Another concern is that high debt may hinder people seeking to start a business. Starting a business is a classic pathway to securing a foothold in the middle class. This has been particularly true for members of some groups that historically have faced challenges in the labor market, particularly minorities and first-generation Americans. 37 Aspiring small business owners with student loans may lack the financial ability to invest in starting a business while staying current on payments. One study found that individuals with student loan debt are less likely to start a business, and those who do are more likely to fall behind on their loan payments. 38 Another study found that growth in student loan debt resulted in a 14 percent reduction in small business formation in counties over a 10-year period. 39 The personal assets of small business owners have been an important source of capital for entrepreneurs as they seek to start and sustain a small business. As wealth for middle-income households has stagnated, reliance on this source of capital has declined in recent years. 40 Very small firms depend heavily on personal debt for start-up and working capital. Owners of smaller firms often struggle to qualify for bank credit, and among those that apply and are denied, low credit scores and insufficient credit history are the most frequently cited reasons. More broadly, a key reason that middle-income households have not seen wealth increases commensurate with high-income households is that they have not benefited as much from the strong performance of stocks and privately held businesses. In inflation-adjusted terms, total business assets (including corporate stocks, mutual funds, and unincorporated businesses) have more than tripled since 1989. Similarly, the average business assets of top-income households have more than tripled since 1989. But the average business assets of middle-income families have grown only 31 percent since 1989 and are lower than they were before the Great Recession ( figure 12 ). Stock market participation fell for middle-income families after the Great Recession, so they have not benefited as much from the subsequent rise in stock prices. 41 By 2018, the 30 percent of households in the middle of the income distribution held only 6 percent of aggregate business assets, while the top 10 percent of households held over three‑fourths. Maximum Employment, Wages, and Wealth With lower net worth and financial assets, the livelihoods of most middle-income families, other than retirees, depend primarily on compensation from working. So the robustness of labor income over time is central to the ability of middle-income families to achieve and maintain middle-class financial security. While the strengthening of the labor market over the course of this extended recovery has benefited middle-income families, the long-term decline in the share of national income going to wage earners is concerning. The Congress put maximum employment right at the heart of the Federal Reserve's mandate, alongside price stability. In fact, we are one of only a handful of central banks that have the explicit responsibility to promote maximum employment. Given that households at the middle of the income distribution rely primarily on wage income, our full employment mandate has served the country well during this extended recovery. The gains to workers, including those in the middle class, from the strong labor market are clear. Unemployment is now at 3.6 percent—its lowest level in 50 years. Employment rates of adults in their prime working years (ages 25 to 54) have been rising steadily during the expansion and recently reached their pre-recession peak of 80 percent. 42 Importantly, wage growth has begun to pick up after years of slow gains. It is notable that the near recovery in middle-class wealth from the Great Recession did not take hold until the labor market began to strengthen. While higher-income households saw their wealth begin to recover as soon as financial markets stabilized in early 2009, middle-income households did not see their wealth begin to recover until 2010, when the unemployment rate began to decline ( figure 13 ). Even as we welcome the many benefits of the current strong job market, longer-term trends raise concerns. Labor market disparities by race have been an enduring feature of the labor market for decades. The unemployment rate of blacks, while near its historical low, remains at about 7 percent, twice the unemployment rate of whites. Recent research suggests that the strong labor market may be helping to narrow some of the long-standing disparities for some racial minorities and women, although the results are tentative and very modest. 43 The progressive long-term decline in the share of national income that goes to workers through wages is concerning for middle-income households. The share going to workers—which economists call the labor share—translates into how much of our economic output shows up in people's paychecks. The decline in the labor share goes to the heart of the rising inequality of wealth and the unequal sharing of prosperity. Several explanations have been put forward for the decline in the labor share. The increasing concentration of industries into the hands of a few firms has likely reduced the bargaining power of workers. 44 Increasing automation in the workplace is also a factor, along with the ongoing effects of globalization and offshoring. Earnings have declined as the job market has shifted away from important middle-income occupations. Manufacturing, for example, employs vastly fewer people now than it has historically. 45 It is important to understand the relative importance of these different drivers, as they have different implications for the overall health of the economy and for policies to support middle-income families. Monetary policy aims to influence employment and inflation over the business cycle, as opposed to addressing these longer-run structural changes. But the distribution of income and wealth may have important implications for macroeconomic developments, such as the evolution of consumption, which is the single biggest engine of growth in our economy. That is why the Federal Reserve has a significant interest in understanding distributional developments and their implications. Recent research finds that households with lower levels of wealth spend a larger fraction of any income gains than households with higher levels of wealth. 46 Consequently, an economy that delivers an increasing share of income gains to high-wealth households could result in less growth in consumer demand than one in which the gains are distributed more equally. In fact, the recovery of consumer spending after the Great Recession was slower than the recovery in aggregate household income and net worth would previously have suggested, and rising inequality is one plausible explanation. 47 Conclusion The discrepancy between slow growth in income and wealth, on the one hand, and rising costs of housing, health care, and education, on the other, may be making it more difficult for middle-income families to achieve middle-class financial security. Long-term, the shifting of wealth and income to the top of the distribution and away from the middle could pose challenges to the health and resilience of our economy. These are important questions, and I am pleased that this conference is bringing to light interesting research to shed light on them. 1. I am grateful to Claudia Sahm of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text, along with Barbara Lipman, Kevin Moore, Karen Pence, Paul Smith, and Mike Zabek. The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Take, for example, this statement attributed to Aristotle: "The best political community is formed by citizens of the middle class, and that those states are likely to be well-administered in which the middle class is large, and stronger if possible than both the other classes." See Constitutional Rights Foundation (2010), " Plato and Aristotle on Tyranny and the Rule of Law ," Bill of Rights in Action, vol. 26 (Fall), (quoted text under the heading "Aristotle's Politics"). Return to text 3. This definition errs slightly on the higher side of what might be considered middle income, but the results are qualitatively robust to taking the middle third of the income distribution. Return to text 4. For more details on the construction of the DFAs, see Michael Batty, Jesse Bricker, Joseph Briggs, Elizabeth Holmquist, Susan McIntosh, Kevin Moore, Eric Nielsen, Sarah Reber, Molly Shatto, Kamila Sommer, Tom Sweeney, and Alice Henriques Volz (2019), " Introducing the Distributional Financial Accounts of the United States (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-017 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March). The publicly available DFAs data can be found on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/efa/efa-distributional-financial-accounts.htm . Visualization tools for the data are forthcoming. Return to text 5. The SHED is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm . Return to text 6. The published data set includes data on the distribution of nominal wealth by wealth percentiles. For this speech, Board staff analyzed the data, with the wealth distribution by income percentiles and other demographic categories. Wealth and all of its subcomponents are reported here in 2018 dollars using the personal consumption expenditures price index from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (see table 1.1.4, which is available at https://www.bea.gov ) . Wealth is defined as the sum of assets, including financial and nonfinancial assets, net of liabilities, including mortgages, consumer debt, and other liabilities. Return to text 7. Income groups at each point in time are defined here using current household income. Specific households may move across income groups over time. Since households in the high-income group during their working years may, in retirement, move to low- or middle-income groups, some of the wealth assigned to low- or middle-income groups in this analysis comes from households with high lifetime income. Return to text 8. Wealth in figure 2 is indexed to the first quarter of 2007, which is between the peak in house prices in 2006 and the start of the Great Recession at the end of 2007. As figure 2 shows, household wealth began declining before the recession officially began. Return to text 9. See Neil Bhutta and Lisa Dettling (2018), " Money in the Bank? Assessing Families' Liquid Savings using the Survey of Consumer Finances ," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 19). In this study, "middle income" refers to households with income between the 25th and 75th percentiles. Income is defined as the "usual amount" of income the household earned in the previous year and could differ from the actual amount. Overall expenses are estimated using partial data on household expenses, including rent, mortgages payments, car loans, and food. Return to text 10. This statistic and the rest in this subsection are from the 2018 SHED and are only for middle-income adults. The SHED collects ranges of family income, not a dollar amount. Middle income is defined as the ranges of family income from $40,000 to $99,000, which is roughly the 40th to 70th percentiles. Return to text 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release Z.1, "Financial Accounts of the United States," table L.117 . For more information, see John Sabelhaus and Alice Henriques Volz (2019), " Are Disappearing Employer Pensions Contributing to Rising Wealth Inequality? " FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 1). Return to text 12. The data are from the 2018 SHED. Tabulations include only middle-income adults who are not retired. Retirement savings in the SHED include pensions, individual retirement accounts, and other savings for retirement. Return to text 13. The data source is the SCF (1989–2016). In 1989, 50 percent of middle-income households had a defined benefit pension, and 29 percent had a defined contribution pension, but by 1998, the relative ownership of each pension type had reversed to 36 percent and 43 percent, respectively. Since then, the rates have been fairly stable. Return to text 14. The data are from the 2018 SHED. The tabulation includes only middle-income adults, who have self-directed retirement accounts. Return to text 15. The 2018 SHED is the data source. Tabulations include only middle-income adults. Return to text 16. The source is the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances, which is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scfindex.htm . Return to text 17. See Lisa J. Dettling, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, and Jeffrey P. Thompson (2017), " Recent Trends in Wealth-Holding by Race and Ethnicity: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances ," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 27). See also, using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, William Darity, Jr., Darrick Hamilton, Mark Paul, Alan Aja, Anne Price, Antonio Moore, and Caterina Chiopris (2018), What We Get Wrong about Closing the Racial Wealth Gap (PDF) (Durham, N.C.: Samuel DuBois Cook Center on Social Equity and Insight Center for Community Economic Development, Duke University, April). Return to text 18. See Laura Feiveson and John Sabelhaus (2018), " How Does Intergenerational Wealth Transmission Affect Wealth Concentration? " FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 1). See also Maury Gittleman and Edward N. Wolff (2004), "Racial Differences in Patterns of Wealth Accumulation," Journal of Human Resources, vol. 39, (Winter), pp. 193–227. Return to text 19. See Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter (2018), "The Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility," NBER Working Paper Series 25147 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October). Return to text 20. See Matthew Desmond (2016), Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City (New York: Crown). Return to text 21. See Lisa Dettling, Joanne Hsu, and Elizabeth Llanes (2018), " A Wealthless Recovery? Asset Ownership and the Uneven Recovery from the Great Recession ," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 13). Their analysis focused on working-age households, and income classifications are based on the "usual amount" of income the household earns. Return to text 22. As one example, in March 2019, according to Fannie Mae's National Housing Survey, 69 percent of households say they would "buy" if they were going to move. See Fannie Mae's March 2019 Data Release, which is available on its website at http://www.fanniemae.com/resources/file/research/housingsurvey/pdf/nhs-monthly-data-040819.pdf . Return to text 23. See Alexander Hermann (2018), " Price-to-Income Ratios Are Nearing Historic Highs ," Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, Housing Perspectives (blog), September 13. Return to text 24. The data are from the Survey of Consumer Finances. Return to text 25. See U.S. Census Bureau (2019), Current Population Survey/Housing Vacancy Survey, April 4, https://www.census.gov/housing/hvs/data/ann18ind.html . Return to text 26. See Dettling, Hsu, and Llanes, "A Wealthless Recovery?" in note 23; and Jeff Larrimore and Jenny Schuetz (2017), " Assessing the Severity of Rent Burden on Low-Income Families ," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 22). Return to text 27. Glaeser and Gyorko found that zoning restrictions increased the cost of housing by 25 percent or more in around 15 percent of cities in 2013 and doubled housing costs in about 6 percent of cities. See Edward Glaeser and Joseph Gyourko (2018), "The Economic Implications of Housing Supply," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 32 (Winter), pp. 3–30. Return to text 28. See Richard Rothstein (2017), The Color of Law: A Forgotten History of How Our Government Segregated America (New York: Liveright). Return to text 29. See Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (2019), " An Interview with Juan Salgado, Chancellor of the City Colleges of Chicago: Charting Pathways to the Middle Class ," CDPS Blog, April 5. Return to text 30. See Elka Torpey (2018), " Measuring the Value of Education ," Bureau of Labor Statistics, Career Outlook (blog), April. Return to text 31. Net tuition and fees at four-year public colleges increased 44 percent between 2008 and 2009 and between 2018 and 2019 (according to data from the College Board, which are available on its website at https://trends.collegeboard.org/college-pricing/figures-tables/tuition-fees-room-and-board-over-time ), while income increased about 7 percent in the same period (as indicated by U.S. Census Bureau data, which can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's FRED website at https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/?g=nDPn ). For more information, see College Board (2018), Trends in College Pricing 2018 (PDF) (New York: CB). Return to text 32. The data are from the 2018 SHED. Tabulations include all adults (regardless of income) who attended any post-secondary program. Return to text 33. The 2018 SHED is the data source. Tabulations include all adults (regardless of income). Return to text 34. The data are from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release G.19, " Consumer Credit ." For a comparison of various estimates of student loan debt, see Jesse Bricker, Meta Brown, Simona Hannon, and Karen Pence (2015), " How Much Student Debt Is Out There? " FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 7). Return to text 35. The 2018 SHED is the data source. Tabulations include middle-income adults who currently owe money for their own education and do not include those who have already paid off their education debts. Return to text 36. See Alvaro Mezza, Daniel Ringo, and Kamila Sommer (2019), " Can Student Loan Debt Explain Low Homeownership Rates for Young Adults? " Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer & Community Context, vol. 1 (January), pp. 2–6. Return to text 37. African American women are one of the fastest-growing groups of entrepreneurs. See National Women's Business Council (2016), " New Report Highlights Challenges Faced by Black Women Entrepreneurs; Offers Roadmap for Solving Toughest Issues ," press release, October 5. Immigrants compose approximately 15 percent of the U.S. workforce and around one-fourth of U.S. entrepreneurs. See Sari Pekkala Kerr and William R. Kerr (2016), "Immigrant Entrepreneurship," NBER Working Paper Series 22385 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July). See also the minority-owned businesses special report of the Federal Reserve Banks' Small Business Credit Survey, which is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/small-business-credit-survey-employer-firms-2016 . Return to text 38. See Karthik Krishnan and Pinshuo Wang (2018), "The Cost of Financing Education: Can Student Debt Hinder Entrepreneurship?" Management Science, published online in Articles in Advance, May 23. Return to text 39. See Brent W. Ambrose, Larry Cordell, and Shuwei Ma (2015), " The Impact of Student Loan Debt on Small Business Formation (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 15-26 (Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, July), Return to text 40. See Arthur B. Kennickell, Myron L. Kwast, and Jonathan Pogach (2017), "Small Businesses and Small Business Finance during the Financial Crisis and the Great Recession: New Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," in John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar, eds., Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 291–349. Return to text 41. See Dettling, Hsu, and Llanes, "A Wealthless Recovery?" in note 23; and Bing Chen and Frank P. Stafford (2016), "Stock Market Participation: Family Responses to Housing Consumption Commitments," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 48 (June), pp. 635–59. Return to text 42. The data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Return to text 43. See Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), " Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF) " paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8. Return to text 44. José Azar, Ioana Marinescu, Marshall I. Steinbaum (2017), "Labor Market Concentration," NBER Working Paper Series 24147 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December; revised February 2019); Evan Starr, J.J. Prescott, and Norman Bishara, "Noncompetes in the U.S. Labor Force," University of Michigan Law and Economics Research Paper Series 18-013 (Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Law School, April); Sandeep Vaheesan (forthcoming), "Accommodating Capital and Policing Labor: Antitrust in the Two Gilded Ages," Maryland Law Review ; and David Autor, David Dorn, Lawrence F. Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen (2017), "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms," NBER Working Paper Series 23396 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May). Return to text 45. See David Autor and Anna Salomons (2018), " Is Automation Labor-Displacing? Productivity Growth, Employment, and the Labor Share (PDF) ," paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 8–9; David H. Autor and David Dorn (2013), "The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the U.S. Labor Market," American Economic Review , vol. 103 (August), pp. 1553–97. Return to text 46. See Jonathan Fisher, David Johnson, Timothy Smeeding, and Jeffrey Thompson (2019), " Estimating the Marginal Propensity to Consume Using the Distributions of Income, Consumption and Wealth (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 19-4 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, February). Return to text 47. See Aditya Aladangady and Laura Feiveson (2018), " A Not-So-Great Recovery in Consumption: What Is Holding Back Household Spending? " FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 8). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Related Content 2019 Federal Reserve Community Development Research Conference Last Update: May 10, 2019 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At "Certain Uncertainty: Tax Policy in Unsettled Times" National Tax Association 49th Annual Spring Symposium, Washington, D.C. Share It is a pleasure to be here at the National Tax Association Annual Spring Symposium. Just as it may take the tax experts and practitioners here today some time to disentangle the longer-term implications of recent major changes to tax policy, so, too, we are in the process of analyzing the lessons for monetary policy of apparent post-crisis changes in the relationships among employment, inflation, and interest rates. 1 The Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve the job of using monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and price stability. Price stability means moderate and stable inflation, which the Federal Reserve has defined to be 2 percent inflation. Maximum employment is understood as the highest level of employment consistent with price stability. In the aftermath of the Great Recession, which had deep and persistent effects, it is important to understand whether there have been long-lasting changes in the relationships among employment, inflation, and interest rates in order to ensure our policy framework remains effective. Employment and Inflation This expansion will soon become the longest on record in the United States. Growth has persisted throughout the past decade, overcoming downdrafts from abroad and pullbacks in fiscal support earlier in the expansion and benefiting last year from a large fiscal boost. Recent data confirm that consumers remain confident, workers are productive, and businesses are hiring, although trade conflict is creating uncertainty. The job market is strong. At 3.6 percent, the unemployment rate is now lower than it was before the crisis. At 80 percent, the employment rate for workers in their prime working-age years—a more comprehensive measure of slack that includes shifts in labor force participation as well as unemployment—has recently risen close to its pre-crisis level. In contrast, the picture on inflation is puzzling this far into an expansion. Despite the strengthening of the labor market, the measure of core inflation excluding volatile food and energy prices did not move up to 2 percent on a sustained basis until last year, and in the most recent reading, the 12-month change has moved down to 1.6 percent. Other inflation measures paint a somewhat more reassuring picture. The Dallas Fed's trimmed mean measure of inflation, which provides a different way to filter out idiosyncratic movements in various components of inflation, has increased 2 percent in the past 12 months, slightly higher than its level of 1.9 percent for the two previous years. 2 The New Normal Since the Great Recession, there have been several changes in macroeconomic relationships, which I refer to as the new normal. 3 Now is a good time to assess the characteristics of the new normal and what they mean for monetary policy. The emerging contours of today's new normal are defined by low sensitivity of inflation to changes in labor market slack, a low long-term neutral rate of interest, and low underlying trend inflation. Let me take each in turn. In today's new normal, price inflation has not moved up consistently as the labor market has strengthened considerably over the course of the long expansion. This is what economists mean when they say the Phillips curve is very flat: The historical relationship between resource slack and price inflation appears to have broken down. 4 Although wage growth has been moving progressively higher as labor market slack has diminished, broader price inflation has remained muted. Another important feature of today's new normal is that the long-run neutral interest rate seems to be lower than it was historically. The neutral rate of interest refers to the level of the federal funds rate that would maintain the economy at full employment and 2 percent inflation if no tailwinds or headwinds were buffeting the economy. The decline in the neutral rate likely reflects a variety of forces globally, such as the aging of the population in many large economies, some slowing in the rate of productivity growth, and increases in the demand for safe assets. When one looks at the Federal Reserve's Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), it is striking that over the past five years, since the SEP interest rate projections first became available, the median estimate of the long-run federal funds rate has declined 1-1/2 percentage points, from 4‑1/4 percent to 2-3/4 percent. Going back further to the two decades before the crisis shows a similar decline in today's long-run neutral rate relative to earlier Blue Chip consensus forecasts of the long-run federal funds rate. 5 Third, underlying trend inflation—the trend in inflation after filtering out idiosyncratic and transitory factors—appears to be somewhat below the Federal Reserve's goal of 2 percent. This raises the risk that households and businesses could come to expect inflation to run persistently below the Federal Reserve's target and could change their behavior in a way that reinforces that expectation. Expectations are an important determinant of actual inflation because wage and price behavior by businesses and households is partly based on expectations of future inflation. While low inflation and low interest rates have many benefits, the new normal presents a challenge for the conventional approach to monetary policy, in which the Federal Reserve could rely on changes in the level of the federal funds rate to achieve its inflation and employment goals. In past recessions, the Federal Reserve has typically cut interest rates by 4 to 5 percentage points in order to support household and business spending and hiring. With the long-run neutral rate low and with underlying trend inflation somewhat below target, nominal interest rates are likely to remain below those levels, which therefore leaves less room to cut rates as much as needed. With less room to ease financial conditions and support economic activity using our conventional policy tool, the economy may endure prolonged periods during and after recessions with short-term interest rates pinned at their effective lower bound. That, of course, was what happened following the financial crisis, when the Federal Reserve kept interest rates close to zero from December 2008 through November 2015. That constraint limits the Federal Reserve's ability to provide stimulus through its conventional tool and thus could tend to leave inflation lower than it would otherwise be, and unemployment higher. The experience of several years with the federal funds rate pinned at its effective lower bound and actual inflation below our target could weigh on expectations for future inflation and thereby influence the behavior of households and businesses that helps determine wages and prices. The experience of a sustained period of low inflation could depress underlying trend inflation by feeding into lower inflation expectations, further reducing nominal interest rates and the space to cut interest rates in what could become a downward spiral. 6 So we need to be especially careful to preserve as much of our conventional policy space as we can, while exploring mechanisms to augment the effectiveness of our framework. 7 Maximum Employment in the New Normal The new normal has some important benefits. With subdued inflation, the sustained expansion has drawn workers back into the labor market after a damaging recession. The unemployment rate is approaching a 50-year low, and the overall labor force participation rate has remained constant despite the long-term aging of the population that would otherwise be pushing participation lower. Like the overall unemployment rate, broader measures of labor market slack are also lower than their pre-crisis levels. The Bureau of Labor Statistics' U-6 measure shows that two groups have recently shrunk to pre-crisis levels after rising considerably during the recession: those working part time who would prefer full-time employment and people marginally attached to the labor force who have looked for work in the previous year but stopped looking more recently. The strong labor market is leading to employment gains among workers with disabilities. Research suggests it may be helping to narrow some of the long-standing disparities for some racial minorities, although this development is tentative and modest. 8 We hear from business contacts that they are now hiring workers they may not previously have considered. During the recession, the evidence suggests that many employers raised their requirements for many job categories. As labor markets have tightened, employers in certain sectors, occupations, and areas of the country report they are loosening requirements and investing more in training. That means today's economy is providing opportunities for workers who might previously have been left on the sidelines—including those with records of past incarceration or who lack a particular certification or degree. Given that the large majority of working-age households, those at the middle and lower ends of the income distribution, rely primarily on wage income, advancing our employment mandate has served the country well. In today's new normal, with the low responsiveness of inflation to labor market tightness, there appears to be little evidence so far of a tradeoff with our price-stability objective. The sustained strengthening of the labor market also adds to the productive capacity of the economy by attracting people on the sidelines to join or rejoin the labor force and move into employment. What about the Risks? Of course, there are also risks. The past three downturns were precipitated not by rising inflation pressure, but rather by the buildup of financial imbalances. Extended periods of above-potential growth and low interest rates tend to be accompanied by rapid credit growth and elevated asset valuations, which tend to boost downside risks to the economy. 9 It is not hard to see why a high-pressure economy might be associated with elevated financial imbalances, especially late in the cycle. As an expansion continues, the memory of the previous recession fades. Profits tend to rise, experienced loss rates on loans are low, and people tend to project recent trends into the future, which leads financial market participants and borrowers to become overly optimistic. Risk appetite rises, asset valuations become stretched, and credit is available on easier terms and to riskier borrowers than earlier in the cycle when memories of losses were still fresh. Historically, when the Phillips curve was steeper, inflation tended to rise as the economy heated up, which naturally prompted the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates. In turn, the interest rate increases would have the collateral effect of damping increases in asset prices and risk appetites. With a flat Phillips curve, inflation does not rise as much as resource utilization tightens, and, accordingly, provides less necessity for the Federal Reserve to raise rates to restrictive levels. At the same time, low interest rates along with sustained strong economic conditions are conducive to increasing risk appetites prompting reach-for-yield behavior and boosting financial excesses late in an expansion. With the forces holding down interest rates likely to persist, valuation pressures and risky corporate debt, such as leveraged lending, could well remain at elevated levels. Elevated valuations and corporate debt could leave the economy more vulnerable to negative shocks. The market volatility in December is a reminder of how sensitive markets can be to downside surprises. A key implication of the weakening in the relationship between inflation and employment, then, is that we should not assume monetary policy will act to restrain the financial cycle as much as previously. As a consequence, policymakers may need to think differently about the interplay of the financial and business cycles due to the combination of a low neutral rate, a flat Phillips curve, and low underlying inflation. With financial stability risks likely to be more tightly linked to the business cycle than in the past, it may make sense to take actions other than tightening monetary policy to temper the financial cycle. In order to enable monetary policy to focus on supporting the return of inflation to our symmetric 2 percent target on a sustained basis along with maximum employment, we should be looking to countercyclical tools to temper the financial cycle. One tool other central banks have been using to help temper the financial cycle is the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The CCyB provides regulators with the authority to require large banks to build up an extra capital buffer as financial risks mount. 10 Although the CCyB was authorized as part of the post-crisis package of reforms, so far, the Federal Reserve has chosen not to use it. Turning on the CCyB would build an extra layer of resilience and signal restraint, helping to damp the rising vulnerability of the overall system. Moreover, because the CCyB is explicitly countercyclical, it is intended to be cut if the outlook deteriorates, boosting the ability of banks to make loans when extending credit is most needed and providing a valuable signal about policymakers' intentions. This feature proved to be valuable in the United Kingdom in the wake of the Brexit referendum. If countercyclical tools and other regulatory safeguards are not adequate over the cycle, monetary policy will need to carry a greater burden in leaning against financial excesses. That would be unfortunate, because adding financial stability concerns to the burden of conventional monetary policy might undermine sustained achievement of our employment and inflation goals. Because the financial cycle is today likely to be tempered less than in the past by material increases in interest rates as the economy expands, the appropriate level of bank capital for today's conditions is unlikely to be the same as in past business cycles: Because interest rates likely will do less than in past cycles, regulatory buffers will need to do more. As a consequence, now is a bad time to be weakening the core resilience of our largest banking institutions or to be weakening oversight over the nonbank financial system. Instead, we should be safeguarding the capital and liquidity buffers of banks at the center of the system, carefully monitoring risks in the nonbank sector, and making good use of the countercyclical tool that we have. Achieving our Inflation Objective on a Sustained Basis Finally, let us turn to the apparent softness in underlying trend inflation. One hypothesis for the flat Phillips curve is that central banks have been so effective in anchoring inflation expectations that tightening resource utilization is no longer transmitted to price inflation. 11 Another possibility is that structural factors such as administrative changes to health care costs, globalization, or technological-enabled disruption have been dominant in recent years, masking the operation of cyclical forces. 12 Regardless, because inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, the Federal Reserve has the capacity and the responsibility to ensure inflation expectations are firmly anchored at—and not below—our target. As I have argued in the past, the fact that inflation has been running somewhat below our longer-run goal of 2 percent may not be entirely due to labor market slack or to transitory shocks; it also likely reflects some softening in inflation's underlying trend. 13 First, estimates of underlying inflation based on statistical filters are lower than they were before the financial crisis and are currently below 2 percent. Second, estimates of longer-run inflation expectations based on the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and on inflation compensation from financial market pricing are also running lower than before the financial crisis. 14 Our goal now is to get underlying trend inflation around our target on a sustained basis. What would this take? We can get some sense from statistical models. Although there is no one widely agreed-upon method of measuring underlying inflation, one statistical approach that has received attention in recent years captures the idea that underlying inflation responds to the experience with actual inflation, and that this responsiveness varies over time. 15 We can use such an approach to get an idea of how much, and how quickly, underlying inflation might respond to any particular path for actual inflation. It provides some reassurance that our goal may be achievable if inflation moves only slightly above 2 percent for a couple of years. The SEP inflation projections of Committee members suggest that many have, over the past year or so, envisaged a few years of a mild overshoot. 16 Of course, it is not entirely clear how to move underlying trend inflation smoothly to our target on a sustained basis in the presence of a very flat Phillips curve. One possibility we might refer to as "opportunistic reflation" would be to take advantage of a modest increase in actual inflation to demonstrate to the public our commitment to our inflation goal on a symmetric basis. 17 For example, suppose that an unexpected increase in core import price inflation drove overall inflation modestly above 2 percent for a couple of years. The Federal Reserve could use that opportunity to communicate that a mild overshooting of inflation is consistent with our goals and to align policy with that statement. Such an approach could help demonstrate to the public that the Committee is serious about achieving its 2 percent inflation objective on a sustained basis. Conclusion In today's new normal, it is important to achieve inflation and inflation expectations around our 2 percent target on a sustained basis while guarding against financial imbalances through active use of countercyclical tools. We want to be mindful of the risk of financial imbalances that could amplify any shock and help tip the economy into recession, which the Federal Reserve has less conventional space to address in today's low interest rate environment. In my view, it is therefore wise to proceed cautiously, helping to sustain the expansion and further gains in employment and with appropriate regulatory safeguards that reduce the risk of dangerous financial imbalances. 1. I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. For an assessment of the relative strengths of the ex-food-and-energy and trimmed mean measures of personal consumption expenditures inflation, see Jim Dolmas and Evan F. Koenig (2019), "Two Measures of Core Inflation: A Comparison," (PDF) Working Paper Series 1903 (Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, February). Return to text 3. See Lael Brainard (2016), "The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12. Return to text 4. See Lael Brainard (2015), " Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," s peech delivered at the 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C. October 12. For evidence that the Phillips curve may steepen when unemployment is low, see Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Amir Sufi (2019), "Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just Hibernating?" paper presented at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 22. Return to text 5. See Lael Brainard (2015), "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. Return to text 6. For a formal model of how this mechanism might work, see Michael T. Kiley and John M. Roberts (2017), "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 317–96. See also Thomas Mertens and John C. Williams (2019), "Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates," (PDF) Staff Report 887 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May). Return to text 7. See Ben S. Bernanke (2017), "Monetary Policy in a New Era," (PDF) paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12–13. See also Ben S. Bernanke, Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February). Return to text 8. See Stephanie R. Aaronson, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox (2019), "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?" (PDF) paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8. Return to text 9. See Tobias Adrian, Nina Boyarchenko, and Domenico Giannone ( 2019), "Vulnerable Growth," American Economic Review , vol. 109 (April), pp. 1263–89; and Michael T. Kiley (2018), "Unemployment Risk," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-067 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September). Return to text 10. See Lael Brainard (2018), "Assessing Financial Stability over the Cycle," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, December 7. Return to text 11. For evidence that inflation expectations may have played a role in flattening the Phillips curve, see Damjan Pfajfar and John M. Roberts (2018), "The Role of Expectations in Changed Inflation Dynamics," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-062 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August). Return to text 12. For a discussion of cyclical and acyclical inflation, see Tim Mahedy and Adam Shapiro (2017), "What's Down with Inflation?" (PDF) FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-35 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November). For a specific discussion of the role of medical-care costs, see Jeffrey Clemens, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Adam Hale Shapiro (2016), "Medicare Payment Cuts Continue to Restrain Inflation," (PDF) FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-15 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May). For a discussion of common global factors, see Matteo Ciccarelli and Benoit Mojon (2010), "Global Inflation," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 92 (August), pp. 524–35. For a discussion of the role of technology, see Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (2018), "Technology-Enabled Disruption: Implications for Business, Labor Markets and Monetary Policy," conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, May 24–25 . Return to text 13. See Lael Brainard (2017), "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5; and Lael Brainard (2018), "Navigating Monetary Policy as Headwinds Shift to Tailwinds," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, March 6. Return to text 14. The Michigan survey's measure of inflation expectations recently moved down to its all-time low. Return to text 15. For instance, see James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (2007), "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 3–33. Their model allows the responsiveness of underlying inflation to actual inflation to vary over time and suggests that responsiveness—the "gain"—has been lower in recent years than in the 1970s and 1980s. Return to text 16. See the Federal Open Market Committee's September 2018 SEP, an addendum to the minutes of the September 25–26, 2018, FOMC meeting, in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 25–26, 2018," press release, October 17. Return to text 17. For discussions with respect to disinflation , see Antulio N. Bomfim and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2000), "Opportunistic and Deliberate Disinflation under Imperfect Credibility," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (pt. 1, November), pp. 707–21; and Athanasios Orphanides and David W. Wilcox (2002), "The Opportunistic Approach to Disinflation," International Finance, vol. 5 (Spring), pp. 47–71. Return to text Last Update: May 16, 2019 Back to Top
