FINAL 1 “We Can’t Afford Not To” Mary C. Daly, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco National Press Club Virtual Event Washington, DC June 15, 2020 12:30PM EST Remarks as prepared for delivery. Introduction Hello, everyone. Thank you for the invitation to join all of you, especially at this critical time in our country. Today’s challenges require everyone’s best thinking, and dialogues like the ones hosted here play a crucial role in navigating our way toward a better future. Of course, our challenges are many right now. COVID-19 has taken a tremendous toll on American life. Just a few weeks ago, the United States passed a grim marker – one hundred thousand COVID-related deaths. To mitigate the spread of the virus, large portions of the country paused all but essential economic activity for more than two months. The magnitude of this sacrifice is unprecedented in our modern history – more than 20 million workers pushed into unemployment, millions more out of the labor force altogether, and countless businesses shuttered, some forever. In both health and economic terms, the costs have fallen most heavily on those who are least able to bear them. Low-income communities have been FINAL 2 disproportionately burdened by COVID-19.1 Job losses have been concentrated among those with less than a college education, people of color, people with disabilities, immigrants, and others. And the past three weeks have served as a painful reminder that these are far from the only inequities in our country. Tensions and unrest around instances of police brutality, structural racism, and systemic injustice have flared nationwide. Three crises – health, economic, and social – are converging into one difficult moment in American history. It forces each of us to reflect and consider who we are, as individuals and as a collective. And it will require those of us in leadership positions to take bold action if we’re going to chart a course through this turmoil and on to a better future. Today, I will primarily discuss our economic challenges and what bold action could look like in that space. And while economic equity is only part of the solution we need to craft, it will provide an essential foundation for making progress on health and social inequities as well. But before I go further, let me give the standard disclaimer: my remarks today are my own, and do not necessarily reflect the views of anyone else within the Federal Reserve System. Bridging the coronavirus So let’s talk first about what the economic challenges we’re facing look like. We began this year in the midst of the longest economic expansion in American history. While it felt slow at times and didn’t reach every 1 Shrimali, Mattiuzzi, and Choi (2020), Cajner et al. (2020). FINAL 3 community to the same degree, we nonetheless experienced more than 10 years of growth. Then the coronavirus reached our shores, and a decade of economic progress was erased in a matter of months. In response to this shock, both monetary and fiscal policymakers moved quickly to deliver emergency support to households and businesses disrupted by the virus. At the Federal Reserve, we cut the federal funds rate to essentially zero and used our lender of last resort powers to provide liquidity to volatile financial markets. With assistance from the Treasury, we also provided more direct support for households, businesses, and state and local governments. These actions have helped ease market pressures and ensured the smooth flow of funding and credit that is so vital to our economy.2 Our decisions were firmly rooted in lessons from history. The measures the Fed took during and after the Great Recession a decade ago taught us how to respond even faster and more forcefully to COVID-19. Lessons from the Great Depression also loomed large. The mistakes made in the 1930s underscore the importance of a rapid and forceful monetary policy response when crises occur. The severe hardship during that decade would have been much less acute had monetary policy been more accommodative earlier.3 Fiscal policymakers also took swift and bold action. Congress and the White House approved several rounds of economic relief, collectively worth almost three trillion dollars. The aid was broad-based and included expanding and enhancing unemployment insurance, giving cash payments to most 2 Board of Governors (2020), Powell (2020). 3 Bernanke (2002). FINAL 4 households, and providing direct support to small businesses through a forgivable loan program.4 Taken together, these monetary and fiscal measures are helping to bridge our people and our economy through the immediate hardships caused by COVID-19. And that’s the intent – to provide emergency relief so that we can emerge from the crisis on the best possible footing and expand more rapidly when the virus is safely controlled or behind us. Of course, no one knows right now if these emergency actions will be sufficient, or if more relief will be needed. The virus, and how quickly we are able to manage it, will determine the length of the bridge we need to build. We’ll need to be flexible and responsive as the situation evolves – and prepared to do more, if more is needed. Because speed of action alone isn’t enough. Commitment to action over the long term is essential to ensuring a sustainable recovery. A decade is too long The hardest lesson from both the Great Depression and the Great Recession is that it took a decade to dig out. A decade for the economy to fully recover and for the benefits of growth to reach all of those displaced by the shock. The Great Depression began in 1929. And in 1939, overall employment was still below its pre-depression peak, leaving many workers and families stranded and struggling 10 years later. 4 See Wilson (2020) for a discussion of its potential economic impact. FINAL 5 The employment recovery following the Great Recession was faster, but the gains were uneven. In 2018, household incomes for the bottom 20 percent of households were still lower than their pre-recession peak more than a decade earlier.5 What do we learn from this? A decade is too long. We can’t wait 10 years for an economic recovery to reach everyone. Some people might argue that our ability to reverse these patterns is limited. That in present times, the post-virus economy will be so different that not everyone will be able to adapt. That we should expect some dislocations to remain. And it’s certainly true that many of the recent job losses are likely to be permanent.6 But we heard similar arguments during the Great Recession – that we should expect unemployment to remain permanently elevated well above its prior levels. The thinking was that unemployment approaching 10 percent was due in large part to permanent or structural factors, rather than temporary cyclical disruptions.7 The subsequent expansion proved that these arguments were wrong. Unemployment approached 50-year lows, while inflation remained subdued. We discovered that the labor market was much more flexible than we thought – and that finding maximum employment experientially, rather than theoretically, yields a higher number than almost anyone thought possible. 5 Semega et al. (2019). 6 Barrero, Bloom, and Davis (2020). 7 See for example Kocherlakota (2010), Lacker (2012), and Phelps (2008). Daly et al. (2012) provide an alternative view. FINAL 6 Moreover, we found – in the data, and in our conversations with business and community leaders – that letting the economy run past what we thought was possible has tremendous benefits, especially for less advantaged groups.8 Individuals who were previously seen as less employable – such as those with less education or experience – were able to get a foothold when economic conditions were sufficiently strong.9 Those same groups – who only lately got a chance to experience the benefits of the longest economic expansion in U.S. history – are now among the hardest hit as we respond to COVID-19.10 And this is not a new phenomenon. As in so many previous economic cycles, those least advantaged in the labor market are the first to be let go when conditions deteriorate, and the last to be hired when conditions improve.11 Unless we build the foundations for a sustained and robust recovery, we risk losing these individuals – from the labor force, and perhaps even from the mainstream of economic life.12 This isn’t just about fairness – although that’s clearly important. Low employment risks letting many people sit idle, sidelined from work and participation in economic life. This limits growth and pulls at the health of our communities. We have to commit – now – to not letting this happen. Any plan for long- term economic recovery has to include the people we welcomed into 8 See the discussion of the “Fed Listens” initiative on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors website: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of- monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm 9 Aaronson et al. (2019), Petrosky-Nadeau and Valletta (2019). 10 Cajner et al. (2020). 11 Couch and Fairlie (2010), Hoynes, Miller, and Schaller (2012). 12 Krueger (2017). FINAL 7 employment during the expansion. This must be the measuring stick we hold ourselves to. The path forward With this goal in mind, what should our path forward look like? The answer isn’t simple, and it can’t be achieved by any one institution alone. At the Federal Reserve, I expect our current stance of highly accommodative monetary policy to continue until the economy has largely recovered what’s been lost due to the virus. Getting back on track to achieving our congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability is our top priority. And with the current low inflation environment expected to continue, we can once again search for the upside potential of our full employment goal. But monetary policy can’t help the U.S. economy reach its full potential on its own. We also need fiscal policymakers to commit to sustained investments in our economic future. The need for this was evident before the crisis, and it’s even more evident now.13 Increasing investments may sound like a surprising recommendation. After all, we’ve already spent trillions of dollars in emergency economic relief. And this has occurred at a time when the federal debt was already at historically high levels.14 But the key word there is “emergency.” These actions were taken to keep households and businesses solvent in the midst of the crisis. Much more 13 See Elmendorf and Dynan (2020) for a related discussion recorded before the U.S. virus outbreak. 14 Congressional Budget Office (2020). FINAL 8 will be needed in order to build a strong economic foundation that will allow a full recovery and sustained expansion. Now let me be clear: I’m not just advocating for increased public spending and debt. The composition of spending is crucial. We need to focus on investments that leverage the talent of everyone and contribute to the economy’s long-term growth prospects. In this case, inclusive growth is faster growth – and it will pay for itself in the long run. And now is an especially good time to take on this type of debt. Even before the crisis, we were in an environment of low interest rates – and that is expected to continue for the foreseeable future.15 This makes public spending relatively inexpensive and easy to finance. The payoff is potentially huge. Public works programs during the Great Depression re-employed many of those hardest hit by the downturn and made lasting improvements in the nation’s infrastructure that boosted our economy’s potential output.16 The GI Bill following World War II helped educate a generation and set the stage for rapid postwar growth.17 And the construction of the interstate highway system created jobs while laying the groundwork for our modern economy.18 15 Williams (2018), Jordà and Taylor (2019). 16 See, for example, Kline and Moretti (2014). 17 Bound and Turner (2002), Fernald and Jones (2014). 18 Fernald (1999). See also Leduc and Wilson (2012) for the effects of road spending following the Great Recession. FINAL 9 Opportunity infrastructure So what should today’s investments look like? The greatest need is for what I’ll call “opportunity infrastructure” – the building blocks that help individuals maximize their potential. First, we need to invest in people’s health. The coronavirus exposed existing inequities in both health outcomes and access to health care. Structural factors related to race, location, and income have created disparities that leave less advantaged communities more vulnerable to health shocks. And when those shocks come, access to health care can be prohibitively expensive, or not available at all.19 A healthy economy requires healthy people who can live, and work, and contribute to our society. Investing in health infrastructure, access, and care will both improve individual outcomes and help create a more productive labor force. Next, we need to invest in the full life cycle of education. Education is the best form of insurance against unemployment. We’ve seen this in the recent job losses, which were much less severe for those with college degrees. Educational investments should begin with early childhood education that helps kids develop and allows parents to pursue employment without making difficult tradeoffs.20 We should also focus on making higher education more accessible, and encouraging students to enroll in and complete college. Of course, lifelong learning also means bolstering access to schooling and skills training to help workers displaced by economic shocks like COVID-19. 19 Shrimali, Mattiuzzi, and Choi (2020). 20 Heckman, Pinto, and Savelyev (2013), Shrimali, Mattiuzzi, and Choi (2020), Grunewald (2020). FINAL 10 These investments boost employment, labor force participation, and ensure our nation’s long-term global competitiveness.21 Finally, we need to invest in digital infrastructure so that we can expand access to opportunity and create more economic resiliency. As shelter-in- place became the norm around the country in March, being able to get online was a crucial determinant of people’s ability to continue engaging in the workplace and in the classroom.22 Jobs and education are only going to become more reliant on technology in the months and years ahead. And the “digital divide” means those without adequate connectivity will struggle to be full participants in our future economy.23 We need to close this gap in order to maximize our economic potential. We can’t afford not to The coronavirus is the largest economic shock most of us have experienced in our lives. It’s taken a tremendous toll on all of us. But the inequities it exposed – and often magnified – have been with us for a long time. Right now, not everyone gets the same chance to succeed in our country. And it’s not for lack of trying – it’s for lack of opportunity. Our system, whether we meant it to be or not, is set up that way. But we don’t have to accept this. 21 See the discussion in Daly (2019). 22 Gao (2020). 23 Goss, Lee, and Gao (2019). FINAL 11 Our nation’s economic health, physical health, and societal health are all intertwined. And while addressing our economic challenges alone can’t solve the health and social issues we’re facing, it can certainly help. We find ourselves at an inflection point. A moment when crises converge, and a once-in-a-generation opportunity presents itself. The choices we make today will define our future path. We have to choose long-term growth. We have to choose equitable opportunity. We have to choose inclusive success. We can’t afford not to. Thank you. FINAL 12 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox. 2019. “Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference Draft, Spring. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/okun- revisited-who-benefits-most-from-a-strong-economy/ Barrero, Jose Maria, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2020. “COVID-19 Is Also a Reallocation Shock.” NBER Working Paper 27137, May. https://www.nber.org/papers/w27137 Bernanke, Ben S. 2002. “On Milton Friedman’s Ninetieth Birthday.” Remarks at the Conference to Honor Milton Friedman, University of Chicago, November 8. https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2002/20021108/ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2020. “Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement.” Press release, March 15. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200315a.htm Bound, John, and Sarah Turner. 2002. “Going to War and Going to College: Did World War II and the G.I. Bill Increase Educational Attainment for Returning Veterans?” Journal of Labor Economics 20(4, October), pp. 784–815. Cajner, Tomaz, Leland D. Crane, Ryan A. Decker, John Grigsby, Adrian Hamins-Puertolas, Erik Hurst, Christopher Kurz, and Ahu Yildirmaz. 2020. “The U.S. Labor Market during the Beginning of the Pandemic Recession.” Working Paper 2020-58, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics, University of Chicago, May. https://bfi.uchicago.edu/working- paper/2020-58/ Congressional Budget Office. 2020. “Federal Debt: A Primer.” March 12. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56165 Couch Kenneth A., and Robert Fairlie. 2010. “Last Hired, First Fired? Black-White Unemployment and the Business Cycle.” Demography 47(1), pp. 227–247. Daly, Mary C. 2019. “Beyond Fairness: The Value of an Inclusive Economy.” Speech to the Los Angeles World Affairs Council & Town Hall, Los Angeles, CA. October 15. https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/mary-c- daly/2019/october/beyond-fairness-the-value-of-an-inclusive-economy/ Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta. 2012. “A Search and Matching Approach to Labor Markets: Did the Natural Rate of Unemployment Rise?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(3, Summer), pp. 3–26. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.26.3.3 FINAL 13 Elmendorf, Douglas, and Karen Dynan 2020. “How Much Can the Federal Budget and the Deficit Continue to Grow?” February 12 podcast interview by Jonathan Shaw, Harvard Magazine, April 13. https://harvardmagazine.com/podcast/2020/doug-elmendorf- and-karen-dynan Fernald, John. 1999. “Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and Productivity.” American Economic Review 89(3), pp. 619–638. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.89.3.619 Fernald, John G., and Charles I. Jones. 2014. “The Future of US Economic Growth.” American Economic Review 104(5), pp. 44–49. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.104.5.44 Gao, Niu. 2020. “Will Students without Home Internet Fall Behind during Coronavirus Shutdowns?” Public Policy Institute of California blog, March 12. https://www.ppic.org/blog/will-students-without-home-internet-fall-behind-during- coronavirus-shutdowns/ Goss, Justin, Courtney Lee, and Niu Gao. 2019. “California’s Digital Divide.” Just the Facts (March), Public Policy Institute of California. https://www.ppic.org/publication/californias-digital-divide/ Grunewald, Rob. 2020. “COVID-19 Challenges the Child Care Market.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, April 22. https://www.minneapolisfed.org/article/2020/covid-19- challenges-the-child-care-market Heckman, James, Rodrigo Pinto, and Peter Savelyev. 2013. “Understanding the Mechanisms through Which an Influential Early Childhood Program Boosted Adult Outcomes.” American Economic Review 103(6, October), pp. 2,052–2,086. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.103.6.2052 Hoynes, Hilary W., Douglas L. Miller, and Jessamyn Schaller. 2012. “Who Suffers during Recessions?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(3), pp. 27–48. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.26.3.27 Jordà, Òscar, and Alan M. Taylor. 2019. “Riders on the Storm.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2019–20. https://doi.org/10.24148/wp2019-20 Kline, Patrick, and Enrico Moretti. 2014. “Local Economic Development, Agglomeration Economies, and the Big Push: 100 Years of Evidence from the Tennessee Valley Authority.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(1, February), pp. 275–331. Kocherlakota, Naryana. 2010. “Inside the FOMC.” Speech at Northern Michigan University, Marquette, MI, August 17. https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2010/inside- the-fomc/ FINAL 14 Krueger, Alan B. 2017. “Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/where-have-all-the-workers-gone-an- inquiry-into-the-decline-of-the-u-s-labor-force-participation-rate/ Lacker, Jeffrey M. 2012. “Maximum Employment and Monetary Policy.” Speech to the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, NY. September 18. https://www.richmondfed.org/press_room/speeches/jeffrey_m_lacker/2012/lacker_s peech_20120918 Leduc, Sylvain, and Daniel Wilson. 2013. “Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory and Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012, volume 27, eds. Daron Acemoglu, Jonathan Parker, and Michael Woodford. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 89–142. Petrosky-Nadeau, Nicolas, and Robert G. Valletta. 2019. “Unemployment: Lower for Longer?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2019-21 (August 19). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2019/august/unemployment-lower-for-longer/ Phelps, Edmund. 2008. “U.S. Monetary Policy and the Prospective Structural Slump.” Speech to the 7th Annual BIS Conference on Monetary Policy, Luzern, Switzerland, June 26. https://www.bis.org/events/conf080626/phelps.pdf Powell, Jerome H. 2020. “Coronavirus and CARES Act.” Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC, May 19. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/powell20200519a.htm Semega, Jessica, Melissa Kollar, John Creamer, and Abinash Mohanty. 2019. “Income and Poverty in the United States: 2018.” U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports, P60-266, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC. September. https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2019/demo/p60- 266.pdf Shrimali, Bina Patel, Elizabeth Mattiuzzi, and Laura Choi. 2020. “Coronavirus Compounds Challenges for Low-Income Communities and Communities of Color.” SF Fed Blog, April 24. https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/about/sf-fed-blog/covid19-coronavirus-low- income-disproportionate-impact-communities-color/ Williams, John C. 2018. “The Future Fortunes of R-star: Are They Really Rising?” Remarks to the Economic Club of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, May 15. https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams- speeches/2018/may/future-fortunes-r-star-are-they-rising/ FINAL 15 Wilson, Daniel J. 2020. “The COVID-19 Fiscal Multiplier: Lessons from the Great Recession.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2020-13 (May 26). https://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2020/may/covid-19-fiscal-multiplier-lessons- from-great-recession/

FINAL 1 “Ambassadors of Hope” Mary C. Daly, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco The Preuss School Graduation Virtual Presentation June 18, 2020 4:00PM PT Remarks as prepared for delivery. Hi everyone. I’m honored to be your graduation speaker today. It’s truly a gift to me. Now typically, graduation speeches have a certain rhythm to them. There’s a little humor, some advice, lots of celebration, big congratulations. And almost always, there’s a central theme tied around encouragement, aspiration, or maybe perspective. But today, I’ve decided to depart from the usual rhythm and go straight to what we all need most right now: HOPE. Hope for ourselves, hope for our world, hope for a brighter future. I know I’m not alone in needing hope. I saw it in your words that you sent in last month – on how you felt about graduating during a global pandemic. In the midst of the expected emotions at graduation, the ones I’ve seen and felt myself – things like accomplished, motivated, excited – there were others that reflect the times we’re in. Words like, anxious, disappointed… one person said robbed. FINAL 2 And these were your feelings when we were only dealing with COVID- 19. Before the pain, the tensions, and the unrest surrounding the deaths of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, and Breonna Taylor. Deaths that underscore and spotlight the systemic racism, inequality, and injustice that plague our society. I’m guessing that if I asked you today, you might not even have the words to fully describe how you feel anymore. And that’s okay. I’ve been trying to figure out my own feelings, and find my own right words, for weeks. It’s understandable. Our world is in a hard place right now. And we have no clear sense of when and how better days will emerge. But to better days we must go. Not by accident. But with purpose and conviction. As agents of change. As ambassadors of hope. Why hope? What makes hope the foundational element for change? It’s actually very simple: hope is the stubborn – and I mean double-underlined stubborn – belief that whatever is happening today does not have to determine tomorrow. Hope is what allows you to set an intention for change and know that change is possible. So at its heart, hope is agency. You start off with loads of hope when you’re young. I know I did. Just think of all the things you’ve done with complete abandon, knowing in your heart that they would work out in the end. Then the disappointments come, and the frustrations. You learn that change can be slow, and that maybe goals aren’t as easy to reach as you expected. And these experiences leave little dents… maybe a bruise. And they can chip away at your hope. FINAL 3 But here’s the thing I came to tell you. Hope is not a rock or some other inanimate object that erodes or diminishes over time, outside of our control. Hope is a living thing. And we must choose to nurture it. It takes care and intention to thrive. So how do you do it? How do you maintain hope? How do you make it grow, and get bigger and stronger over time? You keep a box of diamonds. You might remember my box of diamonds. I talked to you about it when I visited Preuss in October. They’re the memories from my life, big and small, that make me feel joyous, filled up, boundless. They remind me of my humanness, of my goodness, and of the kindness in the world. They remind me that, no matter what’s going on, I belong. Sometimes my diamonds are physical – like my grandfather’s pocket knife, or the last $20 bill my grandma gave me for groceries before she passed away. Sometimes they are small and fleeting moments, like the compassion of a UPS driver who saw I was upset one day and stopped his truck to ask if I was okay. And sometimes they are grand, like the day I married my wife. The best thing about diamonds is that they are everywhere. You just have to remember to stop and collect them. You have to be intentional about spotting them, and reflecting on them, and putting them in your real or virtual memory box. All so they will be ready to take out when you need them – to help you through frustration or anger, to fill you back up, to soothe your grief when the world feels lost. This is the practice of choosing hope. FINAL 4 I’ve been taking out my box of diamonds a lot over the past few months. Looking at each one. Recalling where I got them and how I felt when I found them. All trying to feel strong in these challenging times. So it’s fitting that I am here today to give your graduation speech. Because last October, I had the enormous joy of meeting you. On that day, we took a picture together. I rushed home and printed that picture, and it still hangs on my wall. It was a day I won’t forget. It is one of my diamonds. Today, more than anything, I want to say thank you. And I want you to remember that you make a difference even when you don’t realize it. You give others strength and fortitude just by being who you are. By graduating in a pandemic. By being the first in your family to head for college. And for being brave and vulnerable enough to allow yourselves to feel excited, anxious, motivated, disappointed, and even robbed all on the same day. But before I close and for just a moment, I want you to put every other emotion aside except for one. I want you to only feel joy. Because today is your day. It’s filled with love, and pride, and gratitude from your families, from your friends, from your teachers, and from your community. You have accomplished so much, and today is your day to celebrate. The world will be here when you’re done – and it will need you to be strong and ready. It will need you to show up, speak out, and fight for a better future on whatever path you choose to take. But that’s for tomorrow. So take today. Hold on to it. Let it fill you up. And then, let’s join together to be ambassadors of hope. The world needs us. Thank you – and congratulations. I can’t wait to see what you do.

College is Opportunity NASPA Conferences on Student Success in Higher Education June 29, 2020 Mary C. Daly President & CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. College is protective Graduates have lower unemployment rates 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 1993 1996 1999 2002 2005 2008 2011 2014 2017 2020 Source:BLS/Haver Analytics. Note: Unemployment rate shown is a 12 month moving average. Unemployment rate by educational attainment Percent High School College or more And insurance against economic shocks Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics. Note: Past two recession values are averaged from 2000-2001 recession and Great Recession. Coronavirus shock values are from February to May 2020. Changes in unemployment rate during recessions, 1992-2020 College is an investment Graduates earn more Graduates have greater economic mobility Degrees earn a competitive return College is our future Demand for college degrees is rising But too many are left behind Closing gaps benefits everyone Improves potential economic growth • Employ more of working age population • Increase the skill level of the workforce Protects the American Dream • Aspirations need evidence References Abel, Jaison R., and Richard Deitz. 2014. "Do the benefits of college still outweigh the costs?." Current Issues in Economics and Finance 20, no. 3. Carnevale, Anthony, Nicole Smith, and Jeff Strohl. 2013. “Recovery: Job Growth and Education Requirements Through 2020.” Georgetown Center on Education and the Workforce. Daly, Mary C., and Yifan Cao. 2015. “Does College Pay?” Does College Matter? Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2014 Annual Report. U.S. Department of Education. Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Statistics. 2016. “Educational Attainment of Young Adults.” http://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_caa.asp
