Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At the Financial Stability Board Workshop on Pre-Positioning, Ring-Fencing, and Market Fragmentation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Share Regulatory and supervisory colleagues, members of the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) Resolution Steering Group (ReSG) and Standing Committee on Supervisory and Regulatory Cooperation (SRC), representatives from academia, and the private sector: Thank you for being here, and for taking part in today's workshop on pre-positioning, ring-fencing, and market fragmentation. I particularly want to thank Ryozo Himino, our new SRC chair, for his leadership in highlighting these issues; his remarks and efforts around market fragmentation are especially timely, as we begin the difficult task of examining the post-crisis reforms. I also want to recognize and thank Sir Jon Cunliffe, for proposing a workshop where we can explore these issues together; as he recently said, quoting Ben Franklin, "we must all hang together, or most assuredly, we shall all hang separately." 1 Finally, I want to thank the leadership and staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, for not just accommodating us, but making us feel welcome in the nation's first capital. 2 The Philadelphia Fed is three blocks north, and another three west, from the birthplace of American central banking. That birthplace is not the site of the First or Second Banks of the United States, whose neoclassical headquarters are still standing and open to the public. 3 Instead, the first national bank sat just west of North 3rd Street and Chestnut: the Bank of North America. 4 Its charter came from a new nation on the verge of bankruptcy. 5 Six years of war had drained an already-short supply of domestic specie, a necessity for international trade. So little specie remained in the treasury that the "continentals," used to finance the war, had depreciated to about two cents on the dollar. The United States lacked a common, sound currency to settle its debts, and without federal authority to levy taxes, it lacked a ready path back to solvency. (Another Franklin quote applies: "Glass, China, and Reputation, are easily crack'd, and never well mended." 6 ) In desperation, the Founding Fathers made a successful Philadelphia merchant, Robert Morris, their new superintendent of finance. Drawing on a plan from Alexander Hamilton, Morris proposed a new institution, with the power to issue notes backed by $400,000 in private capital. When it could muster only a fraction of that in subscriptions, the country turned overseas. A substantial loan in French bullion financed the new bank and saved the republic from collapse. America could declare independence, but she could not secure it without credit from abroad. That lesson was both hard earned and short-lived. Four years later, a new Pennsylvania legislature claimed that dividends to foreign creditors were draining much-needed specie from America's shores. James Wilson, Pennsylvania's representative to the Continental Congress, wrote an impassioned legal and political defense of the bank, emphasizing its role in international commerce. He quoted Sir James Steuart, one of the world's first economists, calling banking "that branch of credit which best deserves the attention of a statesman." 7 It wasn't enough. The charter was repealed—a pattern that would repeat with two more national banks, with even more disruptive results. 8 International banking is a very different enterprise than two centuries ago, but it still "best deserves the attention of a statesman." Cross-border finance is an essential part of the international economic infrastructure. It is a conduit to direct financial resources to their most efficient use, regardless of national borders. It channels capital to places and projects it could not otherwise reach, fostering innovation, international ties, and the exchange of ideas. At its best, it is also self-sustaining, extending the financial and technical capacity of emerging economies, and expanding their role in the global economy. America's experience, however, reminds us that the benefits of international banking are not automatic. Cross-border finance is a common good, and like any common good, sustaining it requires collective action from a range of parties. 9 These parties are both public and private, elected and appointed—not just central banks and supervisors, but finance ministries, legislatures, and commercial banking organizations. Each has a distinct mission and a duty to serve a distinct set of stakeholders. When those duties conflict, trust alone cannot sustain cooperation; only a careful configuration that recognizes mutual and separate interests can do so. With such a configuration, the cross-border financial system can be open, stable, and safe; without it, the system can become unpredictable and dangerous. "Ring-fencing" often serves as a catch-all for this dynamic, capturing any and all impediments to the free flow of finance, however and whenever they arise. However, as I have noted previously, that term obscures a distinction that plays a vital role in cross-border finance—between prudently placing a constrained amount of capital and liquidity within jurisdictions and legal entities before a crisis, and competitively seizing capital and liquidity during a crisis. This distinction determines more than just the possibility of an orderly cross-border resolution. Pre-positioning of resources—when properly calibrated—can also provide the certainty that lets cross-border finance occur at all. Certainty is the critical ingredient in achieving the careful configuration of interests I described. Financial institutions need some certainty about the requirements they face by participating in cross-border activity. Supervisors need some certainty about safety and soundness, not just of the foreign banks they host, but of their domestic banks operating overseas. Creditors and investors need some certainty that a foreign authority won't abrogate their contracts. Elected officials need certainty that their constituents are not unfairly disadvantaged. All these parties—and the public—need some certainty that the resources promised to them won't disappear at the first sign of stress. Certainty fosters financial stability. It supports clear monitoring and thoughtful planning, by both institutions and their regulators. It signals the clear intention of authorities to cooperate, during normal times and in an emergency. It increases the odds that a cross-border financial institution will keep operating through a crisis. It fosters more and deeper cross-border financial activity, by decreasing its risks and increasing its benefits, both to participants and to the global economy. Certainty does require tradeoffs. None of us has perfect foresight. If we pursue certainty to the complete exclusion of any flexibility to respond to future events, we may end up undermining our ultimate goal: maintaining a financial system that is resilient to unexpected shocks. However, this workshop begins by revisiting the consequences when certainty disappears. These consequences were on full display during the financial crisis—the collapse in cross-border activity, when trust broke down; the rush to secure assets and prioritize domestic claims; the ambiguous relationship between banks' resources and their needs; and the long, halting return to a more integrated financial system. Today's panelists will also revisit the steps that the international community took to address those consequences. The workshop also examines the effect those steps have had on cross-border financial intermediation and the management of global financial institutions. The panelists will provide their views on whether we have achieved the right balance among certainty, the kinds of economic opportunity that cross-border finance promotes, and the flexibility to manage through a future disruption. This decade-long account is the latest chapter in a much older story, whose moral is clear: in regulating cross-border finance, expectations matter. When capital and liquidity requirements are imposed only at the level of the consolidated institution, they create a good deal of flexibility, but they cannot reassure host supervisors that sufficient resources will truly be available in a time of need. Opaque, vague, and uncertain requirements for pre-positioning and reporting, and lack of clarity on when they may be imposed, make compliance difficult, costly, and potentially disruptive. Pre-positioning, at levels that go beyond what may be needed in a given jurisdiction in stress, can also create rigidity and limit growth opportunities. The consequence of getting the balance between these considerations wrong is a less integrated and less resilient global financial system. These details are as complex as they are important, and I commend my FSB colleagues, particularly the ReSG, for exploring them in the context of the too-big-to-fail reforms. 10 The FSB's work brings together a wide range of experts to better understand the intent, implementation, and effects of our post-crisis work. As with market fragmentation, the broader context of this work matters immensely, including the desired impact of the reforms and their anticipated and unanticipated consequences. Within the Federal Reserve Board, we are considering similar questions—not only what level of loss-absorbing capacity is appropriate for the material legal entities within a large, cross-border financial institution, but also what tools we and other supervisors use to ensure such capacity exists. The roles that supervision and regulation play in addressing these issues are important. There are clear advantages to setting liquidity and capital pre-positioning requirements through regulation. Regulation ensures consistency and clarity; provides a conduit for improvement, through public notice and comment; and offers a clear rational basis for any measures imposed. There is also a role for supervision, not just in addressing the particular conditions at a given firm, but in generating and sharing better information on how stress may manifest, not just in the firm overall, but in each jurisdiction where it operates. More information sharing by home to host supervisors may help convince host supervisors that they need fewer pre-positioned resources in their jurisdiction. Today's workshop is a worthy step forward in discussing these issues, and towards preserving and expanding the benefits of cross-border finance. We are all ultimately responsible for creating the conditions where capital can flow freely, giving rise to genuine opportunity and sustainable growth. We should patiently and thoughtfully examine how best to create those conditions. As William Penn put it, "business can never be well done, that is not well understood: Which cannot be without patience." 11 I look forward to engaging together, rigorously and openly, in the work ahead. 1. John Bartlett, Familiar Quotations (10 th ed., 1919). Return to text 2. U.S. Senate, " The Nine Capitals of the United States " (citing Robert Fortenbaugh, The Nine Capitals of the United States (1948), at 9). Return to text 3. National Park Service, " First Bank of the United States " (October 18, 2016); National Park Service, " Second Bank of the United States " (April 12, 2017). Return to text 4. Library of Congress, " Bank of North America, 305-307 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, Philadelphia County, PA " (documentation compiled after 1933). Return to text 5. This account is derived from Edward S. Kaplan, The Bank of the United States and the American Economy (1999), at 3-10, and from Janet Wilson, " The Bank of North America and Pennsylvania Politics: 1781-1787 ," 66(1) Penn. Magazine of History and Biography 3 (Jan. 1942). Return to text 6. Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard's Almanack (1732), 160. Return to text 7. James Wilson, Considerations on the Bank of North-America (1785) (quoting Sir James Steuart, An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy [sic] : Being an Essay on the Science of Domestic Policy in Free Nations, in which are particularly considered Population, Agriculture, Trade, Industry, Money, Coin, Interest, Circulation, Banks, Exchange, Public Credit, and Taxes," Vol. 2 (1770), at 358). Supporters also produced more popular literature. In a satire in the Pennsylvania Gazette , a critic of the bank complains: "All honest men should support their country, by cheating their creditors: Creditors are the bane of a young country: So here is confusion to them all—a tender-law forever!" Janet Wilson, supra note 5, at 12 quoting Pennsylvania Gazette (September 21, 1785). Return to text 8. Unlike its successors, the bank's headquarters no longer stands; it was demolished sometime after 1959. See Library of Congress, supra note 4. Return to text 9. See Elinor Ostrom and Oliver E. Williamson, " Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance of Complex Economic Systems ," Nobel Prize Lecture delivered at Aula Magna, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden (December 8, 2009). Return to text 10. Financial Stability Board, " FSB launches evaluation of too-big-to-fail reforms and invites feedback from stakeholders ," news release (May 23, 2019). Return to text 11. William Penn, Some Fruits of Solitude in Reflections and Maxims (1682), 399. Return to text Last Update: September 26, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the “Law and Macroeconomics,” a conference at Georgetown University Law Center, Washington, D.C. Share Good morning. I would like to thank Georgetown University Law Center and the conference organizers, Anna Gelpern and Adam Levitin, for the opportunity to speak to you. I was particularly delighted to be asked to speak at today's conference because the topic is law and macroeconomics, a field that my experience has persuaded me is of the first importance, but ill understood, and surprisingly understudied. Now, this may at first blush sound like a beloved former president, venturing into a grocery store—"Golly, can you believe these scanners!?"—because the field of law and economics was already sturdily established when I was in law school back in the Coolidge Administration, and is now well over half a century old. It has been the source of some of the most innovative and influential legal scholarship over the lifetimes of everyone here, and in many ways the insights of the law and economics movement have become the default framework that policy makers and practitioners alike use when we think about the law conceptually, and often even at the level of granular application. Yet, while we have called this law and economics, it would be more precise to call it law and micro economics. Both law and microeconomics are centrally concerned with incentives— how are they constructed, how do they operate, how do legal or economic actors respond to them—and the interplay between these different ways to think about incentives has been a natural and fruitful focus of investigation in a broad range of legal studies: tort law, property law, criminal law, contract law, corporate law. But both law and economics are also centrally concerned with systems , the performance and relationships of broad aggregates of laws or economic activity. Not merely how do individual actors react to changes in incentives, but how do large-scale combinations of actors respond to changes in systems: how are legal or economic systems constructed, how do they operate, how do those systems constrain wide areas of human activity. The interplay between those two ways of thinking about systems would seem to be as natural and fruitful a focus of investigation as is law and microeconomics, but it is only just beginning to be thought of as a field in itself. For a concrete example, think about the often observed fact that corporate profit margins have been increasing steadily over the last few decades. Law is likely to have been a significant element in this evolution, but not any individual law. Rather an entire system of laws—laws relating to corporate governance, corporate combinations, taxation, litigation, labor—have evolved over an extended period of time. And, under this theory, one outcome of this system—higher corporate profit margins—would likely give firms greater scope to increase wages without increasing prices, thus offering a potential explanation for the flattening of the Phillips curve, the traditional macroeconomic relationship between the unemployment rate and inflation. For a policymaker who accepted this theory, his comfort in maintaining a very low rate of unemployment could depend significantly on his understanding of that underlying legal system and his estimation of how its evolution would likely proceed in the future. Thus, the formal union of law and macroeconomics should seek to examine the interplay between a legal system and macroeconomic outcomes, above and beyond the connections a particular law may have with its impact on human behavior. Scholars and policymakers have spent our time primarily thinking about the impact of single laws, but it is appropriate to focus more broadly, especially since we have in fact repeatedly sought over the past century to revamp our system of laws to improve macroeconomic outcomes. Consider the roaring debate in the half-dozen years after the 1929 market crash that led to the establishment of the foundations of federal financial regulation in the United States. Laws creating the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and a federal deposit insurance and receivership framework, establishing the Securities and Exchange Commission, and greatly expanding the responsibilities and capabilities of the Federal Reserve System were very purposefully intended to help restore confidence in the U.S. financial system as a necessary condition to foster a recovery from the devastation of the Great Depression. In essence, we designed and implemented a new system of financial regulatory laws to alter macroeconomic outcomes, not only to affect individual behavior. The debate around those laws, in the 1930s, was not an academic one, because the pain and suffering of that era was evident—at the time Congress was debating the Banking Act of 1935, which established the modern framework for the federal bank regulation and supervision, the unemployment rate in the United States was still 20 percent. 1 I will leave to others the question of whether every detail of the laws passed in this period was equally effective, in the short or long term, in promoting macroeconomic stability. But we should recognize that rules to promote financial stability and a healthy economy have deep roots in the American legal tradition. The Post-Crisis International Consensus Building upon that strong tradition, I would like to focus this morning's remarks on the role that law and macroeconomics has played since the financial crisis in promoting a more stable economy. I am, of course, referring to macroprudential financial regulation. Let's rewind the tape. After many decades of remarkable financial stability in the United States since the 1930s, the focus of financial oversight had moved away from systemic risks. Prior to the financial crisis, the better part of our regulatory framework was micro prudential in nature—individual laws geared toward mitigating the fallout from idiosyncratic shocks to firms. This framework was designed to protect investors and depositors, viewed negative shocks as not originating from the financial system, and did not take into account risks that might be shared by financial firms. 2 This is not to say that regulators did not understand the consequences of an interconnected system and the potential of contagion. For instance, the U.S. government, under the able leadership of Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, recognized and responded to the financial stability risks of the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s. The United States had interests in stabilizing allies in Latin America, but a central part of the motivation was to contain potential risks to the U.S. economy. The events of 2008–09 redefined our mission by more explicitly connecting macroeconomic and financial stability, as in the 1930s. Congress and the executive branch embraced a sweeping response, designing a system of laws to reflect a recognition that the cumulative, interconnected behavior of financial institutions had implications for financial stability and that even the behavior of a single large and complex institution could have implications for financial stability. This new system was also adopted at the international level. Starting with the G20 summit in Washington, D.C., in November 2008, the global community established the runway for a structural change. The subsequent G20 summit in London led to the establishment of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), with a strengthened mandate as a successor to the Financial Stability Forum. Subsequently, including at the following summit in Pittsburgh, world leaders agreed that the supervision of individual financial institutions had to account for the financial system as a whole, and it was recognized that shocks could originate from within the system and could spread to institutions with common exposures. In other words, the supervisory framework had to be macro prudential—focusing on mitigating systemic risk and accounting for macroeconomic consequences. 3 This reorientation was a defining part of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act, and internationally, in the Basel III Accord. Section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, in particular, requires the Board to implement heightened capital and liquidity standards, concentration limits, and stress testing—all to further the macroprudential purpose of preventing or mitigating risks to the financial stability of the United States. As I will discuss later, the Board has followed through with rules such as the G-SIB surcharge, the liquidity coverage ratio, and single-counterparty credit limits, just to name a few; and, importantly, we have used macroeconomic considerations in calibrating some of these rules. An Evolving Regulatory Perspective Now, let's fast forward to the present. Over a decade has passed since the migration began toward a renewed focus on macroprudential regulation. Our evolution did not stop with the Pittsburgh G20 summit in 2009. Indeed, global financial standard-setters have continued to adapt and learn as they implemented and updated regulations in line with the global consensus that was reflected in Basel III. I would like to highlight three important regulatory paradigm shifts that follow from this renewed focus on macroprudential regulation. Taking Stock of the Entire Banking Sector First, in line with the pivot away from microprudential regulation, we have a renewed focus not only on the health of individual financial firms but on the amount of capital in the entire banking sector. Note that the idea of improving the stability of the financial system by regulating individual bank capital has been around for decades. Global policymakers began construction of the modern risk-based, bank capital framework in the 1980s, when the aforementioned Latin American debt crisis increased concerns that the capital held by large international banks was deteriorating. Since then, regulators, such as the Board, have continued to have one eye focused on the capital held at individual firms. Now, over a decade after the crisis, exercises such as stress testing have caused us to have the other eye focused on and assessing the amount of capital in the entire banking system. Considering Macroeconomic Outcomes in Calibrations and Impact Analyses The second paradigm shift is that regulators have improved their methods of conducting quantitative analysis of regulations. Such analysis, including conventional –cost-benefit analysis, traditionally did not take macroeconomic variables like gross domestic product (GDP) growth or the unemployment rate. That is no longer the case. Since regulators are given the task of maintaining the stability of the system as a whole, they must concern themselves with externalities and spillover effects to the broader economy. At the Federal Reserve, several regulatory initiatives have exemplified this change in quantitative analysis. At the height of the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve created the first stress test, the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP), to estimate potential losses at those banks, if economic and financial conditions worsened. Building on SCAP, the Federal Reserve moved to the current stress testing assessment—the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)—to evaluate whether the largest firms have sufficient capital to absorb potential losses and continue to lend under stressful conditions. In the CCAR process, the Federal Reserve simulates macroeconomic scenarios like a recession in which GDP falls and the unemployment rate rises significantly. In the 2019 stress test cycle, for example, we tested banks against a hypothetical global recession in which the unemployment rate in the United States rose to 10 percent. 4 The stressed banks were required to show that they could continue to meet minimum capital requirements in the face of those hypothetical macroeconomic shocks. Aside from CCAR, the FSB compiles an annual list of global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), which are subject to stricter capital requirements in the form of a capital surcharge. These banks must meet this higher capital standard based on the judgement that their potential failure would have a larger, systemwide impact on the economy. The goal, therefore, is to reduce a G-SIB's probability of failure so that its expected impact on the economy would be the same as that of a non-G-SIB. Similarly, to reduce the risks of interconnectedness and contagion, the United States and other jurisdictions have implemented rules that limit the exposure that one bank may have to a single counterparty. Finally, research on optimal bank capital levels by staff at regulatory and supervisory bodies around the world have factored in macroeconomic costs and benefits. Specifically, these models assume that higher capital requirements would reduce the probability of a financial crisis occurring but would increase the cost of bank lending, thereby lowering GDP growth. Not surprisingly, these models have produced a wide range of capital estimates given the wide range of underlying assumptions. Combating Pro-cyclicality The third paradigm shift at the Fed is combatting pro-cyclicality. To be sure, none of the regulatory developments that I have discussed so far screams macroeconomics quite as loudly as a time-varying, discretionary regulatory regime the express goal of which is to fight pro-cyclicality. Cyclicality—in this case, fluctuations in the economy based on the business cycle—is a concept that is near and dear to every macroeconomist's heart. In fact, theoretical studies of economic cycles go back to the early 1800s, and the National Bureau of Economic Research's tracker of the U.S. business cycle dates economic contractions and expansions back to the 1850s. Quite impressive. There's also more than just a handful of volumes of articles and book chapters written on the business cycle and countercyclical fiscal policy. In the context of macroprudential regulation, pro-cyclicality represents a problem because banks tend to build up excessive credit during an economic expansion. Limiting pro-cyclicality means limiting both the highs and lows of a credit cycle. Along with many other jurisdictions, the United States adopted a countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) to address the issue. The U.S. CCyB is a capital buffer that ranges from zero percent to 2.5 percent of covered institutions' risk-weighted assets. Domestic regulators have discretion to switch the CCyB on or off anywhere within that range in order to prevent or mitigate the overheating of credit markets under their jurisdiction. In setting the buffer, the Federal Reserve takes into account, among other things, leverage in the financial sector, leverage in the nonfinancial sector, maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector, and asset valuation pressures. Notably, the CCyB is not calibrated bank-by-bank and is not calibrated asset-class-by-asset-class. Rather, regulators set the buffer based on their perception of the aggregate domestic credit cycle, whether it's too hot, too cold, or just right. Under the Board's current policy, we would activate the CCyB based on "when systemic vulnerabilities are meaningfully above normal." Based on this policy, the CCyB is currently set at zero percent in the United States but has been turned on in France, Hong Kong, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and Norway. It is worth noting that, in the United Kingdom, the CCyB is set equal to a positive level—1 percent—in normal times. As a result, their buffer can be adjusted upward or downward based on the perceived risks of the time-varying credit cycle. As I have recently said, I see real merit in exploring the U.K. approach as a tool to promote financial stability. Conclusion Let me conclude by offering a few thoughts on three research topics that fall squarely in the intersection of law and macroeconomics. Central Bank Mandates First, while international agreements such as Basel III demonstrate that the international regulatory community has agreed on the high-level systematic changes and developed similar perspectives following the crisis, national governments gave different regulatory powers—in both degree and scope—to their central banks in pursuit of the new post-crisis consensus. 5 In the United States, Congress did not change the Federal Reserve's dual mandate but did provide new responsibilities to promote financial stability. There was no change to the European Central Bank's monetary policy mandate, but it received direct supervisory authority over some of the Eurozone's largest banks through the Single Supervisory Mechanism and also continues to monitor financial sector risks. The Bank of Japan does not control Japan's macroprudential toolkit but does play an active role in monitoring systemic risk. The Bank of England, on the other hand, was explicitly tasked with a new financial stability mandate, and it oversees macroprudential regulation. In line with the debates over central bank independence and macroeconomic outcomes, legal scholars who engage in cutting-edge research on institutional design may have thoughts on which model leads to the best outcomes for financial stability. Financial Stability Monitoring Second, in addition to giving varying degrees of power to their central banks, national governments also created new bodies that promote financial stability, such as the FSB and the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), to monitor systemic risk and identify systemically important institutions and activities. For example, the main issues on the FSB agenda for this year were developments in financial technology, nonbank financial intermediation, and evaluation of too-big-to-fail reforms. 6 In the same vein, the FSOC produces annual reports that highlight such threats and vulnerabilities, including news ones such as cybersecurity. 7 Given today's audience, I very much look forward to hearing your thoughts on these issues, particularly suggestions on ways in which our legal framework can be used to mitigate these risks and the extent to which additional macroeconomic tools should be developed to monitor or address evolving risks. Due Process Third and finally, since I have spent a good part of this speech talking about issues that are near and dear to every economist, I feel like it is only fair for me to wrap up by discussing an issue of equal, if not greater, emotional import to lawyers: due process. Specifically, I'd like to close by talking about the due process considerations associated with the aforementioned macroprudential policies. There is nothing improper about mitigating negative externalities through regulation, and that is an important purpose of much post-crisis financial regulation. However, it is also well-accepted that due process requires the fair, evenhanded application of laws so that individuals are not at the mercy of the arbitrary exercise of government power. 8 As I have alluded to throughout my remarks, we are currently placing a much greater regulatory burden on a select group of banks—the largest and most complex firms—because we believe their failures would bring down the entire financial system. Some might argue that, during the financial crisis, we dispensed with due process considerations while conducting version 1.0 of the stress tests. This is why I have strongly pushed for the recent shift toward greater transparency around the structure of the stress tests and the models themselves. It affords greater due process to the affected participants. In the same vein, I would welcome greater legal scholarship on the due process considerations associated with bank supervision as a process distinct from bank regulation. By bank supervision, I refer to the processes and activities identified with examining banks, including checking compliance with laws and regulations, assessing bank capital and liquidity levels, assigning supervisory ratings to banks, and taking formal and informal enforcement actions. While it is important for bank supervision to be up to the task of assessing the world's largest banks, especially in light of the financial stability risks that I have been describing today, an equally important task is making sure that supervisors are acting fairly. Although questions of fairness are routine in law and economics, there is ample room to explore these issues as they relate to bank supervision. While transparency and fairness are pillars of due process, I appreciate that there are other approaches worth considering on this matter. With this growing field of law and macroeconomics, I hope to see and implement many interdisciplinary solutions on the path forward. 1. Arguably, the history of law and macroeconomics has even deeper roots. Prior to the Banking Act of 1935, Congress had passed the National Bank Act of 1863 in response to the financial crisis that emerged during the early days of the American Civil War. Its purpose was to create a national banking system and establish a national currency. The following year, Congress passed the National Bank Act of 1864, which established the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and gave the federal government the authority to supervise commercial banks. Some might even characterize the First and Second Banks of the United States as early efforts at law and macroeconomics. Return to text 2. See Claudio Borio, Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Financial Supervision and Regulation? (PDF) Bank of International Settlements Working Papers No. 128 (Basel, Switzerland: BIS, February 2003). Return to text 3. See Busch and van Rijin (2018), supra. Return to text 4. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2019 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, February 2019). Return to text 5. See Ed Balls, James Howat, and Anna Stansbury, Central Bank Independence Revisited: After the Financial Crisis, What Should a Model Central Bank Look Like? (PDF) Harvard Kennedy School M-RCBG Associate Working Paper No. 87 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Kennedy School, 2018). Return to text 6. Randal K. Quarles, " The Financial Stability Board in 2019 " (speech at the Joint Conference of the European Central Bank and the Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking , Frankfurt, Germany, March 2019). Return to text 7. See U.S Department of the Treasury, Financial Stability Oversight Council Annual Report 2018 (Washington: U.S. Treasury, 2018). Return to text 8. See Paul Tucker, Unelected Power: The Quest for Legitimacy in Central Banking and the Regulatory State (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018). Return to text Last Update: September 27, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At the European Banking Federation's European Banking Summit, Brussels, Belgium Share Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. The European Banking Federation is often referred to as the voice of Europe's banks, and I am here in the hopes that you are the ears of those institutions as well. This year, 2019, is the 10th anniversary of the founding of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which means it has also been 10 years since some of the darker days of the global financial crisis. The FSB was not born on a sunny day; it was born of necessity, with storm clouds still looming. An anniversary—particularly a 10th anniversary—is a good opportunity for reflection. Not far from here, in Antwerp, the artist Peter Paul Rubens painted the "Temple of Janus." Janus was a Roman god who could look both backward and forward in time, and when Rubens painted the work, citizens of Antwerp were at a turning point and were wondering what the future held for them. Today, I would like to take on the role of Janus. I would like to look back on the experiences of the past 10 years, what the FSB has accomplished, and also offer some perspective on just how it contributed to the construction of the post-crisis global financial architecture. As you would expect, I believe the FSB has and will continue to play an important role in our global financial system. I will discuss why that is. I would then like to look ahead to the new challenges facing the global regulatory community, such as innovations in financial technology, shifts in financial globalization and integration, and increasing nonbank financial intermediation. Ten years ago, after the events of the fall of 2008, the G20 nations recognized that the response to the crisis had to be urgent, it had to be credible, and it had to be global. The regulatory community knew it must work to regain the confidence of financial institutions, market participants, and the broader public. They knew that then-existing arrangements for international cooperation were not up to that task. The Financial Stability Forum (FSF), the predecessor of the FSB, had been founded by the G7 countries in 1999 after a series of financial crises in the latter part of the 1990s. The group was intended to enhance cooperation among various national and international supervisory bodies and multilateral financial institutions in order to promote stability in the international financial system. Membership was relatively narrow, with only 12 countries and few emerging markets represented. While the group discussed matters related to financial stability, the areas it was asked to study were relatively narrow, and combined with its limited membership, it had relatively little scope to promote regulatory reform. The looseness of this arrangement represented the prevailing view in advanced nations at the time that national regulators and finance ministries were capable of monitoring and dealing with risks to global financial stability. On the one hand, these nations had long recognized that effective capital regulation of banks with a global footprint was only possible with coordination on minimal capital standards—the Basel Committee process. But there was no such consensus about financial stability, perhaps rooted in a belief, rarely expressed but widespread, that a severe global financial crisis was highly unlikely, and that traditional prudential supervision would be enough to prevent it. Major banks in Europe, Japan, and the United States had been affected by debt crises in developing countries in the 1980s and 1990s, but these crises had never seriously threatened advanced economies. In the fall of 2008, G20 leaders recognized that the severity of the emerging global financial crisis required a response that was beyond the capabilities of the FSF. Like that Long Island police chief in the movie "Jaws," ministers and leaders saw what was racing toward them and decided that they were going to need a bigger boat. Specifically, they recognized there was a major deficiency in the FSF that prevented it from being very effective in establishing international financial regulatory standards. The FSF was narrow—geographically, in the number of governments, and substantively, in the range of ministries, central banks, and important regulatory agencies that were not members. Some of the world's largest economies and financial markets were not represented, in particular emerging markets like China, India, Brazil, Mexico, and South Africa. As of 2009, only 58 percent of global gross domestic product (GDP) was represented, compared to 83 percent of GDP under the FSB today. The issue of representation was crucial, because the financial crisis required a fully global response. As a result, in April of 2009 at the G20 summit in London, the heads of state and government called for an organization "with a stronger institutional basis and enhanced capacity" that would allow them to achieve "much greater consistency and systematic cooperation between countries…that a global financial system requires." Behind those simple words was a sea change in the willingness of advanced nations to tackle significant coordination on financial regulation. The crisis that had been raging at that point for over a year made the need for such a commitment inescapable. With the creation of the FSB, the G20 designed a new regulatory organization with global reach dedicated to advancing and coordinating a newly embraced priority for the global economy—far-reaching reform of financial regulation and supervision. The FSB membership spans central banks, ministries of finance, supervisors of financial institutions, international financial organizations, and market regulators. It has a broad mandate centered on financial stability and coordination of responses for those most challenging issues that cut across the traditional mandates of other global standard-setting bodies. In addition, one of the FSB's chief responsibilities is scanning the horizon for financial vulnerabilities, making it an inherently forward-looking body. The exigency of the crisis helped overcome longstanding deficiencies in the structure of the FSF, rooted in differences between the members or ambivalence about international standard setting itself, related to financial stability. The crisis helped bridge differences and reach consensus, so that quick initial progress was made on matters that required urgent action. In addition to those actions, the members also recognized that work must begin immediately to develop new regulatory standards for capital and liquidity, derivatives reform, and issues stemming from the nonbanking sector which would require some time for data gathering and extensive public consultation. Creation of the FSB was one of a number of steps taken at the international level in the spring of 2009 that over the subsequent months helped restore confidence in the banking system and begin the process of recovery. Since the FSB was born with the global economy and financial markets still in turmoil, immediate attention was needed in a number of core areas: over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, prudential bank standards, resolution, and nonbank finance. Much of the FSB's first 10 years has been focused on these issues, and a great deal has been accomplished, resulting in a significantly strengthened and more resilient global financial system. So let me quickly review our work in these areas. Over-the-Counter Derivatives The elements of the FSB's agenda for OTC derivatives fall into four categories: 1) central clearing of standardized OTC derivatives, where appropriate, 2) exchange or electronic platform trading of standardized OTC derivatives, 3) reporting to trade repositories, and 4) higher capital and margin requirements for non-centrally cleared derivatives. The most recent report on implementation progress finds that in the jurisdictions with the largest OTC derivatives markets, there is almost complete implementation of the necessary reforms. That means that today, OTC derivatives markets, which are crucial for the functioning of our financial system, are simpler, more transparent, and generally more resilient. Prudential Bank Standards The FSB has endorsed the work of the Basel Committee that is aimed at enhanced prudential standards for internationally active banking organizations, a process known as Basel III. The main elements of Basel III are: a stronger risk-based capital adequacy framework; a leverage ratio requirement; a capital surcharge for global systemically important banks; a liquidity coverage ratio liquidity requirement; a net stable funding ratio liquidity requirement; and a large exposures framework. All 24 member jurisdictions of the FSB have the core elements of Basel III risk-based capital and liquidity measures in place. However, there has been uneven progress on some of the other elements. Some jurisdictions have not yet fully implemented the large exposures framework, the leverage ratio, and the net stable funding ratio. And most jurisdictions are just starting to implement the Basel III "end game" reforms agreed in December 2017. We have some work left to do but I am confident that it will be completed, and the FSB will continue to push all of its members for full completion of these important measures. Resolution One of the most important issues the world faced during the financial crisis was the "too-big-to-fail" dilemma. The large and unpopular bailouts that were deployed to help stem the crisis made it clear that an alternative was needed to deal with "too big to fail." In response, the FSB established the "Key Attributes for Effective Resolution," which identify the responsibilities, instruments, and powers that national resolution regimes should follow if they have to resolve a failing systemically important financial institution or SIFI. The FSB's resolution work also included a new total loss absorbing capacity requirement to help ensure that authorities are able to conduct a bail-in recapitalization of a failed SIFI. Too big to fail was a defining issue of the crisis, and recognizing the importance of the work that has been done to end it, this year the FSB kicked off an evaluation of the effects of the reforms that have been put in place around the world to deal with the issue. By next year, I hope we will be able to discuss the results of that work. Nonbank Financial Intermediation During the crisis, "shadow banking" became the term for any type of financial activity that occurred outside banks that resembled what banks did and that often wasn't completely understood. Within the FSB, we refer to those activities as nonbank financial intermediation, or NBFI. Regardless of its name, a lot of blame for the problems that arose in the global financial crisis centered on risks that emerged from some activities in parts of this sector, and one of the FSB's first jobs was to try to look into these activities to better understand their growing role in financial markets. Among the important steps we took was a global monitoring exercise that results in an annual report on the size of NBFI in the global economy. That work actually goes beyond the membership of the FSB, since a number of important international financial centers also report information to us. With all of that information, we are able to track the overall size of nonbank financial intermediation, which in 2017 grew to $184 trillion, representing nearly half of financial activity in 21 countries plus the euro area. More important, we are now able to more carefully categorize activities in the nonbank sector in order to analyze potential vulnerabilities. In addition to monitoring, we have made a number of other recommendations and are working with fellow global standard setters to implement them. For example, we are working with the International Association of Insurance Supervisors on capital standards for global insurers, and we are working with the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) on liquidity and leverage in the funds industry. The funds sector continues to evolve, so we will focus particular attention here as we move forward. Status of Post-Crisis Reform The result of 10 years of policy development by the FSB and implementation at the national level has been a stronger, more resilient global financial system. Large banks are better capitalized, less levered, and more liquid. Too-big-to-fail reforms are well-advanced, particularly with the formation of effective resolution regimes for banks. OTC derivatives markets are simpler and more transparent. Nonbank financial intermediation risks are better understood, and steps are being taken to reduce and contain them. While shocks to the system, especially from unanticipated directions, can never be ruled out, these reforms go a long way to reducing the likelihood and severity of future crises. Consequently, the FSB has started to pivot from policy development to evaluating the effectiveness of the reforms it has advocated. I just mentioned that this year the FSB began a two-year evaluation of its too-big-to-fail reform package. We are also completing an evaluation of the effects that reforms have had on infrastructure finance and lending to small- and medium-sized enterprises. Going forward, these evaluations will be critical for assessing where more work needs to be done. Casting my gaze backward, there is much to be proud of in the last decade, success that is reflected in the strength and stability of the global financial system. So now I would like to leave the past behind and turn to the future. But while Janus was the god of beginnings, he was also the god of endings, and as such was able to look both backwards and forwards at the same time. Assessing financial vulnerabilities is a critical part of the FSB mandate, and that is inherently a forward-looking job. The global financial system is constantly evolving, influenced in part by past experience, and by regulation. As I look ahead, I think we must consider whether the ways in which we responded to the financial crisis may not be the most appropriate ones to address the challenges and ongoing changes in the financial system that we currently face. This year the FSB has embarked on an important project to review and update its financial stability surveillance framework. While much of the attention of the FSB in its early years was on post-crisis reforms, members also spent time thinking about new vulnerabilities to the system. As we reach our 10th anniversary, it is a good time to review the ways we monitor the ever-changing financial system. The aim of this review is to ensure that we have a framework that is comprehensive, consistent over time, and effective at identifying relevant vulnerabilities. If we are not at the cutting edge in our ability to assess the state of the financial system, we do a disservice to the public we serve, which relies on a smoothly functioning financial system. In addition, we are looking at how we communicate our understanding of the state of the financial system to the G20 and to the world. We want to be more open about our assessment, but great care has to be taken to avoid a situation where revelations about emerging concerns lead to acceleration of those concerns and becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. As I look forward and ponder the forces that are shaping the evolution of the global financial system, the FSB is currently grappling with two issues—financial innovation and market fragmentation—that have the potential to profoundly affect financial stability, so let me start there. Owing to our forward-looking orientation, the FSB has been actively engaged in monitoring financial innovation for some time. Starting a little over five years ago, there was an explosion of financial innovation that had a technological component, which we now call fintech. This encompasses peer-to-peer lending, cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin, and the use of new techniques like artificial intelligence and machine learning. In 2017, the FSB issued a report on the implications of fintech for financial stability. The report was careful to note the potential benefits of many of these innovations, including the possibility of greater financial inclusion and increased speed of financial transactions. However, the report also drew attention to several supervisory and regulatory issues, including three priorities where international collaboration is critical: managing operational risk from third-party service providers, mitigating cyber risks, and monitoring macrofinancial risks that could emerge as fintech activities increase. 1 More recently, one particular area of fintech has received a lot of attention—stablecoins. These are a type of crypto-asset that attempts to address the volatility of some crypto-assets by tying their value to conventional assets, such as the value of the U.S. dollar or a basket of currencies. While it hasn't been created yet, it is Facebook's proposal for a new stablecoin that significantly increased the public's attention to stablecoins. At the FSB, we undertake regular monitoring of the financial stability implications of crypto-assets, and we have had discussions about the regulatory and supervisory approaches to crypto-assets and potential gaps in regulation. The introduction of stablecoins, however, brings a potentially new scale and scope that the financial regulatory community must carefully consider. Although there is a small risk to financial stability today, there is no doubt the potential scale of stablecoins and other crypto-assets yet to emerge may pose regulatory challenges. At present, the G7 is finishing a preliminary assessment of stablecoins, and the G20 has asked the FSB to lead the work going forward, which we are actively undertaking. This is an issue that can potentially affect every country in the world. We have already begun work to identify which regulations exist that apply to stablecoins in our jurisdictions, and once that assessment is complete, we will report to the G20 on any appropriate actions that need to be taken to ensure that financial stability is not negatively affected by their introduction. The FSB is grappling with other challenges beyond fintech. As time has passed since the financial crisis, there is concern about fragmentation of financial markets—a sense that globalization of financial markets may be slowing and differences in the regulatory requirements at the national level may be on the rise. Some forms of market fragmentation may have financial stability benefits, such as reasonable loss absorbency requirements imposed on subsidiaries of global banks, but market fragmentation may also bring about unintended negative consequences, such as increased opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and cumulatively higher regulatory burdens for firms. Over the past year, at the request of the G20, the FSB has been examining the different forms in which market fragmentation is manifest. Following up on that, we recently held a workshop where FSB members met with representatives from the private sector and from academia to discuss the internal allocation of capital and liquidity by global financial institutions. 2 We are also following up in other areas, such as working with IOSCO on issues related to deference and examining improved ways for regulatory and supervisory information sharing. Market fragmentation is an issue that will never disappear, and we will remain vigilant to ensure that it does not pose a threat to financial stability. At the outset today, I said I was going to take the mantle of Janus, who could look backward and forward in time. Janus was also the god of transitions, which makes him doubly appropriate for the FSB at this time, because we find ourselves in transition from a time when we were largely focused on addressing the effects and the lessons of the financial crisis. We now find ourselves with increasingly focused energy on looking forward, with both a strong organization that has been tested through an intense period of policy formulation and implementation and a strong global financial system resulting from those efforts. I hope that 10 years from now, a successor of mine as FSB Chair can point to 10 more years of success in flexibly and adeptly responding to all that the global financial system throws at us. Speaking on behalf of the members of the FSB, we stand ready. 1. Consumer protection is a major concern in relation to fintech and cyber risk, but it is outside the FSB's mandate and is being handled by member governments. Return to text 2. Randal K. Quarles, " Government of Union: Achieving Certainty in Cross-Border Finance " (speech at the Financial Stability Board Workshop, Philadelphia, PA, September 26, 2019). Return to text Last Update: October 03, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chair for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "The Road to Serfdom at 75: The Future of Classical Liberalism and the Free Market" Ninth Annual Conference of the William F. Buckley, Jr., Program at Yale, New Haven, Connecticut Share I am delighted to be back in New Haven and particularly to be in the company of so many students interested in thinking rigorously about ideas. And I am honored to be participating in the William F. Buckley, Jr., Program's conference today on Friedrich Hayek and the future of classical liberalism. 1 Over the course of this afternoon, you will hear a series of presentations that put Hayek's thinking in the context of contemporary developments and that offer a variety of perspectives on his intellectual legacy. Hayek was a prolific—some might even say profligate—thinker. He was at various times, and in various modes, an early neuropsychologist, an epistemologist, a theoretical economist, a political philosopher, a moral philosopher, a philosopher of science, a historian of ideas, a public intellectual, and a social polemicist. This vast range has caused some to undervalue his contributions as an economist, notwithstanding his eventual Nobel Prize—when Hayek moved to the United States in 1950, the University of Chicago Economics Department would not hire him because, as Milton Friedman said, "At that stage, he really wasn't doing any economics," and Paul Krugman famously said that "the Hayek thing is almost entirely about politics, not economics." 2 Others believe his broader thought, while seminal, was inconsistent across these various areas, and Hayek himself never demonstrated how it all hung together. In my contribution to the discussion today, I want to examine a particular example of the lasting effect that Hayek has had on economic thinking—one pertaining to the importance of freely determined prices for producing efficient economic outcomes—and consider how Hayek's insights in this area can, in fact, tie together the various strands of his larger philosophy. So as not to appear entirely out of touch with more immediate developments, I will end by descending from the empyrean to the terrestrial with a discussion of the economic outlook and the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) policy decision from earlier this week. Hayek and Economics Hayek's contributions to economics ranged widely, and many were important and of lasting influence. Among them were his studies of the relationship between the economic and political arrangements of a society. That body of work included, of course, his celebrated book The Road to Serfdom, which was published 75 years ago this year and is a focus of this event, as well as his later monograph, The Constitution of Liberty. 3 In addition, Hayek contributed prominently to monetary analysis. His work in this area included the theory of the business cycle that was part of the thinking of the Austrian school of economics. 4 It also included Hayek's studies of the feasibility and implications of private-sector currency issuance—contributions that have informed modern-day analyses of the repercussions of electronic money. 5 Today, however, I will be concerned instead with still another key contribution that Hayek made to economic analysis: understanding the operation of the price system. This contribution was formalized in his most famous paper in the economic-research literature: his article "The Use of Knowledge in Society," which was published in the American Economic Review in September 1945. 6 Hayek (1945) Revisited It is worth outlining the basis for the high esteem in which economists hold Hayek's 1945 contribution. In 1974, the press release by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences that announced Hayek's Nobel Prize in Economics stated: "The Academy is of the opinion that von Hayek's analysis of the functional efficiency of different economic systems is one of his most significant contributions to economic research in the broader sense. ...His guiding principle when comparing various systems is to study how efficiently all the knowledge and all the information dispersed among individuals and enterprises [are] utilized. His conclusion is that only by far-reaching decentralization in a market system with competition and free price-fixing is it possible to make full use of knowledge and information." 7 In the research that the academy described, Hayek's 1945 paper was the key article. More recently, this paper received further prominent acclaim when it was categorized by an expert panel as being one of the top 20 articles ever published in the American Economic Review. 8 With regard to the paper's contribution to the understanding of economic processes, an illuminating discussion was provided in 2005 by Oliver Williamson—himself later a Nobel laureate in economics. Williamson cited Hayek's 1945 paper, along with Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations from the eighteenth century, as forming the core of a "venerated tradition in economics" of studying the notion of "spontaneous order" arising from a freely operating market system. 9 How does Hayek's case for the price system fit in alongside the other work that Williamson mentioned? As Paul Samuelson—yet another Nobel Prize winner—had occasion to note, the argument for the price system that Hayek articulated in 1945 was complementary with, but distinct from, the argument that Adam Smith espoused in The Wealth of Nations. 10 Smith focused on how market mechanisms guide producers toward satisfying consumers' wants. Hayek instead stressed how the market mechanism makes, as he put it, "fuller use...of the existing knowledge" than a directed economy is able to do. 11 Hayek emphasized that the signals transmitted by the various individual prices in the economy could, together, serve as a useful means of guiding overall resource allocation. The reason is that prices convey messages to consumers and producers even when the information that drives prices is not aggregated or directly observed. 12 For example, a large increase or decrease in the price of gasoline conveys information that influences consumer behavior and that also affects the behavior of energy producers, even when neither of these sets of market participants are aware of the precise factor initiating the price change. As a related matter, Hayek recognized that prices transmit information even in a situation in which much of that information is not explicitly disclosed by one market participant to another, or even consciously articulable by any market participant at all. Hayek believed that all of us "know" many things that we cannot articulate but that we nevertheless act on in practical situations, and the price system can therefore aggregate and transmit that knowledge which we could not otherwise convey. Hayek's analysis had implications for the viability of different economic systems. With regard to centrally planned economic systems—which had considerable support in the West in 1945, in light of the increased use of government economic controls in many countries during World War II and the dismal performance of market economies during the Great Depression—Hayek's analysis suggested that these systems would likely exhibit great inefficiency. To Hayek, it was totally unrealistic to expect an economy to operate efficiently if it was based on the "direction of the whole economic system according to one unified plan," as such a plan lacked the valuable information embedded in market-determined prices. 13 The economist Gregory Mankiw has elegantly summed up Hayek's insight here: "Information is very, very dispersed among the population. ...Nobody can possibly know all the information you need to run a centrally planned economy." 14 Hayek's economic analysis therefore complemented the philosophical and political arguments he marshaled against centrally planned economies in The Road to Serfdom. Again, it is important to recognize that this is not a contingent or technological problem. It is not only that the dispersion of knowledge makes it hard to gather, although that is certainly true—but if that were the only issue, then perhaps future advances in technology such as quantum computing would remove that obstacle. Rather, as already mentioned, we all know many important things that we cannot articulate; and many of these things we come to know precisely through our participation in trade and exchange through the market. This type of knowledge (a) is by its nature not conveyable to a central planner because we are not fully aware of all we know, and (b) would not even exist apart from the social interactions facilitated by the market which a central planner would replace. The flip side of Hayek's analysis was that, while there are insurmountable obstacles to economic efficiency via a central plan, an efficient economy may still be obtainable by letting the price system work. To quote Mankiw again, Hayek's analysis implies that "markets figure out a way to aggregate, in a decentralized way, dispersed information into desirable outcomes." 15 Furthermore, this mechanism does not require the government or any one individual to process that dispersed information into a central network or to be able to aggregate the information into a statistical series. It is, instead, sufficient for the proper operation of the price mechanism that the relevant information be embodied implicitly in the economy's multiplicity of prices of individual goods and factors of production. This information is recorded in such prices because they respond to the behavior of individual buyers and sellers in the economy. 16 Consequently, as longtime Hayek scholar Gerald O'Driscoll has observed: "What particularly recommends the price system to Hayek is the 'economy of knowledge' with which it operates. It is [in Hayek's description] nothing short of a 'marvel.' " 17 How Hayek (1945) Has Influenced Economics Hayek's 1945 paper has had a great influence on subsequent economic research. It has been found to be highly relevant to a variety of areas of economic inquiry. For example, Hayek's analysis has proved valuable in the development of standard microeconomics, since his contribution deepened economists' understanding of the working of the price system and promoted further investigation of the question of how decentralized information is transmitted by markets. 18 Hayek's emphasis on prices as processors of information has also had applications to international trade theory. 19 And in macroeconomics and monetary theory, Milton Friedman's Nobel lecture, published in 1977, cited Hayek's 1945 paper when arguing that, because it disrupted the signals arising from relative-price movements, inflation both lowered the efficiency of the economy and led output to deviate from its natural (or full-employment) level. 20 Hayek likened the price mechanism to a "system of telecommunications," and Friedman's description of inflation as a form of "static" interrupting price signals was in keeping with this analogy. 21 Hayek's ideas on prices influenced Joseph Stiglitz in his analysis of markets with asymmetric information and Roger Myerson's insights on mechanism design theory. Each of these bodies of work earned a Nobel Prize. 22 Qualifications and Extensions I do not want to leave the impression, however, that all of the conclusions in Hayek's 1945 paper have become unchallenged principles chiseled into the economic consensus. On the contrary, one of the reasons why the paper has been so influential is that it remains a benchmark reference for understanding the case for relying primarily on a market system, based on freely determined prices, for determining the production and allocation of resources. The paper has therefore set a high bar for preempting the price system or for other interventions in the market: When economists point to cases in which market mechanisms can be improved on by regulation or other public-sector intervention, or to instances in which price signals do not appear to be operating effectively, they need to identify a specific market failure as the source of the inefficiency. Essentially, they need to establish instances in which the price system can be improved on as a means of processing information. 23 Even Hayek acknowledged that the price mechanism works within an ecosystem of laws and social institutions, and those may evolve in ways that interfere with the signaling of prices. For example, one of the important events that raised doubts about the functioning of the private market's pricing process occurred in the years leading up to the financial crisis. This period featured pricing by financial markets that seemed, in some prominent cases, not to be adequately reflecting information about actual risks. Spreads on risky private-sector debt reached very low levels, and damaging spillovers to the nonfinancial sector occurred in the form of unduly high real estate prices and excessive leverage by borrowers in the housing market. One of my predecessors at the Federal Reserve Board, Donald Kohn, has noted the seeming herd-like behavior of financial markets in the pre-crisis period that generated this situation—an "underpricing of risk." 24 The financial crisis, and the deep recession that followed it, prompted changes in the United States' regulatory framework. These changes have been designed to make the financial system more resilient than it was before the crisis. By creating appropriate incentives and rules, they should also encourage financial markets to price risk more appropriately than they did in the years leading up to the crisis—for example, by reducing the danger of investor complacency regarding the riskiness of their investments and the possibility of adverse scenarios. If we follow Hayek and regard the price system as like a telecommunications network, and then apply that metaphor to the financial sector, we can think of the institutional and regulatory changes to the financial system over the past decade as designed to improve the reliability and signal quality of the transmissions. 25 How does all of this relate to the larger questions of philosophy and social order to which Hayek devoted much of his thought? Hayek's insights about the price system depend importantly on his theory of knowledge: The information that is available to us as a society is the aggregate of the highly dispersed and sometimes inarticulate knowledge possessed by each of us individually. It is not only hard to convey that information to a central authority for processing into a rational decision—it is also conceptually impossible given the nature of that knowledge. And, indeed, important parts of that knowledge will not even be generated except through our interaction with each other through the mechanism of the market. Trying to centralize economic decisionmaking, then, is not just too hard to do as a practical matter. It would actually reduce the amount of knowledge available to us as a society, by replacing those myriad individual interactions in a free marketplace. Thus, even if some technological way to aggregate information other than through prices could be invented, it would lead to less efficient, less humane outcomes because it would be based on less total human information. The price mechanism, then, is not just a matter of economics—it is a matter of social and, indeed, civilizational progress. As Hayek says in The Constitution of Liberty , "[C]ivilization begins when the individual in pursuit of his ends can make use of more knowledge than he himself acquired and when he can transcend the boundaries of his ignorance by profiting from knowledge that he himself does not possess." 26 I think this ties together the various threads of Hayek's thought throughout a long life: his early work on psychology ("How do we know?"), his later epistemology ("What do we know, and what does it mean to know it?"), his economics ("How do we make knowledge usable?"), and his social and political theory ("What institutions will ensure that the greatest amount of human knowledge will be usable in the pursuit of their human fulfillment?"). Contrary to those polemicists across the ideological spectrum whose tendentious simplifications of Hayek's thought would turn him into a crude icon rather than a complex thinker, this is a deeply human, and a deeply humane, project. I will look forward to the contributions of the others you will hear from today in how Hayek elaborated it and how we can further these principles today. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Now I would like to turn to the current economic scene and this week's FOMC decision. Let me start by saying that the U.S. economy is doing well, and I am optimistic about the outlook. Economic conditions are currently very close to meeting our—that is, the FOMC's—dual-mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. A particular source of strength has been the labor market. Setting aside the monthly volatility and, specifically, the effects of the recent strike at General Motors, labor market indicators are as strong as they have been in quite some time. The unemployment rate has been running near a 50-year low, and the proportion of the population currently employed is close to its highest level in a decade. Encouragingly, labor force participation has held up, as the tight labor market has motivated workers to either join or remain in the labor force, halting, at least for the time being, a long-standing downward trend. Although the pace of job gains has slowed this year, we expected some deceleration because of how low the unemployment rate has fallen. A strong job market and high employment have in turn supported economic growth. Personal consumption expenditures (PCE) grew 2-1/2 percent over the past four quarters, a healthy pace by historical standards and a major contributor to overall growth since consumption represents over two-thirds of economic activity. Because the labor market remains tight, I expect wage growth to pick up, which would then in turn underpin further strength in consumption and overall growth. For the other half of our mandate, inflation as measured by the PCE index was 1.3 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while core PCE inflation, which excludes increases in the prices of food and energy, was 1.7 percent. While these readings are below our 2 percent inflation objective, they are fairly close, and my assessment is that inflation will inch toward our objective in the coming months. Outside the near term, I am also optimistic about the longer-term potential of the U.S. economy. I am heartened by a recent pickup in labor productivity growth. A notable development of the post-crisis period has been the abysmal pace of labor productivity growth. After averaging about a 2-1/4 percent pace in the two decades leading up to the crisis, labor productivity growth has been closer to 1 percent, on average, since 2011. While there has been much speculation, it remains to be seen what has driven this slowdown. Consequently, the slowdown could resolve unpredictably. Although the quarterly data are volatile, I have been encouraged by a pickup in labor productivity in the first half of this year, when it grew at a 3 percent annual rate. Further out, I admit to being a bit of techno-enthusiast, and I see the potential for many emerging technologies, including 5G communications, artificial intelligence and machine learning, and 3-D printing, to further boost productivity growth in the coming years. Having established my optimism, I will now circle back to some more worrying signs in the recent data that suggest some headwinds are holding back growth. One prominent factor weighing on a relatively robust domestic economy has been weak growth among our trading partners. The International Monetary Fund projects that global economic growth in 2019 will be the slowest since the financial crisis. Partly as a consequence of weak foreign growth, U.S. exports have been flat over the past year. Another weak spot has been investment. After a strong 2017 and start to 2018, business fixed investment has tailed off this year and fallen outright in the second and third quarters. I find the weakness of investment to be of particular concern because increasing investment and the capital stock are important for raising the potential capacity of the economy. It is likely that some of the weakness in capital spending is a result of elevated uncertainty, for foreign growth generally but also specifically for trade developments. Against this backdrop, at our meeting earlier this week, we decided to lower our target range for the federal funds rate for the third time this year. We took this action to help keep the U.S. economy strong in the face of global developments and to provide some insurance against ongoing risks. By lowering the federal funds rate this year, we are supporting the continued expansion of the economy. Overall, with these policy adjustments, I believe that the economy will remain in a good place, with the labor market remaining strong and inflation staying close to our 2 percent objective. We see the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropriate as long as incoming information about the economy continues to be broadly consistent with our outlook of moderate economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective. References Arrow, Kenneth J., B. Douglas Bernheim, Martin S. Feldstein, Daniel L. McFadden, James M. Poterba, and Robert M. Solow (2011). "100 Years of the American Economic Review: The Top 20 Articles," American Economic Review , vol. 101 (February), pp. 1–8. Arrow, Kenneth J., and Gerard Debreu (1954). "Existence of an Equilibrium for a Competitive Economy," Econometrica , vol. 22 (July), pp. 265–90. Bernhofen, Daniel M., and John C. Brown (2004). "A Direct Test of the Theory of Comparative Advantage: The Case of Japan," Journal of Political Economy , vol. 112 (February), pp. 48–67. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019). " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019 ," press release, August 21. Brainard, Lael (2019). " Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Evolving Payments Landscape ," speech delivered at "The Future of Money in the Digital Age," a conference sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics and Princeton University's Bendheim Center for Finance, Washington, October 16. Brunnermeier, Markus K., Harold James, and Jean-Pierre Landau (2019). " The Digitalization of Money," paper presented at "The Future of Money in the Digital Age (PDF) ," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 16. Caldwell, Bruce (2004). Hayek's Challenge: An Intellectual Biography of F.A. Hayek. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ——— (forthcoming). " The Road to Serfdom after 75 Years," Journal of Economic Literature. Cassidy, John (2000). "The Price Prophet," New Yorker , February 7, pp. 44–51. Dasgupta, Partha (1980). "Decentralization and Rights," Economica, vol. 47 (May), pp. 107–23. Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, and Daniel Sanches (2019). "Can Currency Competition Work?" Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 106 (October), 1–15. Friedman, Milton (1977). "Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 85 (June), pp. 451–72. Friedman, Milton, and Rose Friedman (1980). Free to Choose: A Personal Statement. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Hayek, Friedrich A. (1935). Prices and Production, 2nd ed. London: G. Routledge and Sons. ——— (1944). The Road to Serfdom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ——— (1945). "The Use of Knowledge in Society," American Economic Review, vol. 35 (September), pp. 519–30. ——— (1960). The Constitution of Liberty. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ——— (1976). "Denationalisation of Money: An Analysis of the Theory and Practice of Concurrent Currencies," Hobart Paper 70. London: Institute of Economic Affairs, October. Kohn, Donald L. (2009). " Comments on 'Financial Intermediation and the Post-Crisis Financial System ,' " speech delivered at the Eighth BIS Annual Conference 2009, Financial System and Macroeconomic Resilience: Revisited, Basel, Switzerland, July 10. Krugman, Paul (2011). "Things That Never Happened in the History of Macroeconomics," New York Times, The Conscience of a Liberal (blog), December 5. Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (2004). "Keynote Address to the 2003 HOPE Conference: My Keynesian Education," History of Political Economy , vol. 36 (supplement), pp. 12–24. Mankiw, N. Gregory (2017). "N. Gregory Mankiw: America's Economy and the Case for Free Markets," Conversations with Bill Kristol, interview, April 9, YouTube video, 1:06:03, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QY4M6a56nFs. Myerson, Roger B. (2008). "Perspectives on Mechanism Design in Economic Theory," American Economic Review, vol. 98 (June), pp. 586–603. O'Driscoll, Gerald P., Jr. (1977). Economics as a Coordination Problem: The Contributions of Friedrich A. Hayek. Kansas City, Mo.: Sheed Andrews and McMeel. Quarles, Randal K. (2019). " The Financial Stability Board at 10 Years—Looking Back and Looking Ahead ," speech delivered at the European Banking Federation's European Banking Summit, Brussels, October 3. Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1974). " Economics Prize for Works in Economic Theory and Inter-Disciplinary Research ," press release, October 9. Samuelson, Paul A. (1983). "My Life Philosophy," American Economist, vol. 27 (Fall), pp. 5–12. Serrano, Roberto (2002). "Decentralized Information and the Walrasian Outcome: A Pairwise Meetings Market with Private Values," Journal of Mathematical Economics, vol. 38 (September), pp. 65–89. Smith, Adam (1776). An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 5th ed., Edwin Cannan, ed., 1930. London: Methuen and Co. Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2000). "The Contributions of the Economics of Information to Twentieth Century Economics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115 (November), pp. 1441–78. Taylor, John B. (2012). " Why We Still Need to Read Hayek (PDF) ," speech delivered at the Hayek Lecture, New York, May 31. Williamson, Oliver E. (2005). "The Economics of Governance," American Economic Review, vol. 95 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 1–18. Woodford, Michael (2003). Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Yellen, Janet L. (2017). " Financial Stability a Decade after the Onset of the Crisis ," speech delivered at "Fostering a Dynamic Global Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., Aug. 24–26. 1. All of my remarks today represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Open Market Committee, or the Financial Stability Board. I would like to thank Ed Nelson for his assistance in preparing these remarks. Return to text 2. See, respectively, Cassidy (2000) and Krugman (2011). Return to text 3. See Hayek (1944, 1960). For an extensive analysis of these books, see Caldwell (2004) and, more recently, Caldwell (forthcoming). Return to text 4. See, for example, Hayek (1935). For an examination of this body of work, see O'Driscoll (1977). Return to text 5. See especially Hayek (1976). For recent formal investigations of the topic, see Brunnermeier, James, and Landau (2019) and Fernández-Villaverde and Sanches (2019). My Board colleague, Lael Brainard, has recently discussed the policy implications of electronic money. See Brainard (2019). The potential implications of privately issued currency in the form of stablecoins are under active consideration by the Financial Stability Board, which I chair, in work to be delivered to the Group of Twenty later next year. Return to text 6. See Hayek (1945). Return to text 7. See Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1974, paragraph 10). Return to text 8. See Arrow and others (2011, p. 4). Return to text 9. See Williamson (2005, p. 1). This discussion referred to Smith (1776) and Arrow and Debreu (1954) alongside Hayek (1945). Return to text 10. See Samuelson (1983, p. 6). Return to text 11. The quotation is from Hayek (1945, p. 521). Return to text 12. Hayek's analysis therefore differed from general equilibrium approaches to economic problems, exemplified by the work of Arrow and Debreu (1954). Such approaches tend to evaluate market outcomes in terms of their ability to reproduce the allocation decided on by a hypothetical social planner who possesses complete knowledge of all information in the economy and who is charged with maximizing the welfare of the community. Return to text 13. See Hayek (1945, p. 521). Return to text 14. See Mankiw (2017). Return to text 15. See Mankiw (2017). See also Taylor (2012, p. 1). Return to text 16. The process is interactive, with market participants not only influencing prices, but also responding to price signals. Return to text 17. See O'Driscoll (1977, p. 27). Return to text 18. See, for example, Serrano (2002). Return to text 19. For example, an article in the area of international trade noted (Bernhofen and Brown, 2004, p. 49): "The insight that prices contain the relevant information about underlying economic fundamentals goes back to the pioneering work of Hayek (1945)." Return to text 20. See Friedman (1977, pp. 456–67). The notion that distortions to relative-price patterns lead the economy's output level to deviate from its natural value would be formalized by Woodford (2003). Return to text 21. See Hayek (1945, p. 527), and, for Friedman's use of the analogy between inflation and static, see Friedman and Friedman (1980, pp. 17, 274). Return to text 22. Shortly before he received the prize, Stiglitz (2000, p. 1468) noted that the 1945 Hayek paper recognized that "the central problem of economics was a problem of knowledge or information"—and so it anticipated the field of the economics of information. And in his Nobel lecture, Myerson (2008, p. 586) credited Hayek's "widely influential paper" with helping spur mechanism-design research—by characterizing alternative institutional frameworks as different mechanisms for "communicating widely dispersed information about the desires and the resources of different individuals in society." Return to text 23. For example, while Stiglitz (2000) agreed that the price system is a means of collecting and transmitting dispersed information, he took issue with the notion that this system always produced the most efficient economic equilibrium. Specifically, Stiglitz argued that incomplete information could lead to unnecessarily high unemployment and other undesirable outcomes that could be improved on by government intervention. In a similar vein, Dasgupta (1980, p. 115) noted in response to Hayek's (1945) position: "It can immediately be argued that the fact that much information is private is not on its own sufficient to warrant the unfettered play of market forces to be judged the best possible resource allocation mechanism." Return to text 24. See Kohn (2009). See also Yellen (2017, p. 4). Return to text 25. I recently discussed post-crisis reform to financial regulation in Quarles (2019). Return to text 26. See Hayek (1960, p. 22). Return to text Last Update: November 01, 2019 Back to Top

forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows] increase/decrease volume; [M] toggles mute on/off; [F] toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The [Tab] key may be used in combination with the [Enter/Return] key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. I greatly regret I couldn't be with you today in Abu Dhabi. You are in a region of the world that's a fitting place to discuss the future of insurance supervision because of its ties to the very origins of insurance. The first written system of laws, the Hammurabic Code, in fact, included the first rules on loss liability. The ancient Arab tribal practice of takaful , a system of guarantees, gave rise to one of the earliest forms of mutual insurance, which was used to protect ship owners and cargo. The Middle East is the cradle of civilization, and civilization itself has always depended on the rules and guarantees that are the basis of insurance. And while I couldn't be part of the your discussions, I am grateful for this opportunity to reach you with a message about how the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) is supporting the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) goal of promoting a strong and stable global financial system. The FSB was created to gather national and regional authorities together in a forum that considers and addresses financial stability risks. The IAIS's mission, to promote effective supervision of the insurance industry, is in full alignment with the goals of the FSB. The new global financial architecture built in the aftermath of the crisis requires continued cooperation among authorities, standard-setting bodies, and all stakeholders. Such cooperation is the basis of the FSB, and the basis for what the IAIS has achieved in the past quarter century, and what you are striving to achieve in the future. Since becoming Chair of the FSB last December, I have had some time to observe the important work of the IAIS as one of the standard-setting bodies that are essential to the FSB. The IAIS has been an active contributor to the FSB's work through the Plenary and Steering Committees. It's also a valuable part of the work of the FSB Standing Committees on Supervision and Regulatory Cooperation and Standards Implementation. FSB members tell me they appreciate the regular updates by IAIS Executive Committee chair Vicky Saporta. Our two organizations have worked together closely on addressing systemic risk related to insurance. In particular, I appreciate the work of the IAIS to develop a Holistic Framework for the assessment and mitigation of systemic risk in the insurance sector. As I indicated a moment ago, I know that the IAIS is celebrating its twenty-fifth anniversary. As we think back to 1994, and the step forward the IAIS represented for cooperation and coordination on insurance oversight, I think we can all marvel at how modest, relative to today, were the demands and the aspirations at that time for international standard-setting. On the one hand, insurance had been a global business for well over a century. On the other, the idea that an insurance company could be at the center of a global financial meltdown would have seem far-fetched. Likewise, even after the financial crises in developing countries in the late 1990s, few people believed that the world's largest and wealthiest economies could all be threatened with ruin by a truly global crisis. It is for this reason that we are not this year also celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the Financial Stability Forum, which was created in that more innocent era. It was replaced by the FSB a decade ago because of the urgent need for a larger and more ambitious organization to deal with the global crisis that few had seen coming. 1 That global financial crisis demanded a global response and the Group of 20 (G20) leaders called on national authorities to cast a wider net for membership than the Financial Stability Forum could offer. The first ten years of the FSB have seen important achievements in promoting global financial standards that have addressed weaknesses revealed by the financial crisis. Today, banks are more resilient due to higher capital and liquidity standards. We are addressing the "too-big-to-fail" problem, including through new statutory resolution frameworks and resolution planning. Over-the-counter derivatives markets are simpler and more transparent. And the risks emanating from non-bank financial intermediation that contributed to the crisis have diminished significantly. But the FSB's policy work needs to advance in a few important areas. While resolution plans are in place for the global, systemically important banks, more work is needed to build effective resolution regimes for insurers. We have to keep up the momentum to ensure that markets have confidence that bailouts using taxpayer funds are a thing of the past. The future, and the prospects for success, of both the FSB and the IAIS will turn on how we address the challenges of the changing nature of financial services that are coming from technological innovation and other sources. Your conference theme this year, "Supervision in a Digital Era" is timely, and the panels you have planned on these topics can inform the supervisory responses that all our governments are weighing. The rapid changes transforming the financial landscape mean we can't rely on the past for answers. The FSB is committed to a forward-looking agenda to address new vulnerabilities and new challenges. Like the IAIS, we are developing a new financial stability surveillance framework. We're also examining possible unintended negative consequences of market fragmentation. And something that is capturing the attention of many regulators are recent proposals to launch stablecoins on a global scale. The FSB has been looking at crypto-assets and has formed a group of experts to examine the implications of these recent proposals. The FSB and IAIS share many common concerns about risks to financial stability—Fintech, cyber risk and operational resilience are just some of them. The IAIS has advanced the effort to tackle these problems with an active and comprehensive program of outreach: by extending the length of public consultations whenever possible; by expanding participation of new stakeholders in public events; by organizing subject matter specific workshops on emerging risks; by expanding efforts to seek input from consumer groups; and, by reaching out to academics with more roundtable discussions with investors and rating agencies. In closing, congratulations again to the IAIS on its silver anniversary, and doubly so for embracing such an ambitious agenda for the future. On behalf of the FSB, we look forward to working with you to set standards for financial regulation and supervision that will promote a strong and stable financial system. Thank you for this opportunity to speak, and I wish you a successful and engaging conference. 1. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/quarles20191003a.htm Return to text Last Update: November 14, 2019 Back to Top
