1 | P a g e Presented at the Conference on “Improving Diversity in the Financial Services Industry: A Holistic View,” Rutgers University, Newark Campus, Newark, New Jersey By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on October 19, 2016 Diversity and Inclusion without Excuses Thank you, and good morning. It’s a special honor to be here and speak at this important and timely conference marking the launch of the Center for Research on Diversity in the Financial Services Industry at the Rutgers Business School. It’s also a unique pleasure not to talk about the economy and when we’re going to raise interest rates. Instead, I have the chance to discuss something that in many ways is more important than interest rates: How do we create more diverse and inclusive cultures and organizations in the financial services industry, including the Federal Reserve? Before I go any further, I should inject the usual Fed disclaimer that everything I say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The title of this conference speaks truth. The first part, “Improving Diversity in the Financial Services Industry,” makes clear that we aren’t here to declare victory or celebrate a job well done. We’re together today because we have a shared problem: The financial services industry and the Federal Reserve are not as diverse as they should or need to be.1 Our organizations affect all Americans, yet in large part we don’t share the same cultural and gender diversity of the public we serve. This point is made abundantly clear when I listen to activists and other representatives from minority communities. Their impassioned plea is to see diverse representation and perspectives in 1 See U.S. GAO (2013) and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission website, https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc/statistics/employment/jobpat-eeo1/index.cfm. 2 | P a g e the C-suite, but also to ensure that we effectively serve the interests of underrepresented Americans who struggle with a lack of jobs, opportunity, and yes, financial services. That we see and act based on the whole picture, not just our reflection in the mirror. And they’re right: It’s imperative that we are all engaged in the rich tapestry of culture and experience that our country has to offer. The second part of the conference title—“A Holistic View”—is just as telling. We don’t have all the answers we need to solve this problem, and we recognize that. We need to experiment, share stories, and learn from each other if we hope to succeed. And, quite honestly, we need to learn the lessons from others who have found ways to create and sustain more diverse and inclusive cultures than our own. I’m reminded of a conversation I had a while back with Congresswoman Maxine Waters. I was proudly listing all the things we’re doing at the Fed to increase the diversity of our outside suppliers. She responded that, while that was all well and good, all of these ideas have been around for decades, and why were we so late to the game? That observation itself was a testament to our lack of diversity. Just because we’re smart and our hearts are in the right place doesn’t make us wise or effective. In a more diverse culture, we wouldn’t be trying to reinvent the wheel ourselves, but would most likely have learned from those who have blazed the trail ahead on these issues. And we undoubtedly would have been more successful at achieving our diversity goals. Until we advance our diversity and inclusion efforts, we are all missing enormous opportunities to expand our horizons, our vision, our labor pool, and ultimately, our success, both for our organizations and our society. There’s a business case as well as a moral one, and they’re both equally persuasive. Starting with the business case, in today’s highly diverse and changing society, we can’t compete for the best talent if we don’t welcome and encourage diversity and 3 | P a g e inclusion.2 And if we don’t attract and retain diverse employees, we are missing out on a huge and growing part of the labor force. Moreover, diverse perspectives often lead to better thinking and better outcomes.3 Furthermore, abstracting from dollars and cents, the very success of our nation depends on all segments of society participating fully in all aspects of our economy. Our national story is that of a melting pot, combining multitudes of cultures and experiences. There’s no place for bastions of privilege in the financial sector, the government, the tech sector, or any other important segment of our economy and society. If we don’t recognize this, the outside world certainly does. Today’s society, with instantaneous social media campaigns and political demands for change, is not satisfied with the status quo or promises that eventually things will get better. And I agree. In fact, I’ll be the first to admit that the demands for us to be more diverse and inclusive originating outside our walls have provided a healthy, and perhaps needed, kick in the pants to move faster and be more accountable regarding our progress on diversity and inclusion. The Federal Reserve in particular is in the spotlight for a lack of diversity in our senior ranks and on our Boards of Directors, and rightly so. Our record is not what it should be, and change has been too slow at best, or, sadly, in some instances, nonexistent. Let’s be clear—this is not for a lack of talented people out there. Take my organization, the San Francisco Fed, as an example. We are situated in a remarkably diverse region, with a population that has a higher share of members of minority groups than elsewhere in the country.4 Our colleges are turning out large 2 For example, the National Center for Education Statistics (2016) projects an outsize increase in minority shares of college attendees in coming decades. 3 Recent research finds a direct relationship between greater workforce diversity and favorable business outcomes (Hunt, Layton, and Prince 2015). See also Ellison and Mullin (2014) and Joshi and Roh (2009). 4 For example, see 2010 U.S. Census Bureau data for the San Francisco-Oakland-Fremont MSA (http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml). 4 | P a g e numbers of bright and eager people of highly diverse backgrounds.5 So, we should be perfectly positioned to tackle head-on the lack of diversity and inclusion. It hasn’t proven that easy. Although our overall workforce is ethnically diverse and we have seen gains in diversity at the most senior ranks of our Bank, we fall short in the ranks of middle management. Like many other organizations, we have made strides in attracting diverse job candidates through outreach programs and job fairs focused on female and minority job seekers. We have also enhanced our recruiting practices to minimize implicit bias that can distort outcomes. In our intern program, we’ve partnered with organizations that provide corporate internship and placement opportunities for low-income, first-generation college students and we’ve teamed up with programs that seek to increase the number of qualified students entering the fields of information security. And, we continue to expand our employee resource groups to empower our diverse employees to engage in dialogue with leadership and drive change. Of course, we are always seeking new ideas, and I look forward to learning about additional strategies during the sessions on developing pipelines and recruiting strategies for financial services firms. However, despite our efforts, our diversity pipeline drops from a torrent to a trickle once employees reach the cusp of leadership positions. We far too often hear from employees that it takes too long to get promoted or that they didn’t see a clear road ahead into a leadership role in our organization. We aren’t special in this regard—a 2015 Mercer report highlighted these same issues in the financial sector in Chicago.6 I’m sure many in this room have the same experience, and I look 5 For example, see data on degrees awarded from the University of California (http://universityofcalifornia.edu/infocenter/degrees-awarded-glance) and California State University (http://www.calstate.edu/as/stat_reports/2014-2015/degree1415.shtml). 6 Mercer (2015). 5 | P a g e forward to the discussion of this topic during the panel on the glass ceiling in financial services this afternoon. We at the San Francisco Fed are currently taking a number of steps to attack this problem, and I am optimistic about the road we are on. At an enterprise level, we created a Diversity Council chaired by a senior executive and membership composed of Bank leaders who coordinate and promote our diversity and inclusion efforts. Senior leaders regularly discuss our pipeline of future managers and leaders, with a focus on identifying gaps and opportunities for diversity and inclusion in our management ranks. We are setting the expectation that leaders mentor and sponsor diverse candidates into leadership roles. Through our Diversity Council, use of analytics, and senior leadership succession reviews we are actively working towards our goal of minimizing the choke points and keeping our pipeline strong. But, most importantly, as leaders of organizations, we must hold ourselves accountable to provide an inclusive environment that recruits, retains, and develops diverse talent. You have heard me say the word “accountable” more than once this morning because I believe that leadership accountability is crucial to advancing diversity and inclusion. Despite the efforts that I just described, if we as leaders do not hold ourselves responsible for our own actions—for example, in our hiring and promotion decisions, who we seek out for advice, and who we call on in meetings— these efforts will not have the desired impact. And it is equally important that we are accountable for the actions we are not taking—who are we not hiring or promoting, who is not in our inner circles, and who we are overlooking in meetings. There is still more to do. I personally read all of our employee engagement survey responses carefully and talk to employees about how they experience life at the Bank. It’s clear from their 6 | P a g e comments that, for many employees, the San Francisco Fed can seem a backward-looking, stuffy, slow-moving organization. We are currently undertaking a major cultural change at the Bank with a key goal to enhance our appeal to a diverse applicant and employee pool. This means different things to different people. For some, an atmosphere of more casual attire is welcoming and allows people to come to work as “who they are.” For others, greater flexibility in work hours and telecommuting is what’s needed.7 For many, especially women and minority candidates, an environment that genuinely embraces diversity at all levels of leadership is what is most vital. Instead of thinking of work as a place where employees need to “fit in,” I want to see our organization become a place that fits our employees and embraces our differences. By creating a more welcoming and inclusive culture—meaning a culture that holds itself accountable for encouraging and developing all employees and providing a sense of belonging at work—we will be better able to attract, retain, and grow a highly productive and diverse workforce. In this regard, I look forward to learning what else can be done in the “Successful Case Studies” session this afternoon. It’s absolutely essential that we not only stop putting up unintended barriers to diversity, but that we also affirm every day through our words and our deeds that we value and celebrate it. These efforts require organizational and behavioral self-awareness and a commitment, starting at the top, to foster change. Again, both the business case and the fact that it’s the right thing to do should drive our resolve. I’ve been talking so far about our employees, but as I mentioned earlier, we have more work to do in terms of the diversity of our Boards of Directors and outside Advisory Councils. Although the representation of women and minorities among our Directors has improved in recent years, it 7 Recent research by a leading economics scholar emphasizes the importance of flexibility in work hours for advancing qualified female candidates, especially in the financial and legal sectors (Goldin 2014). 7 | P a g e still isn’t representative of the people we serve.8 At the San Francisco Fed, we have taken steps similar to those for employee recruiting. Senior leaders of the Bank meet quarterly to review openings on our Boards and advisory groups with a focus on identifying and building a pipeline of outstanding diverse candidates that are representative of the communities we serve. I should be clear that we do not control the selection of the candidates for our Boards of Directors. Instead, according to the Federal Reserve Act, those decisions are made by the member banks themselves, our San Francisco Board of Directors, or the Board of Governors, depending on the nature of the positon. But, we can and do play an important role in introducing potential candidates to the Federal Reserve and by having a strong slate of diverse candidates, we hope to achieve greater diversity on our Boards. In addition, we have created the new 12th District Community Advisory Council to ensure that we are hearing a wide range of voices and perspectives from throughout our District. We plan to kick off this new Council next year, with semiannual meetings with senior executives of the San Francisco Fed. Membership will include representatives from community groups, community development organizations, and other members of the public. This council supplements the Federal Reserve Board’s Community Advisory Council, which has membership from across the country, as well as similar councils set up by other Federal Reserve Banks. I’ve gone over some of the key challenges we face regarding diversity and inclusion at my organization and some of the things we are doing to get us where we need to be. But, as I have said many times already, I know we don’t have all the answers, and I look forward to learning from the 8 According to Federal Reserve System tabulations, minority representation on Boards at Reserve Banks increased from 16 percent in 2010 to 24 percent this year. The proportion of women directors increased from 23 percent to 30 percent over the same period. 8 | P a g e other participants at this conference and in the future. I also know that this isn’t an issue that can be fixed overnight by flicking a switch. If it were, we wouldn’t be having this conference and I wouldn’t be speaking here. Instead, it takes focused leadership from the top of the organization, dedicated to an ongoing, long-term commitment to achieve greater diversity and inclusion. Change like this takes time and perseverance. As leaders of our organizations, we must hold ourselves accountable and not make excuses or look for others to tackle this problem. Admittedly, it’s often a process of two steps forward and one step back, and can feel like the Greek myth of Sisyphus, who was forced to roll a boulder up a hill, only to see it roll back and hit him, over and over, for eternity. But, this doesn’t have to be a Greek tragedy. As leaders, we can be staunch advocates, taking responsibility for creating a culture that embraces and engages diversity and inclusion in every way, and making sure that obstacles and hurdles are overcome. I am personally committed, and I hope you will join me in advancing diversity and inclusion in the financial sector with a sense of urgency and, most importantly, without excuses. Thank you. 9 | P a g e References Ellison, Sara Fisher, and Wallace P. Mullin. 2014. “Diversity, Social Goods Provision, and Performance in the Firm.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 23(2, Summer), pp. 465–481. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jems.12051/abstract Goldin, Claudia. 2014. “A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter.” American Economic Review 104(4, April), pp. 1091–1119. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.104.4.1091 Hunt, Vivian, Dennis Layton, and Sara Prince. 2015. “Diversity Matters.” Report, McKinsey and Company, Feb. 2. Available at http://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/why- diversity-matters Joshi, Aparna, and Hyuntak Roh. 2009. “The Role of Context in Work Team Diversity Research: A Meta- Analytic Review.” Academy of Management Journal 52(3), pp. 599–627. Mercer. 2015. “Bridging the Diversity Gap: Building African-American and Latino Talent Pipelines for the Financial Services Industry in Chicago.” Report for the Financial Services Pipeline Initiative. Available at http://www.mercer.com/insights/focus/bridging-the-diversity-gap.html National Center for Education Statistics. 2016. “Projections of Education Statistics to 2023.” Forty-second Edition. https://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2015073 U.S. Government Accountability Office. 2013. “Diversity Management: Trends and Practices in the Financial Services Industry and Agencies after the Recent Financial Crisis.” GAO-13-238, April. http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-13-238

1 Presentation to the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco’s 2016 Member Conference San Francisco, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on October 21, 2016 Assessing the New Normal(s) Good morning. I represent the 12th Federal Reserve District, and that covers a lot of territory—in fact over a third of the country. An important part of my job is to travel across the western United States, meeting with people and getting grassroots information about how the economy is doing. But, I’ll admit that once in a while it’s nice to give a speech closer to home and be able to sleep in my own bed tonight. That is to say, it’s a pleasure to be here today. I’m going to talk about where I see the U.S. economy going and what that means for monetary policy. In addition to the usual reading of the tea leaves about the near-term economic outlook, I will take a longer-term perspective and focus on how the new normal for the U.S. economy is shaping up. Before I proceed, I should note that the views I express here are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The dual mandate As a Fed policymaker, I tend to see virtually everything through the lens of our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability, and I’ll describe economic developments through that lens. I’ll begin with employment. Our goal is not to have an unemployment rate of zero. Instead, it’s to be near what economists call the “natural rate” of unemployment: That’s the rate we can expect to see in a healthy “Goldilocks” economy—one that’s running neither too hot nor too cold. It’s impossible to know exactly what that magic number is, but it’s generally thought to 2 be between 4¾ and 5 percent today.1 By the way, that’s about the same number that economists thought before the recession, so this is one case where the new normal is the same as the old. As I’ll note later in my remarks, this is more the exception than the norm. With the unemployment rate at 5 percent, we’re very close to that goal. Of course, the unemployment rate isn’t the only measure of labor market health, and it’s reassuring that a range of indicators have been improving and are sending similar signals. In particular, one labor market indicator that I look to measures what regular people—by that, I mean not just economists—say when they are asked how hard it is to find a job. Those responses are currently right in line with, or in fact even a little better, than the signal we’re getting from the unemployment rate.2 That’s great news about the job market, and it means that we won’t need as much job growth going forward as we’ve seen in the past few years. Because we’re pretty much at full employment now, the future is less about creating an ever stronger labor market than about maintaining a healthy one, which means creating enough new jobs to keep up with the increase in the size of the labor force. That number depends on things like the number of people retiring this year or graduating from school and entering the workforce. These factors can change a lot over time. During the 1960s and 1970s, the growing youth population and rapid labor force entry by women pushed up labor force growth and the rate of job growth needed to keep up. It reached a peak of about 160,000 jobs per month in 1980 and stayed close to that level through the 1990s. Since then, with labor force growth slowing due to an aging population, stabilization in women’s participation, and other factors, required job 1 In the September 2016 Summary of Economic Projections, the central tendency of estimates of the long -run level of the unemployment rate ranged between 4.7 and 5 percent (Board of Governors 2016b). The Congressional Budget Office estimates the natural rate to be 4¾ percent as of August (CBO 2016). The median estimate from the Survey of Professional Forecasters in August 2016 was 4.8 percent (https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/2016/survq316). The Blue Chip Economic Indicators estimate is 4.8 percent as of October 2016. 2 Data are from the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Survey (https://www.conference- board.org/data/consumerconfidence.cfm). See Weidner and Williams (2011). 3 growth slowed substantially. I put it at around 80,000 a month currently. Looking ahead, estimates that take account of potential labor force trends imply a range from 50,000 to a little over 100,000.3 So this year’s pace of job gains of about 180,000 jobs a month is more than twice as fast as we need to keep up with the trend in labor force growth and, quite honestly, is unsustainable in the long run. With job gains continuing to far outpace labor force growth, I expect the unemployment rate to edge down over the next year, bottoming out somewhere between 4½ and 4¾ percent—a very strong labor market by any standard. Under these conditions, we should expect the pace of job gains to slow, and no one should be alarmed when it does—we should only be alarmed, frankly, if we don’t see that necessary slowdown. This slowdown in labor force growth also has important implications for the new normal for economic growth. In the long run, two factors determine the speed at which the economy can grow in a balanced manner: the size of the labor force and labor productivity. The Congressional Budget Office projects that the labor force in the U.S. will grow at about ½ percent per year over the next decade.4 As I mentioned, the transition of women to the labor force is long complete and the baby boomers are already retiring. This is a considerable drop from the pace experienced over the past 40 years. This means that, unlike in the 1970s and ’80s, demographics will hinder rather than boost potential output growth. We have also seen a significant slowdown in productivity growth. Over the past 40 years total-economy productivity growth, or GDP per hour, has typically averaged between 1 and 1¼ percent per year. Since the 1970s, we’ve only deviated from this pace during the information technology boom of the late 1990s and early 2000s. Therefore, a reasonable 3 Bidder, Mahedy, and Valletta (forthcoming). See also Aaronson, Brave, and Kelley (2016). 4 CBO (2016). 4 benchmark is that total-economy productivity growth in the range of 1 to 1¼ percent represents normal, incremental growth. This view is consistent with research by leading experts.5 Moreover, since educational attainment per worker is unlikely to rise the way it did during much of the 20th century, the future pace of productivity growth will likely be at the lower end of the historical range, that is, not much above 1 percent.6 Putting these two ingredients together, demographics and productivity, in my view the trend growth rate of the U.S. economy is between 1½ and 1¾ percent per year.7 This is, admittedly, a far cry from the 3 percent rates ingrained in our memories from the 1980s and 1990s. Demographic and productivity trends are difficult to bend. In many ways the die has already been cast. Of course, there may be a revolutionary invention or technology just around the corner. Our crystal ball is hazy about when the next technological revolution will arrive. In the meantime, it’s more likely than not that slow growth is both real and here to stay. And while the days of 3 percent growth are behind us, at least for the foreseeable future, it isn’t the end of the world. We can still run a strong economy. GDP increased about 2 percent last year, yet we added 2¾ million jobs, and 2016 looks to be a lot like 2015, with continued moderate GDP growth and solid job gains. Turning to our second mandate of price stability, the Fed’s monetary policy committee— the Federal Open Market Committee or FOMC for short—has set a long-run goal of 2 percent inflation.8 Inflation has been running persistently below that goal for several years. Over the past couple of years, the strengthening of the dollar and declines in energy prices have pushed 5 Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016) and Gordon (2016). 6 Fernald (2016). 7 Fernald (2016). 8 Board of Governors (2016a). 5 inflation down, but these influences should fade over time. To cut through some of the noise, it’s useful to look at measures of inflation that strip out volatile prices and provide a clearer view of the underlying trend. These suggest that underlying inflation is running about 1¾ percent. So, we’re not quite at our target yet, but we’re getting pretty darn close. The combination of fading transitory factors and a strong economy should help us get back to our 2 percent goal in the next year or two. To sum up, the economic expansion remains on the right track. The labor market is strong, the economy has good forward momentum, and inflation is moving towards our 2 percent goal. What it means for interest rates So, what does this mean for interest rates? In the context of a strong economy with good momentum, it makes sense to get back to a pace of gradual rate increases, preferably sooner rather than later. Let me be clear: In arguing for a gradual increase in interest rates, I’m not trying to stall the economic expansion. It’s just the opposite: My aim is to keep it on a sound footing so that it can be sustained for a long time.9 History teaches us that an economy that runs too hot for too long can generate imbalances, potentially leading to excessive inflation, asset market bubbles, and ultimately economic correction and recession. A gradual process of raising rates reduces the risks of such an outcome. It also allows a smoother, more calibrated process of normalization that gives us space to adjust our responses to any surprise changes in economic conditions. If we wait too long to remove monetary accommodation, we hazard allowing imbalances to grow, requiring us to play catch-up, and not leaving much room to maneuver. Not to mention, a sudden reversal of policy could be disruptive and slow the economy in unintended ways. 9 See Williams (2016a) for further discussion. 6 As I said, my goal is to sustain the strong economy for as long as possible. The best way to accomplish this is by supporting a moderate pace of growth that is consistent with the new normal pace of GDP and jobs growth and that will keep the unemployment rate near the natural rate. I fear that if we allow the economy to overshoot this mark by too much, eventually we will need to reverse course to bring the economy back on track. The experience of past business cycles shows that this is a hard, if not impossible, act to pull off, and ultimately ends in recession. A gradual process of removing monetary accommodation reduces this risk. How low can rates stay? So far, I have talked a lot about the new normal for the labor market and economic growth. What about interest rates? Like job growth and GDP growth, the new normal for interest rates is likely much lower than we are used to. There is growing evidence of a significant decline in the natural rate of interest, or r* (r-star), over the past quarter-century to historically low levels. The natural interest rate is the short-term real (inflation-adjusted) interest rate that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation. While a central bank sets its short-term interest rate, r-star is a function of factors beyond its influence. A variety of economic factors have pushed natural interest rates very low, and they appear poised to stay that way.10 This is the case not just for the United States but for other economies as well. In a recent paper, Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and I estimated the inflation-adjusted natural rate for four major economies: the United States, Canada, the euro area, and the United Kingdom.11 In 1990, estimates ranged from about 2½ to 3½ percent. By 10 See Williams (2015), Hamilton et al. (2015), Kiley (2015), Lubik and Matthes (2015), and Laubach and Williams (2016). 11 Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016). Estimates are available at: http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/economists/jwilliams/Holston_Laubach_Williams_estimates.xlsx 7 2007, on the eve of the global financial crisis, these had all declined to between 2 and 2½ percent. Since then, all four estimates have dropped sharply, to slightly below 1½ percent for Canada and the United Kingdom, about ½ percent for the United States, and well below zero for the euro area. The underlying determinants for these declines are related to the global supply and demand for funds, including shifting demographics, slower trend productivity and economic growth, emerging markets seeking large reserves of safe assets, and a more general global savings glut.12 The key takeaway from these global trends is that interest rates are going to stay lower than we’ve come to expect in the past. This does not mean they will be zero, but when juxtaposed with pre-recession normal short-term interest rates of, say, 4 to 4½ percent, it may be jarring to see the underlying r-star guiding us towards a new normal of 3 to 3½ percent—or even lower. Importantly, this future of low interest rates is not due to easy monetary policy; instead, it is the rate expected to prevail when the economy is at full strength and the stance of monetary policy is neutral. Conclusion Although it has been a long, hard road back from the recession, the American economy is in good shape and headed in the right direction. We’re essentially at full employment, and inflation is well within sight of and on track to reach our target. Given the progress we have made and signs of continued solid momentum in the economy, and consistent with our agreed- upon monetary policy approach, it makes sense for the Fed to gradually move interest rates toward more normal levels. 12 Council of Economic Advisers (2015), International Monetary Fund (2014), Rachel and Smith (2015), and Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2016). 8 This policy path should be viewed in the context of an economy that has mostly cleared the Great Recession but faces a future that looks very different from the past in important ways. Although the natural rate of unemployment appears close to what it was a decade ago, demographic trends and a sustained productivity slowdown have pushed down the normal growth rates of jobs and GDP and have lowered the normal rates of interest. These developments will shape the economic landscape for years to come. Thank you. 9 References Aaronson, Daniel, Scott A. Brave, and David Kelley. 2016. “Is There Still Slack in the Labor Market?” Chicago Fed Letter 2016(359). https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/chicago-fed-letter/2016/359 Bidder, Rhys, Timothy Mahedy, and Rob Valletta. 2016. “Trend Job Growth: Where’s Normal?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-32 (forthcoming, October 24). Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016a. “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” Amended January 26. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_20160126.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016b. “Summary of Economic Projections.” September 21. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20160921ep.htm Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf. 2016. “Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, conference draft (March). https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/does-the-united-states-have-a- productivity-slowdown-or-a-measurement-problem/ Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2016. “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB.” NBER Working Paper 21670 (revised March 14). Congressional Budget Office. 2016. “An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2016 to 2026.” Report, August. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/51908 Council of Economic Advisers. 2015. “Long-Term Interest Rates: A Survey.” Report, July. https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/interest_rate_report_final_v2.pdf Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford. 2003. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2003(1, Spring), pp. 139–211. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/the-zero-bound-on-interest-rates-and-optimal-monetary- policy/ Fernald, John. 2016. “What Is the New Normal for U.S. Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-30 (October 11). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/october/new-normal-for-gdp-growth/ Goodfriend, Marvin. 2016. “The Case for Unencumbering Interest Rate Policy at the Zero Bound.” Presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 40th Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 26. https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/sympos/2016/econsymposium-goodfriend- paper.pdf Gordon, Robert J. 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West. 2015. “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings, October 30. https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-equilibrium-real-funds- rate-past-present-and-future/ 10 Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2016. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-11, June. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working-papers/wp2016- 11.pdf International Monetary Fund. 2014. World Economic Outlook, April. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2014/01/index.htm Kiley, Michael T. 2015. “What Can the Data Tell Us About the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate?” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.077 Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams. 2016. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux.” Business Economics, 51(2, July), pp. 57–67. Lubik, Thomas A., and Christian Matthes. 2015. “Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Brief 15-10, October. https://www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/economic_brief/2015/eb_15-10 Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith. 2015. “Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate.” Bank of England Staff Working Paper 571, December. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Pages/workingpapers/2015/swp571.aspx Weidner, Justin, and John C. Williams. 2011. “What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-5 (February 14), update. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/el2011- 05-update.pdf Williams, John C. 2015. “The Decline in the Natural Rate of Interest.” Business Economics 50(2, April), pp. 57–60. Williams, John C. 2016a. “Longview: The Economic Outlook.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-24 (August 22). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/august/longview-economic-outlook-anchorage-speech/ Williams, John C. 2016b. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23 (August 15). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/august/monetary-policy-and-low-r-star-natural-rate-of-interest/
