January 4, 2014 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the American Economic Association 2014 Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to be here today and to have the opportunity to talk about the role of economics and economists at the Reserve Banks. Economics is a critical discipline at the New York Fed, just as it is at the Board of Governors and the other Reserve Banks. Nevertheless, I expect that my perspective will differ a bit from that of Eric, Charlie, or Narayana 1 . In part, this is because my background is different. Although I have a Ph.D. from Berkeley, unlike Charlie and Narayana, I never spent time in academia, and, unlike Eric, I spent most of my career not in public service, but working in the private sector. My focus during my time in the private sector was also somewhat different than my colleagues, with an emphasis on those issues that affect financial markets. Don't get me wrong, I am very happy I got a Ph.D. in economics, the training has been invaluable. It's just that my career path is a bit unusual relative to other central bankers, so that must influence my perspective. Of course, another important point of differentiation is where I am now and the unique role that the New York Fed performs within the Federal Reserve System. All of the Federal Reserve Banks have their areas of specialization. In my opinion, the New York Fed has at least four that are worthy of mention today because these affect the work of the New York Fed's economists. First, we are the operational arm of the Federal Reserve, responsible for the implementation of monetary policy. This means we have a unique set of relationships with the securities dealer community and with respect to monitoring financial markets. It also means that we work very closely with the Board of Governors and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in implementing monetary policy. Second, we have a unique endowment and responsibility by virtue of our location. New York City is a global financial center, and finance is a very important aspect of the Second District's economy. Most of the largest global financial institutions have a major presence here. With delegated authority from the Board of Governors, we are responsible for the supervision of most of the major financial institutions headquartered in our district, as well as numerous foreign banking organizations that do business here. Third, we are the fiscal agent for the Treasury and conduct the Treasury debt auctions on their behalf. Additionally, we are responsible for Fedwire, which along with Clearing House Interbank Payments System (CHIPS), is one of the two large-dollar, real-time payment systems in the U.S. Fourth, we have a unique set of international duties. We provide banking services to foreign central banks, including investment of reserves and administration of foreign exchange swap lines. We also have a seat at the table in Basel with respect to the activities of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), its various committees, and the Financial Stability Board (FSB). As I noted earlier, economics is a critical discipline at the New York Fed. The New York Fed economists are not just theoreticians. Most have a strong empirical orientation and work very closely with those in the Bank that are responsible for the execution of policy—be it with respect to monetary policy, financial stability, supervision or payments services. What's special to me about the Bank is how the economists and non-economists work together to develop practical policy solutions to real-world problems and then implement those policies effectively. The breadth of activities at the New York Fed means that our economists contribute to policy in many different ways, working closely with other areas of the Bank including those who execute on our supervision, monetary policy, and payments responsibilities. We have about 60 Ph.D. economists in our Research Group. But we also have many more in other areas of the Bank, such as part of our open markets desk, in our supervision group, and in our risk functions. In fact, many of those with economics Ph.D.s elsewhere in the Bank started their careers at the Bank in the Research Group. They moved to other areas of the Bank as their interests evolved and they became less focused on research and more focused on policy development. This movement of economists throughout the organization has helped build a deep reservoir of human capital within the Bank and has fostered close collaboration between Research and other areas of the Bank. Our model with respect to attracting economists into our Research Group is to hire people with strong research skills, with the highest academic credentials and who already have or are likely to develop a policy orientation related to the Bank's work. We give our economists plenty of time and opportunity to conduct independent research, and expect them to publish their research in the major academic journals and to engage with the economics profession outside the Bank. As they progress in research capability, we require economists to apply the skills and techniques they use in research to policy issues. We expect that, as their academic careers develop, there will be a natural convergence between their research interests and the Bank's policy agenda. This usually happens as a matter of course because the Bank has a rich agenda of policy issues to work on and the economists at the Bank often have unique access to data and information that would not be available elsewhere. The convergence works in both directions: research informs the policy work and policy work generates research questions. The end result is that our economists have the ability to be both highly respected in their disciplines from a research perspective, and also to make a significant contribution to policy development and implementation. There is an excellent value proposition both for the Bank and the economists that work here, as indicated by the publication record of our economists and their contribution to policy initiatives. Let me give you some more concrete examples of what our economists have worked on or are currently working on. I will focus on three broad buckets: prudential policy and financial stability; monetary and macroeconomic policy; and microeconomic and regional economic policy. Prudential policy and financial stability New York Fed economists, inside and outside our Research Group, provided substantial assistance to the design and development of the numerous emergency lender of last resort facilities implemented during the financial crisis. This was done in conjunction with the Board of Governors, but the contributions from the New York Fed were critical because of our unique vantage point with respect to operational implementation, financial markets, and financial market infrastructures. In a different vein, New York Fed economists assisted in designing, developing, and implementing supervisory stress testing, including the annual Comprehensive and Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) supervisory stress tests. The New York Fed's economists perspectives and measurements on how downturns affect bank portfolio values was crucial to the design of these tests. A critical aspect of CCAR was the development of independent detailed models for the key bank business lines to act as an independent check on the risk assessments by the banks. Of course, this effort also drew on work at the Board of Governors and the rest of the Federal Reserve System. As well, our economists have played a role in developing international and domestic regulatory policy with respect to bank capital and liquidity standards. For instance, measurement of capital losses over time, and various run-off rates of different types of liabilities by our economists informed this work. Also, our economists' work on broker-dealer liquidity informed the design of the liquidity coverage ratio. Finally, our economists pay special attention to the emerging area of financial stability monitoring. This takes place in a number of realms, including participation in the work of the Basel Committees, such as the Committee on Global Financial Stability (CGFS) of the BIS, that I currently chair, and the Committee on Payments and Settlement Systems (CPSS), which I once chaired, the numerous workgroups and committees of the Financial Stability Board, and ongoing contributions to the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). With respect to the FSOC, for example, New York and Chicago Fed economists have played a key role in editing the FSOC annual reports. A few other examples of our economists' involvement in prudential and regulator policy include: GSE reform and housing market policy. Our economists, working with staff in the Markets Group, have published two staff reports detailing a framework for replacing the GSEs and implementing an explicit government guarantee to protect against tail risks in residential real estate. This work has included briefings of congressional staff and congressional testimony. Triparty repo reform. Working with the other areas of the Bank and Board of Governors staff, economists have helped to design and implement reforms that make the triparty repo market more stable and less prone to “run” risk. Reference rate reform. New York Fed economists and members of the Markets Group are deeply involved in the FSB's efforts to reform the reference rate setting process for LIBOR and other reference rates. Monetary policy and macroeconomic policy Economists provide invaluable input to the New York Fed President, who serves as Vice-Chairman of the FOMC, and to the Markets Group, which is responsible for the operational aspects of monetary policy implementation. This work has many aspects, including: Independent macroeconomic forecasts. This includes a New York Fed DSGE model and a suite of products to analyze labor market developments 2 . The development and implementation of new tools, such as the large-scale asset purchase programs, the payment of interest on excess reserves, and the development and testing of a fixed rate, full allotment reverse repurchase facility. This is done in close concert with economists at the Board of Governors. Longer-term work to assess what monetary policy framework is most consistent with the goals of monetary policy and financial stability. New York Fed economists have made many contributions to the theory and measurement in New Keynesian models, focusing on monetary policy at the zero lower bound, and incorporating financial frictions into more standard macro models. Microeconomic and regional policy New York Fed economists also have important opportunities supporting microeconomic and regional policy. These include the survey of consumer expectations, which will launch this month, and the consumer credit panel, which, using raw data supplied by Equifax, allows us to develop insights into consumer indebtedness at the micro-level. These panels give us and the public unique insights into household beliefs and behavior. One example is the work highlighting the growing aggregate student loan debt balance and repayment burden. An important responsibility for each of the Reserve Banks is coverage of economic development in its region. A significant aspect of this work at the New York Fed involves our regional press briefings, business surveys, and white papers. One notable example has been the New York Fed economists' work in developing a white paper that highlighted some key choices that Puerto Rican policymakers might make to eliminate structural constraints that have impinged on the Island's economic performance. I'm very pleased by the contributions of our economists in the Bank, whether they sit in the Research Group or elsewhere in the Bank. I think we have helped to contribute to the considerable progress made on a number of fronts, including making the financial system more resilient and robust and helping make monetary policy more effective, even at the zero lower bound. But there is much more work to do. In particular, I think we have just scratched the surface in understanding how developments in one area, such as capital and liquidity requirements for large, complex financial institutions, affect other areas, such as effective monetary policy implementation. We still don't have well developed macro-models that incorporate a realistic financial sector. We don't understand fully how large-scale asset purchase programs work to ease financial market conditions—is it the effect of the purchases on the portfolios of private investors, or alternatively is the major channel one of signaling? There are many other riddles that remain to be solved. How does one design an effective reference rate that is informative, verifiable and not vulnerable to manipulation? If you manage to come up with one, how do you migrate the trillions of dollars of existing contracts to the new standard? The U.S. unemployment rate has declined more sharply than one might expect given the economy's growth rate over the past few years. Is this permanent or will it reverse if the economy continues to grow and the pressure on labor market resources increases in the coming years? How does one end “too big to fail” for large global firms operating across different jurisdictions? The list goes on and on. There is plenty to work on and think about. Finally, let me take up one other question that Stan has posed: Do I think you need to be an economist to be the President at the New York Fed? I don't think so. If you look at the past five Presidents—Volcker, Corrigan, McDonough, Geithner, and myself, some have been economists, some haven't. Yet I think all my predecessors have been very effective. I think there are other attributes that are more important than being an economist: 1) An analytical orientation; 2) the ability to synthesize a broad range of material so as to understand the interactions of markets, financial institutions, and regulatory and macroeconomic policy; 3) open-mindedness and pragmatism—the world is complicated and ever changing; and 4) the ability to lead—that means identifying the key issues and motivating people to do their best work in order to develop new insights and approaches. Having an economics background probably helps, especially on the analytics side, but, in my view, is by no means necessary and certainly not sufficient. One point on which I am certain is that regardless of the background of the President, having a very strong research group is essential. Thanks for your kind attention. 1 Eric Rosengren, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston; Charles Plosser, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia; and Narayana Kocherlakota, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. 2 Dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

February 26, 2014 Posted February 25, 2014 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Tenth Asia-Pacific High Level Meeting on Banking Supervision, Auckland, New Zealand As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today. This is my first time in New Zealand (not counting a brief stop at the Auckland airport). I’m delighted to be here and am heading down to the South Island tomorrow. Today, I am going to talk about the challenges that face us in ensuring stability in the global financial system. While we have made considerable progress in strengthening the financial system—for example, large global banks have considerably more capital and liquidity resources than prior to the financial crisis—there is still a significant amount of hard work ahead for all of us. For example, we need to develop resolution mechanisms that will work on a global basis and we need to ensure that the clearing of standardized over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives through central counterparties (CCPs) is done safely. We also need to improve our ability to aggregate and share data. We need to do this in order to develop a coherent view of the global financial system so that we can deal with emerging vulnerabilities in a timely and effective way. As always, my remarks today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System. In the years prior to Lehman Brothers’ failure, critical vulnerabilities built up within the global financial system. Banks evolved from being local in their geographic footprint, to national and then international in scope. Supervision and regulation did not keep pace with these changes and capital and liquidity requirements were underdeveloped during this period. Our view into the operations of global banks was too limited due both to shortcomings of banks in aggregating their internal information and to difficulties in sharing information globally across supervisors. At the same time, the so-called “shadow banking” system was growing in both size and complexity. Particularly noteworthy was the proliferation of money-like instruments created outside of the traditional banking sector that were used to finance long-term, illiquid assets. In the U.S., protections against bank runs that were put into place during the Great Depression did not extend to this new shadow banking sector. Put simply, we did not have a good picture of the global financial system. As a result, we were unable to observe its growing instabilities or respond preemptively to emerging vulnerabilities. While the official sector has made considerable progress in addressing these weaknesses, important challenges remain. In particular, we must eliminate the regime of having “too-big-to-fail” financial institutions. I believe that a multi-faceted approach is needed involving four major components. First, we need to minimize the risk that a large, complex financial firm fails in the first place. Second, we need to have credible resolution regimes in place should such a failure materialize despite our best efforts. Third, we need to strengthen the resiliency of our financial system so that the stresses associated with the failure of a major financial firm are not amplified across the system. Fourth, we need to build up our data capabilities so we can better monitor the global financial system as a whole. For the full benefit from this multifaceted approach to be realized, public authorities must continue to work together in a coordinated manner. Global, systemically important financial institutions (G-SIFIs) pose a significant challenge to financial stability on two fronts. First, due to their size, complexity and central role in financial markets, a disorderly failure of a G-SIFI would directly cause major disruptions in markets, adversely affecting credit flows and real economic activity. Second, such a disorderly failure would also indirectly place significant negative strains on other financial firms due not only to direct credit exposures to the failed institution, but also due to the fire sale dynamics that would ensue. The lack of transparency in markets as to which firms would be most affected could result in a general pull-back by investors, which, in turn, could lead to additional deleveraging and further downward pressure on asset prices. As we saw during the financial crisis, this amplification mechanism could quickly spread the strains throughout the global financial system. Prior to the financial crisis, the risk to financial stability posed by G-SIFIs created a dilemma for policymakers when one or more of these firms found itself in danger of failing. On the one hand, standing back and not intervening would enhance market discipline. This market discipline would provide incentives for better decision-making by the management of financial firms and more vigorous monitoring by their creditors. On the other hand, the risks to financial stability from a failure would have been extraordinarily high, creating pressure for the official sector to intervene in an effort to prevent a disorderly failure. Historically, in most cases when the relevant firms were very large and complex, this dilemma has led to official sector interventions. A consequence is that market discipline was undermined for those firms perceived to be “too big to fail.” To the extent that such actions cause creditors to anticipate future interventions that would shield them from losses, this reduces creditors’ incentive to monitor the management of these firms or respond forcefully in the case of early signs of deterioration. In addition, because the expectation of official sector intervention lowers expected credit losses, this results in cheaper funding costs and provides G-SIFIs with a competitive advantage. It also creates an incentive for such firms to take actions to maintain their too-big-to fail status to preserve this funding advantage. As a consequence, the structure of the financial system has evolved towards larger and more complex firms than can be justified by economies of scale and scope. This is an unacceptable regime and this policy dilemma needs to be resolved. Ideally, we want a regime in which we retain the benefits from the services provided by G-SIFIs to the economy, but not at the price of having to “bail-out” such institutions in order to preserve financial stability should they come to the brink of failure. I believe that a credible solution involves two complementary goals. First, coordinated steps must be taken to significantly reduce the likelihood that a G-SIFI ever reaches the point where it is at risk of failure. This risk should be pushed well below the level for smaller and less complex financial institutions. Second, home jurisdictions for these G-SIFIs need credible resolution mechanisms that can be implemented on a global basis so these firms can fail without large systemic consequences. A resolution mechanism will be credible only if it reduces the negative externalities from such a failure to an acceptable level. While progress has been made toward these two goals, additional work and coordination is still required. Turning first to efforts to reduce the likelihood that a G-SIFI will be at risk of failing, the Basel international standards raised both the quantity and quality of capital for internationally active banks. Banks also are required to capture more complex risks in their measures of risk-weighted assets. To complement the stronger risk-weighted capital standards, an international leverage ratio requirement also has been adopted. In addition, the Basel framework will require a capital buffer that increases with a firm’s size, complexity, interconnectedness and global footprint. In addition to providing additional loss absorbing capacity, this capital buffer requirement will act to offset any funding advantages for G-SIFIs, helping to level the playing field with smaller, less complex financial institutions. Together, when fully implemented, these changes should reduce the failure risk for G-SIFIs. To complement the Basel framework, I believe that jurisdictions need to create processes and incentives for management of G-SIFIs to act earlier and more decisively in response to emerging risks facing their firms. Proactive interventions by the senior management of banks will have a greater efficacy and a lower cost than reactive steps taken only in response to growing market pressure. These proactive management interventions can take many forms including raising additional capital, cutting capital distributions, restructuring business lines and making difficult personnel changes. Avoiding a hazard is easier if one’s focal point is kept well down the road. Official sector stress tests are an important tool that can facilitate this forward-looking management focus. One example is the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) process in the United States. The goal of CCAR is to ensure that banks have robust, forward-looking capital planning processes, as well as sufficient capital to withstand severely stressed economic conditions while, maintaining their ability to perform their critical roles of credit intermediation. In CCAR, each of the participating banks is required to project the impact of particular forward-looking stress scenarios on their operations over a two-year horizon. Both the banks and the supervisors conduct independent assessments of the impact of the stress scenarios on the various business lines of the bank. This approach provides a cross-validation of each bank’s analysis, while at the same time generating results that can be compared across the participating banks. Another important feature of CCAR is that the scenarios and the key aspects of the banks results are made public rather than treated as confidential supervisory information. This transparency is important for supporting market confidence in the banking system. Finally, a critical aspect of the stress testing process is the supervisory review of the capital planning process for each participating bank. This planning process is what reinforces and promotes a proactive stance by management to emerging risks. The structure of bank management compensation also could be designed to provide incentives that reinforce a proactive, forward-looking risk management approach. As I will discuss in a moment, sufficient long-term debt that can be converted to equity is an important element of an effective resolution mechanism for G-SIFIs. While the magnitude of this long-term debt needs to be sufficient to ensure that public funds are not at risk in the event that a resolution of a firm is necessary, making this long-term debt a component of management compensation might also be used to help reduce the likelihood of a default. Long-term debt provided by outside creditors exposed to risk of default can create useful market discipline. However, outside creditors do not have the same information or decision rights as inside management. Structuring a long-term debt requirement so that a meaningful component consists of deferred compensation held by senior management would presumably strengthen the incentives for proactive risk management. In my opinion, more research is needed into how the structure of management compensation for financial firms could incentivize good risk management and limit the appetite for excessive risk. 1 Even if every jurisdiction were to successfully implement these types of initiatives and consequently reduce the default risks associated with their G-SIFIs, the risk of failure would not be fully eliminated. This means there would always be some residual risk of major disruptions to financial markets due to a disorderly default of a large financial firm. Consequently, the development and implementation of credible resolution mechanisms for G-SIFIs is the second key component of a global strategy to improve financial stability. By credible, I mean that if the situation of an impending G-SIFI default arises, the home authorities will proceed with the resolution plan, rather than give in to pressure to intervene to prevent the failure. This requires that the resolution mechanisms be capable of significantly mitigating the negative externalities associated with winding down a failing G-SIFI. Although the specifics of the resolution mechanisms will necessarily vary to some extent across jurisdictions, reflecting differences in institutional structures, legal frameworks, and regulatory regimes, the goal is common—to be able to resolve any G-SIFI regardless of its home jurisdiction, even in periods of stressful financial market conditions, without taxpayer funds, in a way that minimizes knock-on effect to financial markets and other financial institutions. As I have indicated in earlier speeches, I endorse the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s (FDIC) single point of entry (SPE) resolution framework for the United States. For the SPE approach to be successful, firms subject to this resolution regime will need to have a sufficient amount of long-term debt at the parent company that the FDIC can convert into equity to guarantee that the new bridge company is adequately capitalized. Counterparties at the subsidiary level need to be assured that they have no reason to pull back from the new bridge company. In the international arena this type of requirement is referred to as GLAC, or “gone concern loss absorption capacity.” The Financial Stability Board is working on a proposal for an international GLAC standard, with a target date for consideration this November. Finalizing this standard is an important to-do item. As I discussed earlier, both the amount and the composition of additional resources are important. The adequacy of the GLAC buffer mitigates the negative externalities from a default, while the possible use of management-held long-term debt as an element of GLAC could bolster incentives to reduce the risk of a default in the first place. There are implementation details of the FDIC’s SPE resolution framework that still need to be worked out. These arise from the challenge involved in operationalizing the framework with financial firms that conduct business across several jurisdictions and geographic borders. In this international arena, one specific issue needs to be promptly addressed. Due to parent guarantees or other cross-default provisions, the placement by the FDIC of the parent company into receivership may be treated by some counterparties as an event of default. This could trigger the close-out of qualified financial contracts (QFCs) such as interest rate swap contracts at international subsidiaries, which could potentially be destabilizing. To deal with this issue, the Dodd-Frank Act’s Title II one-day stay on the close-out of qualified financial contracts needs to be extended to cover contracts governed by non-U.S. law and involving non-U.S. counterparties. Resolving this issue is important to ensuring a smooth transition to the new bridge company. Addressing the contract close-out issue can be accomplished in two ways that are not mutually exclusive. First, existing derivative contracts could be amended and future contracts written to stipulate that the parent’s placement into a Title II resolution does not trigger the close-out option. Second, legal provisions in other countries could be modified so that the one-day stay that applies to qualified financial contracts governed by U.S. law is also enforceable for those contracts governed by foreign law. Either or both of these actions would help ensure that the FDIC’s SPE mechanism could be successfully executed without unduly disrupting financial markets and counterparty risk positions. Given the cross-border activities of the G-SIFIs, the effectiveness of resolution mechanisms also will depend on the degree of coordination across national authorities. For example, we do not know for certain how foreign authorities would react if the parent of a U.S.-based G-SIFI were placed into a Title II resolution proceeding. Uncertainties exist regarding whether foreign authorities either might choose, or be required, to take defensive actions such as ring-fencing that could disrupt the smooth implementation of the resolution process. An important task going forward is for authorities to work cooperatively and expeditiously to resolve these uncertainties. A well-crafted and well-executed resolution process for G-SIFIs can still be expected to create some strains in financial markets, especially considering the likely unsettled state of these markets at the time a resolution is being implemented. This suggests that it is also important to work on improving the resiliency in financial markets so that any shocks associated with a G-SIFI resolution are dampened rather than amplified. Two areas of work that show promise along these lines are new funding requirements and the move to central clearing for many OTC derivatives. An important function of financial firms is to provide liquidity to the market. However, this exposes financial firms to run risk. Liquidity runs can be an accelerant to asset fire sales that can lead to downward price spirals where firms must sell assets to raise funds, with these sales putting more downward pressure on asset prices, leading to a renewed round of asset sales. For solvent financial firms, protection against liquidity runs requires liquidity buffers and/or access to appropriately collateralized central bank liquidity support. Financial firms on their own would likely choose to hold liquidity buffers that are smaller than socially optimal since these firms do not internalize the positive market externality that these liquidity buffers provide. As a consequence, liquidity regulation is necessary to achieve the desired level of firms’ liquidity buffers. Liquidity buffer requirements are also needed to reduce the dependence of these firms on central bank lender-of-last-resort (LOLR) support. There are several reasons this is desirable. First, access to central bank liquidity can lead to moral hazard with respect to the behavior of financial firms. This can be mitigated by requiring that firms with access to LOLR support hold sufficient liquidity buffers that must be used ahead of any central bank liquidity—the equivalent of liquidity “skin-in-the game.” Second, the line between illiquidity and insolvency often can become blurred, especially when markets are under stress. Central banks are meant to provide liquidity support only to solvent firms so that the central banks avoid taking on credit risk. An overreliance by firms on access to central bank liquidity can expose the central bank to the risk of loss. Finally, in some cases, central bank liquidity provision can become stigmatized. In this case, financial firms are prone to underutilize this source of liquidity—a decision that can have adverse consequences for markets and the availability of credit. Liquidity buffers reduce the likelihood that this stigma constraint will become binding. The on-going Basel discussions have focused on a short-term liquidity requirement—the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR); and a longer-term liquidity requirement, the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR). The intention of the LCR is for banks to hold sufficient high-quality, liquid assets that can be easily and quickly converted to cash to cover expected liquidity outflows in a stress scenario over a 30-day period. Unlike illiquid assets, the conversion of these high quality liquid assets into cash should not create any fire sale dynamics. However, it is important that banks actually use this liquidity buffer when there are liquidity outflows, rather than attempting to maintain their LCR at 100 percent by selling other assets. The OTC derivatives markets remain another important source of potential instability. Recognizing this vulnerability, the Group of Twenty (G20) in its 2009 Pittsburgh Summit statement stipulated that all standardized derivative contracts would be moved to central clearing, and that the remaining non-standard derivatives would be subject to higher capital requirements. 2 While there will inevitably be a residual share of derivatives that do not lend themselves to standardization, authorities need to continue to work collaboratively to keep this residual share to a minimum. Why is standardization so important? Standardization has advantages in terms of increasing transparency, price discovery and liquidity. Standardization is also important because it allows the derivatives to be centrally cleared in a CCP. Without central clearing, participants have bilateral credit exposures to each of their counterparties. Moreover, they cannot fully assess their credit risk exposures in this framework since there is no information on the other derivative contracts that their counterparties have with other market participants. Central clearing replaces this complex web with a single set of relationships between the firm and the CCP as its counterparty. This allows for netting, so that a firm’s risk is limited to its net exposure to the central counterparty. This both reduces risk and increases transparency. Consequently, members of the CCP have less of an incentive to pull back in periods of stress and this makes the market more resilient. In addition, international standards on margin requirements for non-centrally cleared derivatives have been adopted. 3 By definition, bespoke derivatives cannot be centrally cleared and so do not benefit from the risk reduction and enhanced transparency associated with central clearing. To offset this, these derivatives will be required by regulation to have higher initial margin requirements, as well as variation margin. Despite these efforts, we still may not get the balance right in terms of the requirements applied to non-standard versus standardized, cleared contracts. One worry is that CCPs that are shareholder-owned and operated for profit may compete for market share by offering lower margin requirements on standardized products. This could strike the wrong balance between the private profit motive versus the public benefit of clearing. For this reason, I believe that all CCPs need to have strong governance and regulatory oversight. This must be harmonized on an international basis in order to prevent a potential race to the bottom. It is important to recognize that increased use of CCPs for central clearing also creates potential financial stability issues that must be addressed. While CCPs reduce aggregate risk, they also concentrate the remaining risk. That is, CCPs create potential single points of failure in global derivatives markets. CCPs need adequate capacity to absorb potential losses from the default of one or more of its members, and they need to have access to liquidity so that they can always fully settle their obligations. To address this concern, in 2012, international standard setters issued a set of minimum risk management standards for financial market infrastructures including CCPs. 4 These principles, known as the “Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures” (PFMIs), require that a CCP maintain sufficient liquid resources. This includes the requirement that a CCP have a pre-funded default arrangement and that the CCP collects initial and variation margin. In particular, the PFMIs stipulate that a CCP must be able to withstand, in a stress environment, the failure of the member having the largest exposure to the CCP. In some cases, this requirement is strengthened to require the ability to cover the failure of the two largest members. The PFMIs also require the CCPs to develop effective methodologies to estimate their funding exposures, so that they can better manage their liquidity risks. Another important risk management task for CCPs is the on-boarding of new members and the monitoring of the condition of existing members. The strength of the CCP is ultimately derived from the collective strength of its members. The mutualization of the CCP’s net credit risk across its members creates an incentive for its members to only want well-capitalized and well-managed members as part of the CCP. The CCP also must ensure that members are meeting their margin requirements and remain in good standing. It is also worth noting that these safeguards for CCPs will need to be put into place along with other reforms such as the use of multilateral trading platforms and trade repositories. Seamless integration with these new trading processes is essential for CCPs to contribute to financial stability. The financial crisis also highlighted the significant gaps that existed between the data collected and the data necessary to adequately monitor developments in the global financial system. In addition, the crisis underscored an important limitation of the current data structure: the inability to combine data effectively across jurisdictions in order to develop a comprehensive view. As a consequence, policymakers often did not have timely access to key information that would have informed both the diagnosis of emerging problems as well as the likely efficacy of proposed interventions. As we all know, it is difficult to safely steer a fast-moving car if outward vision is impaired by a windshield that is largely obscured. In response, the G20 in April 2009 instructed the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to detail these information gaps and to develop proposals for resolving them. The Data Gaps Initiative (DGI) was the response to carry out this important work. The DGI set out four broad objectives: (1) Better capture the build-up of risk in the financial sector, (2) improve data on international financial network connections, (3) monitor the vulnerability of domestic economies to shocks, and (4) improve the communication of official statistics. Across these four objectives twenty specific recommendations were developed. 5 In particular, the DGI effort included developing a centralized data center to pool relevant data for all globally systemically important banks (GSIBs). 6 Implementing the DGI agenda involves more than simply defining common data templates and retooling bank information systems to populate these templates. Rather, what is required is a deeper cultural change in how supervisors operate and interact with each other. This transformation takes time and involves a process of building mutual trust. To date, a new data center has been established at the Bank of International Settlements (BIS) that is receiving data on G-SIB institution-to-institution counterparty credit exposures. Work is underway to expand this data collection to include institution-to-institution funding dependencies, with additional work to follow on institution-to-aggregate credit and funding. Home supervisors contributing data to the BIS data center are receiving reports based on an analysis of the pooled data. Supporting this collaborative initiative is a multilateral framework signed by all of the participating supervisors that details confidentiality requirements, data sharing, and governance arrangements. As this effort moves forward, the data will be available to support both enhanced micro-prudential supervision and macro-prudential supervision. More work, though, needs to be done to facilitate a comprehensive data view of the important financial markets. As an example, an increasing number of trade repositories are collecting valuable transaction data. However, the full benefit of these data can only be realized if we can aggregate this information across the trade repositories, and if regulators have access to the data needed to support their respective mandates. 7 The Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) have produced an analysis of some of the foundational steps that need to be taken. 8 Again, implementing these steps will take time and will need our continued attention. The goal of financial stability will remain elusive so long as we have financial firms that are judged as “too big to fail.” Some might argue that this is reason enough to break up these firms. I do not believe that this is the best course of action. As I have outlined here today, I prefer a multi-faceted approach that strives to: (1) minimize the risk that a large complex financial firm faces default, (2) have in place a credible resolution regime if a default becomes imminent, (3) improve the resiliency of our financial system so that any shocks resulting from a resolution are not amplified across the system, and (4) build out a global data model for effectively monitoring global financial markets. If we can execute on these four elements, then I believe that we can retain the economic benefits from having large financial firms that support the global economy while minimizing the risks that the activities of such firms might pose to the global financial system. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Structuring this in a way to get the incentives right is critical. For example, one would want to be certain that in no circumstance would management see a benefit from putting the firm into resolution in order to convert its debt holdings into equity. 2 See Group of Twenty (2009) The G20 Pittsburgh Summit Leaders’ Statement . 3 See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the Board of International Organization of Securities Commissions (2013) Margin Requirements for Non-Centrally Cleared Derivatives . 4 See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012) Principles for Financial Market Infrastructure . 5 See FSB and IMF (2009) The Financial Crisis and Information Gaps . Report to the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors. 6 FSB and IMF (2009), recommendation no. 9: “The FSB, in close consultation with the IMF, to convene relevant central banks, national supervisors, and other international financial institutions, to develop by end 2010 a common draft template for systemically important global financial institutions for the purpose of better understanding the exposures of these institutions to different financial sectors and national markets. This work should be undertaken in concert with related work on the systemic importance of financial institutions. Widespread consultation would be needed, and due account taken of confidentiality rules, before any reporting framework can be implemented .” 7 See Communique Meeting of Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Washington, DC, April 18-19, 2013 “We also call for a feasibility study on how information from trade repositories can be aggregated and shared among authorities, so as to enable comprehensive monitoring of risks to financial stability.” 8 See CPSS / IOSCO. Report on OTC Derivatives Data Repository and Aggregation Requirements . January 2012. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

March 7, 2014 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Brooklyn College, Brooklyn, New York As prepared for delivery Good afternoon and thank you for inviting me. It is always a pleasure to speak with the different communities that make up our region, and it is especially gratifying to have the opportunity to talk with you, our future leaders. I am especially pleased to be here at Brooklyn College, given the relationship that we at the New York Fed have developed with The City University of New York (CUNY). As an example, we collaborated this year on the College Fed Challenge, our yearly competition where teams of students from area universities take on the roles of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and debate the appropriate next steps for U.S. monetary policy. A number of CUNY schools competed and professors served as judges. Also, several CUNY schools had a strong showing in our annual Savvy Credit Video Festival which I’ll speak more about later. My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts to understand what is going on at the grassroots level of our economy and to share what we are seeing. At the Federal Reserve, we try to meet with a diverse array of people in order to get a comprehensive picture of economic conditions in the regions we serve and a fuller understanding of the major issues. Earlier today, I met with developers and local community leaders to learn about the redevelopment of the Atlantic Yards, was welcomed to a roundtable breakfast meeting with members of the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce and then traveled to Brownsville to learn about the challenges faced by that community. Following this visit to Brooklyn College, I’m headed to Bush Terminal in Sunset Park to meet with city officials and learn about an important redevelopment project and then I’ll end the day at Etsy—a successful innovative start-up and a major private-sector employer here in Brooklyn. These trips are only one of the many ways in which we seek to engage with the people and businesses in our region. We also reach out to our local communities through web resources, workshops and conferences. To assess the performance of the regional economy, we monitor economic activity on a monthly basis, we tap into the insights of the members of our Small Business and Agriculture Advisory Council and Upstate Advisory Board, and we have constructed a consumer credit panel that allows us to better understand the financial condition of homeowners and students at the local level. We conduct two monthly surveys—the Empire State Manufacturing Survey and the Business Leaders Survey of service firms—which help us monitor regional business conditions in close to real-time. We’ve also developed a “Regional Mortgage Conditions” analysis at the county and zip code level. In addition, we conduct a biannual poll of small businesses to understand their credit needs and availability. It is noteworthy that our most recent poll found that cash flow issues replaced credit availability as the number one concern of small companies. We also have worked to support better financial decision-making by young consumers. Every year the Bank conducts two competitions in which college students are challenged to produce a 30-second video promoting wise credit use. The two contests, one held in Puerto Rico and the other in the tri-state region, provide students the opportunity to learn about the importance of personal finance while showcasing their filmmaking creativity. The winning video is then shown at numerous local movie theaters, helping promote the value of the smart use of credit. This year the judges, including Maria Bartiromo from Fox Business, Tamir Muhammad from the Tribeca Film Institute and Jim Rosenberg from UNICEF, selected a Brooklyn College entry, entitled “Elevate Your Credit” as the winner. I am pleased to again congratulate Rasa Partin, Ben Remetz and Andrew Roder, and their coach, Jay Kim, for creating the winning video. Now I would like to review recent developments in the local and national economies, and at the end of my talk will be happy to answer any questions you have. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. Regional Employment and Economic Trends First, let’s talk about economic trends in New York City. The City’s economy showed resilience both during and after this last severe recession. Payroll employment fell sharply in 2008 and 2009; it bounced back, slowly at first, but by July of 2011, the City’s economy had recovered to its pre-recession employment peak and, in November, it eclipsed its previous all-time peak of 1969. Since then, employment has continued to grow strongly, rising at a roughly 2 percent annual pace and outpacing the national growth rate. The demand for labor has been driven by start-ups, tech, health care and business services. While Superstorm Sandy caused substantial damage to homes and the region’s infrastructure and severe economic disruptions in late 2012, the local economy as a whole bounced back quickly. Despite the robust job growth, the unemployment rate among City residents has been persistently high—though it did fall to 8.0 percent in December, nearly a 5-year low. Potential workers are not counted as unemployed unless they are actively looking for work, so this relatively high rate of unemployment, in part, reflects the relative strength in labor force participation, as the City’s residents remain engaged and looking for work. In contrast, at the national level, the picture is quite different—job growth has been slower and proportionately more people have dropped out of the labor force. Perhaps surprisingly, while historically a key driver of the local economy, the finance sector has not been a leader in terms of job growth recently. Instead, employment in New York City’s finance sector and the securities industry specifically, has been essentially flat over the past two years. The city’s job gains in this expansion have been broad-based across other sectors, indicating a healthy diversification within the economy. Conditions in Brooklyn Now let’s focus on Brooklyn. The borough’s economy has been particularly strong in recent years. Compared with the other boroughs, Brooklyn has seen generally stronger job growth, a stronger housing market, and stronger trends in wage and salary earnings. This strength is exemplified by the transformation of industrial neighborhoods—such as DUMBO, Red Hook, Greenpoint, East Williamsburg, Gowanus and Bushwick—into increasingly diversified residential and commercial neighborhoods; and the recent development of the Atlantic Yards and Brooklyn Navy Yard. This changing landscape has helped spur economic activity which has created many new jobs in the borough. Indeed, employment held up well during the recession, declining by less than 2 percent over a brief period in early 2009, and has averaged a nearly 3 percent annualized growth rate since then. Job growth has been particularly strong at retailers, hotels and restaurants, and also service firms ranging from advertising to engineering. That said, the employment picture does have some difficulties. For example, there is concern over some well-paying health sector jobs given the financial strain at Long Island College Hospital and Interfaith Medical Center and the pressure to close those institutions. Brooklyn’s economic vitality is also reflected in the commercial real estate market, as both office and retail vacancy rates have fallen steadily over the past few years. In fact, office vacancy rates are now lower in Brooklyn than in Manhattan. The strength in the housing market is also evident, with the median home price up by roughly 10 percent in each of the past two years, and the rental market has shown similar strength. However, these increasing prices also raise two other issues that acutely afflict many in Brooklyn and New York City more broadly: housing affordability and poverty. Despite Brooklyn’s economic renaissance and growing affluence, a large swath of the Borough’s population—one in four residents—still lives in poverty, and many struggle to pay their rent or mortgage. Even with the strong pace of job creation, Brooklyn’s unemployment rate has remained high, averaging more than 9 percent in 2013. There are also continued financial challenges for families here as indicated by the New York Fed’s measures of credit conditions. As of the end of 2013, average debt per person was about $42,000 in Brooklyn—little changed over several years. At the same time, the Borough’s delinquency rate on that debt is now 11.6 percent, much higher than the state average and more than double the national average. What’s more, the mortgage crisis continues to take a toll on local homeowners. As of the end of 2013, more than 11 percent of mortgage debt in Brooklyn was 90-plus days delinquent, again significantly higher than the New York State and national delinquency rate. I also want to make a few comments about the impact of Superstorm Sandy. While areas of the New York City metropolitan region were hard hit by the storm, the devastation was particularly severe along the waterfronts of Brooklyn—and in particular in southern Brooklyn and neighborhoods like Red Hook. We saw and heard about the devastation of the storm from many of those affected, including a number of our own employees as well as other residents we met at a series of assistance clinics we organized in response to the storm. Those already living close to the edge financially were particularly vulnerable as were the City’s public housing residents. Still, Brooklyn’s economy showed resilience: while employment did drop in November 2012, it bounced back strongly the next month and accelerated during the spring of 2013, reaching new highs. Sandy was a catastrophe for many in our region and significant challenges remain in the years ahead. Recently, the Federal Emergency Management Agency issued preliminary Flood Insurance Rate Maps that show a much larger number of Brooklyn residents and businesses at risk of a future storm. While a once-in-a-hundred-year risk of flooding may not appear worrisome, many within this expanded zone may be required to purchase insurance. The expanded flood zones, coupled with federal government efforts to have insurance premiums accurately reflect the risk, could create a serious affordability problem in the years ahead. The New York Fed has created maps of community-level flood risk in Brooklyn. Now I would like to turn my attention to recent developments in the national economy. National Economic Conditions From the end of the Great Recession in mid-2009 through mid-2013, real Gross Domestic Product, or the aggregate value, after adjusting for inflation, of all the goods and services produced within the borders of the U.S., grew at a rather tepid 2 1/4; percent annual rate. Then, in the second half of 2013, the pace of growth moved notably higher, reaching an annual rate of 3 1/4 percent. Nonetheless, despite this pickup in the growth pace, the average monthly gains in nonfarm payroll employment were somewhat lower in the second half of the year compared to the first half. At the same time, both total and core inflation, as measured by the Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) deflator, slowed in the second half of 2013 relative to the first half, and the overall PCE deflator index is currently running well below the FOMC’s expressed goal of 2 percent for total inflation. Combined with the still-elevated unemployment rate and the drop in the labor force participation rate, these conditions suggest that there continues to be a substantial underutilization of both labor and capital resources. This implies, in turn, that the current, highly-accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time to come. Let me elaborate on these points. While the timing and magnitude of the pickup of growth were earlier and somewhat stronger than our internal forecast, in qualitative terms the economy has performed much as we expected. First, by several measures, households’ balance sheets are in much better shape, and this has led to faster growth of consumer spending, particularly for durable goods. Key measures of household leverage have declined and are now near the lowest levels they have been in well over a decade. Reflecting rising equity and home prices and declining debt, household net worth relative to disposable income has climbed back to its average of the previous decade. Recently, banks have eased credit standards somewhat after a prolonged period of tightening. In fact, our own Consumer Credit Panel, a representative sample of the liability side of the U.S. consumer balance sheet derived from consumer credit reports, indicates that total household liabilities increased last quarter on a year-over-year basis, the first rise since mid-2008. In addition to the firming in consumer spending, growth of exports was quite strong over the second half of last year. Following a few years of lackluster performance, growth among our major trading partners improved, providing a boost to employment and output in our manufacturing sector. Moreover, the important advances made in oil drilling technology have boosted U.S. energy production, cutting oil imports and boosting petroleum product exports and this is also leading to steady improvement in our trade balance. The economy also received an important boost from quite strong inventory accumulation, which added nearly a full percentage point to the annualized second half growth rate. This inventory investment was broad-based across sectors and types of goods. In fact, all four quarters of 2013 saw a positive growth contribution from inventory accumulation, something that typically only occurs as the economy first emerges from recession. I interpret this as a sign of increased confidence about the economic outlook within the business community. Finally, federal fiscal restraint lessened over the second half of 2013. This is in sharp contrast to the first half of the year, when the payroll tax cut expired, tax rates on higher income households were raised, a series of taxes associated with the Affordable Care Act took effect, and spending was reduced due to the sequester and the gradual winding down of foreign military operations. Moreover, the sustained contraction in spending and employment by state and local governments appears to be nearing an end. I wish that I could report that the improved pace of growth of economic activity led to a corresponding increase in the rate of improvement in labor market conditions. But such was not the case. As I noted earlier, the average monthly change of nonfarm payroll employment over the second half of the year, at 184,000 per month, was somewhat below the 204,000 average monthly increase of the first half. In addition, growth of aggregate hours worked by private sector employees was somewhat slower in the second half than in the first. The source of this apparent anomaly is the fact that labor productivity, or output per hour worked, rose rapidly over the second half of the year after being essentially unchanged over the first half. This is a perfect example of the double-edged sword of productivity growth. In the long-run, sustained strong productivity growth is what boosts real living standards. However, in the short-run it can depress job creation. While overall labor market indicators for the second half of 2013 were not particularly strong, the overall trend in unemployment showed some improvement with the unemployment rate falling sharply over that period, from 7.5 percent in June to 6.7 percent in December. However, as has been the case since October of 2009 when the unemployment rate peaked at 10 percent, this decline in the unemployment rate was driven in large part by a decline in the labor force participation rate. Much has been written about the forces that are causing this decline of the labor force participation rate. Researchers have shown that the aging of the population is playing a role, as are changes in behavior. But our own analysis suggests that the cyclical weakness of demand for labor is an important contributing factor. As a result, I conclude that the decline of the unemployment rate significantly overstates the degree of improvement in the labor market. Looking forward, I believe that the underlying fundamentals of the U.S. economy have improved to the point where we can expect sustained growth above the roughly 2 1/4 percent annual pace that prevailed from mid-2009 through mid-2013. Also, the amount of fiscal drag continues to diminish. Another good piece of news is that Congress has raised the debt ceiling until March 2015. This lessens the risk that political brinkmanship in Washington could harm consumer and business confidence. That said, I expect that growth, over the near term, will slow somewhat from the pace we saw during the second half of last year. In particular, during the current quarter, unusually cold and snowy weather will undoubtedly depress activity somewhat—especially with respect to construction activity, but also to a lesser extent in areas such as retail spending. Also, as mentioned above, some special, one-time factors, such as very rapid growth of exports and sustained inventory building, are unlikely to be repeated over the first half of this year. Moreover, while there is now a much better balance between supply and demand in the housing market, that market is still adjusting to the roughly 100 basis point increase in mortgage interest rates that occurred in mid-2013. I do expect that growth will be strong enough to lead to continued improvement in labor market conditions. I must caution, however, that the outlook for the unemployment rate is unusually uncertain. If our assessment is correct, at some point an improving labor market should cause the labor force participation rate to stabilize or rise a bit as currently discouraged workers begin looking for work. Such developments could result in a more muted rate of decline of the unemployment rate despite the faster growth. Finally, as the expansion continues, I expect inflation to gradually rise toward the FOMC’s objective of 2 percent as measured by the PCE deflator. This forecast is based on the projected gradual increase in the levels of resource utilization, a firming in global demand, and the upward pull exercised by stable inflation expectations on actual inflation. Underpinning the latter assumption is the broad stability of long-term inflation expectations across different financial and survey measures, combined with ongoing moderate growth of wages and unit labor costs—all observations consistent with anchored inflation expectations. Overall, I would characterize the outlook as reasonably favorable. But I would very much prefer faster economic growth and more rapid progress towards our dual mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Hence, the continued need for monetary policy to remain highly accommodative to support the economic recovery to the fullest. Thank you for your kind attention and I will now be happy to take some questions. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
