Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Excerpts from Richard Fisher's remarks before the Gainesville Area Chamber of Commerce December 18, 2012 Gainesville, Texas Where Is America's Middle Class? In Texas Texas continued its strong pace of economic expansion and job growth in 2012. The Dallas Fed expects the state to post real gross domestic product growth of at least 3.5 percent and job growth of 3.2 percent for the year. An uninformed observer might think the jobs created in Texas are primarily low wage. But the attached job-growth data from Dallas Fed Senior Economist Pia Orrenius show that over the past decade, Texas has led the nation in job creation in all four income quartiles. We do create more low-wage jobs; we also create more high-wage jobs. And, importantly, while the growth rate for middle-income jobs over the past decade has been negative in the U.S., it has been positive in Texas. Middle-income jobs may be declining and &quot;job polarization&quot; may be occurring in the U.S., but the same is not true for Texas, where the middle-income population is expanding. Using Animal Husbandry to Illustrate Problems Proposed by the Fiscal Cliff Today's Wall Street Journal notes that, according to the highly regarded analyst Ed Yardini, through September American companies bought $274 billion more shares than they issued. Since September, hardly a trading day goes by without a company announcing a new debt offering to take advantage of today's historically low interest rates to finance further share buybacks and/or special dividend payouts. Too little of this money is being used to invest in job creation and job-creating expansion of plant and equipment in the U.S. Which raises a question about the efficacy of our accommodative monetary policy: Are our massive purchases of Treasury notes and bonds effective in meeting our mandate of conducting monetary policy so as to create maximum employment? The answer is, quantitative easing is a necessary but insufficient tool to spark job creation. Employers will not deploy the cheap and abundant capital on hand toward job creation while there is so much uncertainty surrounding final demand for the goods and services they sell. Or the uncertainty surrounding the fiscal cliff: Until they know what their taxes will be or how federal spending patterns that affect them and their customers will change (or, one might add, whether the nation will have a more rational regulatory structure), they will sit on their abundant money rather than spend it on unemployment-reducing expansion. Let me use a little animal husbandry to illustrate this point. We have a ranch in Franklin County in East Texas. We have a 2,200-pound bull there that breeds our Longhorn cows. His name, incidentally, is &quot;Too Big to Fail.&quot; Now, Too Big has plenty of liquidity at his disposal; he's fully equipped to do what we want him to do. But if we put him on the opposite side of the fence from those pretty cows, he's unable to perform. Think of the uncertainty I've just spoken of, and especially the uncertainty surrounding the resolution of the fiscal cliff, as a fence. Businesses, just like Too Big, have plenty of liquidity; they have the resources they need to do what we want them to do&mdash;in this case, invest in job creation. But as long as that fence of uncertainty is in place, they will not be able to perform. This is one of the key reasons that our political authorities must resolve how they will tax and spend going forward and do so in a way that incentivizes American businesses to breed more American jobs. See the full presentation for more data. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Ending 'Too Big to Fail': A Proposal for Reform Before It's Too Late (With Reference to Patrick Henry, Complexity and Reality) Richard Fisher's remarks before the Committee for the Republic, Washington, D.C., January 16, 2013. January 16, 2013 Washington, D.C. Speech in PDF It is an honor to be introduced by my college classmate, John Henry. John is a descendant of the iconic patriot, Patrick Henry. Most of John’s ancestors were prominent colonial Virginians and many were anti-crown. Patrick, however, was the most outspoken. Ask John why this was so, and he will answer: “Patrick was poor.” However poor he may have been, Patrick Henry was a rich orator. In one of his greatest speeches, he said: “Different men often see the same subject in different lights; and therefore, I hope that it will not be thought disrespectful to those gentlemen if, entertaining as I do, opinions of a character very opposite to theirs, I shall speak forth my sentiments freely, and without reserve. This is no time for ceremony … [it] is one of awful moment to this country.” Patrick Henry was addressing the repression of the American colonies by the British crown. Tonight, I wish to speak to a different kind of repression—the injustice of being held hostage to large financial institutions considered “too big to fail,” or TBTF for short. I submit that these institutions, as a result of their privileged status, exact an unfair tax upon the American people. Moreover, they interfere with the transmission of monetary policy and inhibit the advancement of our nation’s economic prosperity. I have spoken of this for several years, beginning with a speech on the “Pathology of Too-Big-to-Fail” in July 2009.[ 1 ] My colleague, Harvey Rosenblum—a highly respected economist and the Dallas Fed’s director of research—and I and our staff have written about it extensively. Tomorrow, we will issue a special report that further elucidates our proposal for dealing with the pathology of TBTF. It also addresses the superior relative performance of community banks during the recent crisis and how they are being victimized by excessive regulation that stems from responses to the sins of their behemoth counterparts. I urge all of you to read that report.[ 2 ] Now, Federal Reserve convention requires that I issue a disclaimer here: I speak only for the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, not for others associated with our central bank. That is usually abundantly clear. In many matters, my staff and I entertain opinions that are very different from those of many of our esteemed colleagues elsewhere in the Federal Reserve System. Today, I “speak forth my sentiments freely and without reserve” on the issue of TBTF, while meaning no disrespect to others who may hold different views. The Problem of TBTF Everyone and their sister knows that financial institutions deemed too big to fail were at the epicenter of the 2007–09 financial crisis. Previously thought of as islands of safety in a sea of risk, they became the enablers of a financial tsunami. Now that the storm has subsided, we submit that they are a key reason accommodative monetary policy and government policies have failed to adequately affect the economic recovery. Harvey Rosenblum and I first wrote about this in an article published in the Wall Street Journal in September 2009, “The Blob That Ate Monetary Policy.”[ 3 ] Put simply, sick banks don’t lend. Sick—seriously undercapitalized—megabanks stopped their lending and capital market activities during the crisis and economic recovery. They brought economic growth to a standstill and spread their sickness to the rest of the banking system. Congress thought it would address the issue of TBTF through the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Preventing TBTF from ever occurring again is in the very preamble of the act. We contend that Dodd–Frank has not done enough to corral TBTF banks and that, on balance, the act has made things worse, not better. We submit that, in the short run, parts of Dodd–Frank have exacerbated weak economic growth by increasing regulatory uncertainty in key sectors of the U.S. economy. It has clearly benefited many lawyers and created new layers of bureaucracy. Despite its good intention, it has been counterproductive, working against solving the core problem it seeks to address. Defining TBTF Let me define what we mean when we speak of TBTF. The Dallas Fed’s definition is financial firms whose owners, managers and customers believe themselves to be exempt from the processes of bankruptcy and creative destruction. Such firms capture the financial upside of their actions but largely avoid payment—bankruptcy and closure—for actions gone wrong, in violation of one of the basic tenets of market capitalism (at least as it is supposed to be practiced in the United States). Such firms enjoy subsidies relative to their non-TBTF competitors. They are thus more likely to take greater risks in search of profits, protected by the presumption that bankruptcy is a highly unlikely outcome. The phenomenon of TBTF is the result of an implicit but widely taken-for-granted government-sanctioned policy of coming to the aid of the owners, managers and creditors of a financial institution deemed to be so large, interconnected and/or complex that its failure could substantially damage the financial system. By reducing a TBTF firm’s exposure to losses from excessive risk taking, such policies undermine the discipline that market forces normally assert on management decisionmaking. The reduction of market discipline has been further eroded by implicit extensions of the federal safety net beyond commercial banks to their nonbank affiliates. Moreover, industry consolidation, fostered by subsidized growth (and during the crisis, encouraged by the federal government in the acquisitions of Merrill Lynch, Bear Stearns, Washington Mutual and Wachovia), has perpetuated and enlarged the weight of financial firms deemed TBTF. This reduces competition in lending. Dodd–Frank does not do enough to constrain the behemoth banks’ advantages. Indeed, given its complexity, it unwittingly exacerbates them. Complexity Bites Andrew Haldane, the highly respected member of the Financial Policy Committee of the Bank of England, addressed this at last summer’s Jackson Hole, Wyo., policymakers’ meeting in witty remarks titled, “The Dog and the Frisbee.”[ 4 ] Here are some choice passages from that noteworthy speech. Haldane notes that regulators’ “… efforts to catch the crisis Frisbee have continued to escalate. Casual empiricism reveals an ever-growing number of regulators … Ever-larger litters have not, however, obviously improved the watchdogs’ Frisbee-catching abilities. [After all,] no regulator had the foresight to predict the financial crisis, although some have since exhibited supernatural powers of hindsight. “So what is the secret of the watchdogs’ failure? The answer is simple. Or rather, it is complexity … complex regulation … might not just be costly and cumbersome but sub-optimal. … In financial regulation, less may be more.” One is reminded of the comment French Prime Minister Clemenceau made about President Wilson’s 14 points: “Why 14?” he asked. “God did it in 10.” Were that we only had 14 points of financial regulation to contend with today. Haldane notes that Dodd–Frank comes against a background of ever-greater escalation of financial regulation. He points out that nationally chartered banks began to file the antecedents of “call reports” after the formation of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in 1863. The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 required state-chartered member banks to do the same, having them submitted to the Federal Reserve starting in 1917. They were short forms; in 1930, Haldane noted, these reports numbered 80 entries. “In 1986, [the ‘call reports’ submitted by bank holding companies] covered 547 columns in Excel, by 1999, 1,208 columns. By 2011 … 2,271 columns.” “Fortunately,” he adds wryly, “Excel had expanded sufficiently to capture the increase.” Though this growingly complex reporting failed to prevent detection of the seeds of the debacle of 2007–09, Dodd–Frank has layered on copious amounts of new complexity. The legislation has 16 titles and runs 848 pages. It spawns litter upon litter of regulations: More than 8,800 pages of regulations have already been proposed, and the process is not yet done. In his speech, Haldane noted—conservatively, in my view—that a survey of the Federal Register showed that complying with these new rules would require 2,260,631 labor hours each year. He added: “Of course, the costs of this regulatory edifice would be considered small if they delivered even modest improvements to regulators’ ability to avert future crises.” He then goes on to argue the wick is not worth the candle. And he concludes: “Modern finance is complex, perhaps too complex. Regulation of modern finance is complex, almost certainly too complex. That configuration spells trouble. As you do not fight fire with fire, you do not fight complexity with complexity. [The situation] requires a regulatory response grounded in simplicity, not complexity. Delivering that would require an about-turn.” The Dallas Fed’s Proposal: A Reasonable ‘About-Turn’ The Dallas Fed’s proposal offers an “about-turn” and a way to mend the flaws in Dodd–Frank. It fights unnecessary complexity with simplicity where appropriate. It eliminates much of the mumbo-jumbo, ineffective, costly complexity of Dodd–Frank. Of note, it would be especially helpful to non-TBTF banks that do not pose systemic or broad risk to the economy or the financial system. Our proposal would relieve small banks of some unnecessary burdens arising from Dodd–Frank that unfairly penalize them. Our proposal would effectively level the playing field for all banking organizations in the country and provide the best protection for taxpaying citizens. In a nutshell, we recommend that TBTF financial institutions be restructured into multiple business entities. Only the resulting downsized commercial banking operations—and not shadow banking affiliates or the parent company—would benefit from the safety net of federal deposit insurance and access to the Federal Reserve’s discount window. Defining the Landscape It is important to have an accurate view of the landscape of banking today in order to understand the impact of this proposal. As of third quarter 2012, there were approximately 5,600 commercial banking organizations in the U.S. The bulk of these—roughly 5,500—were community banks with assets of less than $10 billion. These community-focused organizations accounted for 98.6 percent of all banks but only 12 percent of total industry assets. Another group numbering nearly 70 banking organizations—with assets of between $10 billion and $250 billion—accounted for 1.2 percent of banks, while controlling 19 percent of industry assets. The remaining group, the megabanks—with assets of between $250 billion and $2.3 trillion—was made up of a mere 12 institutions. These dozen behemoths accounted for roughly 0.2 percent of all banks, but they held 69 percent of industry assets. SOURCES: Call reports (Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council); FR Y-9C filers (National Information Center, Federal Reserve System). The 12 institutions that presently account for 69 percent of total industry assets are candidates to be considered TBTF because of the threat they could pose to the financial system and the economy should one or more of them get into trouble. By contrast, should any of the other 99.8 percent of banking institutions get into trouble, the matter most likely would be settled with private-sector ownership changes and minimal governmental intervention. How and why does this work for 99.8 percent but not the other 0.2 percent? To answer this question, it helps to consider the sources of regulatory and market discipline imposed on each of the three groups of banks. Let’s look at two dimensions of regulatory discipline: Potential closure of the institution and the effectiveness of supervisory pressure on bank management practices. Do the owners and managers of a banking institution operate with the belief that their institution is subject to a bankruptcy process that works reasonably quickly to transfer ownership and control to another banking entity or entities? Is there a group of interested and involved shareholders that can exert a restraining force on franchise-threatening risk taking by the bank’s top management team? Can management be replaced and ownership value wiped out? Is the firm controlled de facto by its owners, or instead effectively management-controlled?[ 5 ] In addition, we ask: To what extent do uninsured creditors of the banking entity impose risk-management discipline on management? This analytical framework is summarized in the following slide: SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. Looking across line 1, it is clear that community banks are subject to considerable regulatory and shareholder discipline. They can and do fail. In the last few years, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. (FDIC) has built a reputation for regulators carrying out Joseph Schumpeter’s concept of “creative destruction” by taking over small banks on a Friday evening and reopening them on Monday morning under new ownership. “In on Friday, out by Monday” is the mantra of this process. Knowing the power of banking supervisors to close the institution, owners and managers of community banks heed supervisory suggestions to limit risk. Community banks often have a few significant shareholders who have a considerable portion of their wealth tied to the fate of the bank. Consequently, they exert substantial control over the behavior of management because risk and potential closure matter to them. Since community banks derive the bulk of their funding from federally insured deposits, they are simple rather than complex in their capital structure and rarely have uninsured and unsecured creditors. “Market discipline” over management practices is primarily exerted through shareholders. Of the three groups, the 70 regional and moderate-sized banking organizations depicted in line 2 are subject to a broader range of market discipline. Like community banks, these institutions are not exempt from the bankruptcy process; they can and do fail. But given their size, complexity and generally larger geographic footprint, the failure resolution and ownership transfer processes cannot always be accomplished over a weekend. In practice, owners and managers of mid-sized institutions are nonetheless aware of the downside consequences of the risks taken by the institution. Uninsured depositors and unsecured creditors are also aware of their unprotected status in the event the institution experiences financial difficulties. Mid-sized banking institutions receive a good dose of external discipline from both supervisors and market-based signals. TBTF megabanks, depicted in line 3, receive far too little regulatory and market discipline. This is unfortunate because their failure, if it were allowed, could disrupt financial markets and the economy. For all intents and purposes, we believe that TBTF banks have not been allowed to fail outright.[ 6 ] Knowing this, the management of TBTF banks can, to a large extent, choose to resist the advice and guidance of their bank supervisors’ efforts to impose regulatory discipline. And for TBTF banks, the forces of market discipline from shareholders and unsecured creditors are limited. Let’s first consider discipline from shareholders. Having millions of stockholders has diluted shareholders’ ability to prevent the management of TBTF banks from pursuing corporate strategies that are profitable for management, though not necessarily for shareholders. As we learned during the crisis, adverse information on poor financial performance often is available too late for shareholder reaction or credit default swap (CDS) spreads to have any impact on management behavior. For example, during the financial crisis, shares in two of the largest bank holding companies (BHCs) declined more than 95 percent from their prior peak prices and their CDS spreads went haywire.[ 7 ] The ratings agencies eventually reacted, in keeping with their tendency to be reactive rather than proactive. But the damage from excessive risk taking had already been done. And after the crisis? Judging from the behavior of many of the largest BHCs, with limited exception, efforts by shareholders of these institutions to meaningfully influence management compensation practices have been slow in coming. So much for shareholder discipline as a check on TBTF banks. Unfortunately, TBTF banks also do not face much external discipline from unsecured creditors. An important facet of TBTF is that the funding sources for megabanks extend far beyond insured deposits, as referenced by my mention of CDS spreads. The largest banks, not just the TBTF banks, fund themselves with a wide range of liabilities. These include large, negotiable CDs, which often exceed the FDIC insurance limit; federal funds purchased from other banks, all of which are uninsured, and subordinated notes and bonds, generally unsecured. It is not unusual for such uninsured/unsecured liabilities to account for well over half the liabilities of TBTF institutions. If market discipline were to be imposed on TBTF institutions, one would expect it to come from uninsured/unsecured depositors, creditors and debt holders. But TBTF status exerts perverse market discipline on the risk-taking activities of these banks. Unsecured creditors recognize the implicit government guarantee of TBTF banks’ liabilities. As a result, unsecured depositors and creditors offer their funds at a lower cost to TBTF banks than to mid-sized and regional banks that face the risk of failure. This TBTF subsidy is quite large and has risen following the financial crisis. Recent estimates by the Bank for International Settlements, for example, suggest that the implicit government guarantee provides the largest U.S. BHCs with an average credit rating uplift of more than two notches, thereby lowering average funding costs a full percentage point relative to their smaller competitors.[ 8 ] Our aforementioned friend from the Bank of England, Andrew Haldane, estimates the current implicit TBTF global subsidy to be roughly $300 billion per year for the 29 global institutions identified by the Financial Stability Board (2011) as “systemically important.”[ 9 ] To put that $300 billion estimated annual subsidy in perspective, all the U.S. BHCs summed together reported 2011 earnings of $108 billion. Add to that the burdens stemming from the complexity of TBTF banks. Here is the basic organization diagram for a typical complex financial holding company: SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. To simplify a complex issue, one might consider all the operations other than the commercial banking operation as shadow banking affiliates , including any special investment vehicles—or SIVs—of the commercial bank [ 10 ]. Now, consider this table. It gives you a sense of the size and scope of some of the five largest BHCs, noting their nondeposit liabilities in billions of dollars and their number of total subsidiaries and countries of operation (according to the Financial Stability Oversight Council): SOURCES: "Which Banks Could Face Cap on Size?" by Victoria McGrane, Wall Street Journal , Oct. 11, 2012; Financial Stability Oversight Council. For perspective, consider the sad case of Lehman Brothers. More than four years later, the Lehman bankruptcy is still not completely resolved. As of its 10-K regulatory filing in 2007, Lehman operated a mere 209 subsidiaries across only 21 countries and had total liabilities of $619 billion. By these metrics, Lehman was a small player compared with any of the Big Five. If Lehman Brothers was too big for a private-sector solution while still a going concern, what can we infer about the Big Five in the table? Correcting for the Drawbacks of Dodd–Frank Dodd–Frank addresses this concern. Under the Orderly Liquidation Authority provisions of Dodd–Frank, a systemically important financial institution would receive debtor-in-possession financing from the U.S. Treasury over the period its operations needed to be stabilized. This is quasi-nationalization, just in a new, and untested, format. In Dallas, we consider government ownership of our financial institutions, even on a “temporary” basis, to be a clear distortion of our capitalist principles. Of course, an alternative would be to have another systemically important financial institution acquire the failing institution. We have been down that road already. All it does is compound the problem, expanding the risk posed by the even larger surviving behemoth organizations. In addition, perpetuating the practice of arranging shotgun marriages between giants at taxpayer expense worsens the funding disadvantage faced by the 99.8 percent remaining—small and regional banks. Merging large institutions is a form of discrimination that favors the unwieldy and dangerous TBTF banks over more focused, fit and disciplined banks. The approach of the Dallas Fed neither expands the reach of government nor further handicaps the 99.8 percent of community and regional banks. Nor does it fight complexity with complexity. It calls for reshaping TBTF banking institutions into smaller, less-complex institutions that are: economically viable; profitable; competitively able to attract financial capital and talent; and of a size, complexity and scope that allows both regulatory and market discipline to restrain excessive risk taking. Our proposal is simple and easy to understand. It can be accomplished with minimal statutory modification and implemented with as little government intervention as possible. It calls first for rolling back the federal safety net to apply only to basic, traditional commercial banking. Second, it calls for clarifying, through simple, understandable disclosures, that the federal safety net applies only to the commercial bank and its customers and never ever to the customers of any other affiliated subsidiary or the holding company. The shadow banking activities of financial institutions must not receive taxpayer support. We recognize that undoing customer inertia and management habits at TBTF banking institutions may take many years. During such a period, TBTF banks could possibly sow the seeds for another financial crisis. For these reasons, additional action may be necessary. The TBTF BHCs may need to be downsized and restructured so that the safety-net-supported commercial banking part of the holding company can be effectively disciplined by regulators and market forces. And there will likely have to be additional restrictions (or possibly prohibitions) on the ability to move assets or liabilities from a shadow banking affiliate to a banking affiliate within the holding company.[ 11 ] To illustrate how the first two points in our plan would work, I come back to the hypothetical structure of a complex financial holding company. Recall that this type of holding company has a commercial bank subsidiary and several subsidiaries that are not traditional commercial banks: insurance, securities underwriting and brokerage, finance company and others, many with a vast geographic reach. Where the Government Safety Net Would Begin and End Under our proposal, only the commercial bank would have access to deposit insurance provided by the FDIC and discount window loans provided by the Federal Reserve. These two features of the safety net would explicitly, by statute, become unavailable to any shadow banking affiliate, special investment vehicle of the commercial bank or any obligations of the parent holding company. This is largely the current case—but in theory, not in practice. And consistent enforcement is viewed as unlikely. SOURCE: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. Reinforced by a New Covenant To reinforce the statute and its credibility, every customer, creditor and counterparty of every shadow banking affiliate and of the senior holding company would be required to agree to and sign a new covenant, a simple disclosure statement that acknowledges their unprotected status. A sample disclosure need be no more complex than this: This two-part step should begin to remove the implicit TBTF subsidy provided to BHCs and their shadow banking operations. Entities other than commercial banks have inappropriately benefited from an implicit safety net. Our proposal promotes competition in light of market and regulatory discipline, replacing the status quo of subsidized and perverse incentives to take excessive risk. As indicated earlier, some government intervention may be necessary to accelerate the imposition of effective market discipline. We believe that market forces should be relied upon as much as practicable. However, entrenched oligopoly forces, in combination with customer inertia, will likely only be overcome through government-sanctioned reorganization and restructuring of the TBTF BHCs. A subsidy once given is nearly impossible to take away. Thus, it appears we may need a push, using as little government intervention as possible to realign incentives, reestablish a competitive landscape and level the playing field. Why Protect the 0.2 Percent? My team at the Dallas Fed and I are confident this simple treatment to the complex problem and risks posed by TBTF institutions would be the most effective treatment. Think about it this way: At present, 99.8 percent of the banking organizations in America are subject to sufficient regulatory or shareholder/market discipline to contain the risk of misbehavior that could threaten the stability of the financial system. Zero-point-two percent are not. Their very existence threatens both economic and financial stability. Furthermore, to contain that risk, regulators and many small banks are tied up in regulatory and legal knots at an enormous direct cost to them and a large indirect cost to our economy. Zero-point-two percent. If the administration and the Congress could agree as recently as two weeks ago on legislation that affects 1 percent of taxpayers, surely it can process a solution that affects 0.2 percent of the nation’s banks and is less complex and far more effective than Dodd–Frank. Making a Time of ‘Awful Moment’ a Time of Promise The time has come to change the decisionmaking paradigm. There should be more than the present two solutions: bailout or the end-of-the-economic-world-as-we-have-known-it. Both choices are unacceptable. The next financial crisis could cost more than two years of economic output, borne by millions of U.S. taxpayers. That horrendous cost must be weighed against the supposed benefits of maintaining the TBTF status quo. To us, the remedy is obvious: end TBTF now. End TBTF by reintroducing market forces instead of complex rules, and in so doing, level the playing field for all banking institutions. I return to Patrick Henry. He noted that “it is natural to man to indulge in the illusions of hope. We are apt to shut our eyes against a painful truth, and listen to the song of that siren till she transforms us.” We labor under the siren song of Dodd–Frank and the recent run-up in the pricing of TBTF bank stocks and credit, indulging in the illusion of hope that this complex legislation will end too big to fail and right the banking system. We shut our eyes to the painful truth that TBTF represents an ongoing danger not just to financial stability, but also to fair competition. The Dallas Fed offers a modest but, we believe, far more effective fix to Dodd–Frank. This plan is not without its costs. But it is less costly than all the alternatives put forward and it seriously reduces the likelihood of another horrendous and costly financial crisis. This need not be a time of “awful moment.” It should instead be a time of promise. Treating the pathology of TBTF now would be a big step toward a more stable and prosperous economic system, one that relies on fundamental principles of capitalism rather than regulatory complexity and increasing government intervention. Thank you. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. See “Two Areas of Present Concern: the Economic Outlook and the Pathology of Too-Big-to-Fail (With Reference to Errol Flynn, Johnny Mercer, Gary Stern and Voltaire),” speech by Richard W. Fisher, July 23, 2009, and “Paradise Lost: Addressing ‘Too Big to Fail’ (With Reference to John Milton and Irving Kristol), speech by Richard W. Fisher, Nov. 19, 2009. See “Financial Stability: Traditional Banks Pave the Way,” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Special Report, January 2013, www.dallasfed.org (note: the report will be available online at 9 a.m. Eastern time on Jan. 17). See “ The Blob That Ate Monetary Policy ,” by Richard W. Fisher and Harvey Rosenblum, Wall Street Journal , Sept. 27, 2009. See “ The Dog and the Frisbee ,” by Andrew G. Haldane and Vasileios Madouros, Bank of England, paper presented at “The Changing Policy Landscape” symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., Aug. 30–Sept. 1, 2012. For a distinction between owner-controlled and management-controlled firms, see The Modern Corporation and Private Property , by Adolf A. Berle and Gardiner C. Means, New York: Macmillan, 1932. Several of the nation’s largest banking companies received massive and extraordinary government assistance in 2008–09 but were never listed as failures in the FDIC database nor included on the list of “problem banks.” Discipline without teeth probably leads the management of such institutions to “turn a deaf ear” to their supervisors. Rod Stewart said it well in his song “Young Turks”: “But there ain’t no point in talking, when there’s nobody listening.” See “ Regulatory and Monetary Policies Meet ‘Too Big to Fail’ ,” by Harvey Rosenblum, Jessica J. Renier and Richard Alm, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Letter , vol. 5, no. 3, 2010, Chart 1, p. 6. More specifically, Citigroup and BankAmerica Corp. experienced peak-to-trough declines in their common stock prices of over 96 percent. Bank for International Settlements 2011/2012 Annual Report, June 24, 2012, pp. 75–6. See “On Being the Right Size,” speech by Andrew Haldane, Bank of England, at the 2012 Beesley Lectures, Institute of Economic Affairs’ 22nd Annual Series, London, Oct. 25, 2012. For a review of shadow banking, see “ Understanding the Risks Inherent in Shadow Banking: A Primer and Practical Lessons Learned ,” by David Luttrell, Harvey Rosenblum and Jackson Thies, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Staff Papers, no. 18, 2012. As an example, Sen. David Vitter and Sen. Sherrod Brown cite in their letter to the Government Accountability Office on Jan. 1, 2013, that “Bank of America moved $15 trillion in derivatives contracts from its broker-dealer, Merrill Lynch, to its insured depository institution affiliate in response to a credit downgrade. ... This move reportedly saved the bank $3.3 billion in additional collateral payments.” Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Comments on Monetary Policy and 'Too Big to Fail' (With a Tribute to Irving Kristol) February 27, 2013 New York, N.Y. Thank you, Professor [Merit] Janow. The title of this lectureship far overstates my standing and capacity—I am unworthy of being considered “distinguished” at anything other than having helped raise four children whose talents far surpass my own. But I thank you for this momentarily hyperbolic honor.[ 1 ] As Merit mentioned, we go back a long way. Yet my involvement with Columbia University and Morningside Heights goes back much further. After I graduated from Harvard in 1971, I needed money to pay for Oxford, so I spent most of a year working as a busboy and bartender and doing a number of odd jobs in Washington, D.C.—testimony to the immediate benefits of a Harvard degree in economics! Starved for intellectual sustenance as I waited to return to academia, I found comfort in reading about public policy, especially in the essays of what was then a new journal, The Public Interest . The Public Interest was the brainchild of Irving Kristol and Daniel Bell (subsequently joined by Nathan Glazer)—originally young Trotskyites who had spent their days as students at the City College of New York (CCNY), the “Harvard of the Proletariat”—“trying to understand how the socialist ideal of political and economic justice had ended in Joseph Stalin’s murderous tyranny.”[ 2 ] They later migrated to what we would now consider prototypical Roosevelt-cum-Lyndon Johnson liberalism, and then evolved into “neoconservatives.” These three men were becoming iconic public intellectuals, and The Public Interest was something of a personal journal of lessons they learned during their ideological transformation. Kristol and Bell ran a series of evening seminar/workshops here on this campus and at CCNY. At every opportunity, I would take an afternoon off, jump on a bus to New York, attend their evening talks, find some kindly student to let me sleep in a dorm room and return by bus to Washington the next morning. All this is by way of saying that I have been coming to Columbia for over 40 years, almost as many years as the number of consecutive games lost in the historical losing streak of your illustrious football team. I was especially captivated by Irving Kristol. His book, Two Cheers for Capitalism , praised capitalism because, one, “it works, in a quite simple, material sense;” and two, it is “congenial to a large measure of personal liberty.”[ 3 ] Kristol famously described himself as “a liberal who had been mugged by reality.” In writing a loving homage to Kristol when he died, David Brooks of the New York Times summarized the basis for Kristol’s epiphany in more colorful language. “The elemental Jewish commandment” in the working-class neighborhood where Kristol grew up was: “Don’t be a schmuck. Don’t fall for fantastical notions that have nothing to do with the way people really are.”[ 4 ] As a member of the team of earnest men and women who form the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), I consider myself a central banker who has been mugged by the reality of having been an investor and market operator. I am constantly wary of fantastical notions that seem cogent in economic or monetary theory but run counter to what I learned in the marketplace or run the risk of departing from practice in the real economy—of possibly having nothing to do with the way people and businesses, those who actually operate our economy, really are. Today, I am going to discuss two such risks as I see them: the current program of quantitative easing and the effect of the Dodd–Frank legislation aimed at preventing “too big to fail.” I’ll do this in short order and as provocatively as possible so as to give professors Calomiris and Svejnar plenty of ammo to use during the inquisition that will follow my remarks. Monetary Policy and Quantitative Easing I have argued against what I have called “Buzz Lightyear” monetary policy—pledging to hold the federal funds rate at zero seemingly to infinity and beyond, while purchasing longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month, reinvesting principal payments on all agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and purchasing MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month.[ 5 ] Indeed, other than our initial program to underpin a recovery in the housing market with our initial tranche of purchases of MBS, I have opposed all other large-scale asset purchases or quantitative easing (QE) programs. Why have I been so obstinate in my opposition to this well-intended program? I fully understand its theoretical underpinnings. But I question its efficacy. Confined as the Fed is at the “zero bound,” the only means of adding monetary fuel to the economy has been to purchase Treasury and MBS securities. When we buy something, we pay for it, putting money into the economy. That money—backed by an assurance that the FOMC will hold interest rates at zero and continue large-scale asset purchases for a prolonged period—should, theoretically, be put to use: a) by banks’ lending to consumers and to businesses that will expand employment, or b) by investors who, rediscounting valuations in the fixed-income and equity markets, will drive those markets higher in price, creating a “wealth effect.” This wealth effect should lead to further consumption as well as greater employment by businesses whose balance sheets have been reconfigured and enriched both by the cheapest leverage in American history and by booming prices for their stock. All these actions are in keeping with the dual mandate that the Federal Reserve was given by the Congress of the United States. It calls for us to operate independently both to maintain price stability and conduct policy in a way that engenders full employment. Given that inflation and, importantly, inflationary expectations are presently “contained,” it would seem theoretically compelling to pursue the policy that we have undertaken. But a not-so-funny thing has happened on the way to the reality forum. While bankers and other sources of credit have slowly but consistently liberalized their lending practices, borrowers have not been especially keen to put cheap and super-abundant credit to use in expanding payrolls to the degree the FOMC desires. To be sure, we have, as hoped, seen a reinvigorated housing market. Indeed, FOMC records will show that based on the superb work done by two housing-market experts at the Dallas Fed—John Duca and Anthony Murphy, working with John Muellbauer at Oxford—and thanks to our field soundings with housing and housing-related business leaders, the Dallas Fed was way ahead of others at the FOMC table both in warning of the housing market debacle and then recognizing the housing recovery.[ 6 ] The fact that the housing-market gears have now begun to mesh is why I believe we are running the risk of overkill by continuing our mortgage-backed securities purchase program at the current pace and would suggest tapering off those purchases. As to the more broadly impactful Treasury purchases, occurring as they have simultaneously with a loss of confidence in the euro bond markets—I like to say that, relatively speaking, the U.S. economy has been the “best-looking horse in the glue factory”—they have indeed led to a massive bond and stock market rally. For the ninth time in U.S. history, we have experienced a doubling of the market indexes; corporate borrowing rates are at the lowest levels on record, including those for CCC-rated credits that are just north of default. That’s the good news. Some sharp market operators have done very well. For private-equity firms, for example, hyper-accommodative monetary policy has offered a chance to go back to the glories of payment-in-kind and other financial techniques that enrich financiers but may not create employment. For the largest banks and financial institutions, policy has helped dig them out of the holes in which they found themselves (including the hole of executive compensation). And for the wealthiest investors, even unto the revered Oracle of Omaha, there has been the windfall of super-abundant credit that, after adjusting for tax deductions on interest and a modicum of inflation, is practically free. Ordinary savers and retirees have benefited from the turnaround in the all-important housing sector, but with the remainder of their savings, they have been waylaid on the sidelines of the zero bound. In addition, the 5,500 or so smaller banks that are the backbone of our communities have seen their interest margins squeezed severely. The wealth effect, in other words, has been unbalanced. Main Street does not seem to have been impacted to the same degree as Wall Street. To be sure, as mentioned, businesses have been able to improve their balance sheets and are enjoying higher stock market valuations of their businesses. However, thus far, businesses have pursued payroll-expanding job creation with less enthusiasm than had been hoped for. Unemployment remains annoyingly high. There are some pockets of exception like Texas, which now operates at employment levels 3.1 percent above its prerecession peak and, over the last decade, has created jobs across the entire income spectrum. Nationwide, meanwhile, job creation has been weak and in the important middle-income quartiles has been shrinking. Employers large and small, privately owned or publicly traded, will tell you that despite access to cheap and abundant capital, they are hesitant to make long-term commitments, including hiring significant numbers of permanent workers. They cite uncertain growth prospects for the goods and services they sell at home, where consumption is retarded by slow growth in employment and, lately, by the increase in payroll taxes. And abroad, these employers point to the dampened consumption stemming from the economic debacle in Europe and its knock-on effects on China and the export-led emerging economies. They are uncertain about fiscal policy, not knowing what their taxes will be and what will happen to all-important federal spending that directly impacts them or their customers. They are uncertain as to the ultimate effect on their cost structures of the seemingly endless expansion of health care and other mandates and regulations, however meritorious their intention. And, for some, there is a deeply imbedded worry that the Fed’s contortion of the yield curve and cost of money cannot last forever, or, if it lasts too long, will eventually result in financial bubbles and/or uncontrollable inflation, adding another uncertainty to the plethora of uncertain factors that already plague them. As I walked down memory lane in preparation for this lecture today, I thought of my days at business school in the mid-1970s. Everything we learned in business school was oriented toward operating and growing companies under the assumption of constrained, conservative debt markets and a fundamentals-driven equity market. Today, the opposite obtains: Credit is super-abundant and stock market behavior is conditioned not so much by the fundamental performance of its underlying companies but by increasing doses of monetary Ritalin.[ 7 ] Against this backdrop, I am not surprised by the reaction of businesses. Operating in a highly uncertain environment, it is eminently sensible for them to defensively use their newly strengthened balance sheets to buy back shares and pay out dividends or employ them offensively in ways—say, in making acquisitions—that often lead to employee rationalization, not payroll expansion for U.S. workers. This is how businesses really think; this is the way people really are. The bottom line is that rather than achieve the intended theoretical effect, I believe the policy of super-abundant money at costs deviating substantially from normal equilibrium levels may ultimately prove to be counterproductive. Or it may restrain the benefits that theory might suggest. If this is so, should we continue with the current program of QE? I have argued we should not, that we are pushing on a string. But let me qualify this. I was, indeed, against the escalating rounds of QE, questioning their efficacy. But now that we have them in place, and the fixed-income and stock markets are hooked on the monetary Ritalin that we have dispensed in ever-larger doses, it would, in my opinion, do great harm to force a sudden withdrawal. So, I have argued that it would be best to taper the dose of QE so that markets can adjust gradually to the eventual removal of this treatment and return to pricing securities on the basis of fundamentals. Am I right or wrong? I pose this question to professors Calomiris and Svejnar for the discussion that will follow. Let me add one more thought for the good professors to contemplate before moving on to the topic of too big to fail (TBTF). This is, admittedly, out of left (or perhaps in the spirit of Irving Kristol, right) field: Having posited that, thus far, the wealth-effect phenomenon has been concentrated in both the housing sector—a Main Street benefit, and a powerful one—and the hands of the savviest operators—those most able to exploit free and abundant money, primarily a smaller base consisting of the big banks and the investment community on Wall Street—and given that private sector job creators are in a defensive crouch and the federal government is likely to remain in cost-containment mode, might there be a way for others charged with fiduciary responsibility to the broader public to capitalize on the current moment? For example, Texas, with its highly rated government credit, has navigated its 26 million people through the Great Recession with strong fiscal fundamentals and a dynamic economy that has persistently outperformed the United States and, indeed, all other large states for at least the past two decades.[ 8 ] Might it make sense for Texas to issue ultra-long bonds at currently prevailing ultra-low rates to finance the state’s longer-term infrastructure needs? I have in mind a Texas Century Bond. The public benefit would come from saving on interest payments that will inevitably rise over time from their unprecedented low levels—certainly sometime in the next 100 years—meanwhile financing highways, water projects, universities and the like that will be needed to continue serving the state’s growing population and expanding economy. If ever there were a window for such an issuance, it surely would be now. Domestic entities seeking to match longer-term liabilities and commitments as well as sovereign investors like the Norwegians are keen on finding “risk free” dollar-denominated assets of long duration. Mexico and private universities such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have placed century bonds. Because the U.S. government cannot capitalize on such demand and is stuck in a rut of issuing short-dated debt so as not to add to its deficits, could or should other dollar-based “sovereign” issuers like the best credit-rated states, especially a large one like Texas, do so? I’ll just throw that out for your contemplation. Too Big to Fail Now, on to TBTF. Everyone and their sister knows that financial institutions deemed TBTF were at the epicenter of the 2007–09 financial crisis. Previously thought of as islands of safety in a sea of risk, they became the enablers of a financial tsunami. Now that the storm has subsided, my colleagues at the Dallas Fed and I submit that they are another key reason accommodative monetary policy and government policies have failed to adequately spur the economic recovery. Our research director, Harvey Rosenblum, and I first wrote about this in an article published in the Wall Street Journal in September 2009, titled “The Blob That Ate Monetary Policy.”[ 9 ] Put simply, sick banks don’t lend. Sick—seriously undercapitalized—megabanks severely constricted their usual lending and capital-market activities during the crisis and economic recovery. They brought economic growth to a standstill and spread their sickness to the rest of the banking system. Congress thought it would address the issue of TBTF through the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Preventing TBTF from ever occurring again is in the very preamble of the act. We contend that Dodd–Frank has not done enough to corral TBTF banks and that, on balance, the act has made things worse, not better. We submit that, in the short run, parts of Dodd–Frank have exacerbated the weakness in economic growth by increasing regulatory uncertainty in key sectors of the U.S. economy. Despite its good intention, it has been counterproductive, working against solving the core problems it seeks to address. Let me define what we mean when we speak of TBTF. The Dallas Fed’s definition is financial firms whose owners, managers, creditors, shareholders and customers believe them to be exempt from the processes of bankruptcy and creative destruction. Such firms capture the financial upside of their actions but largely avoid payment—bankruptcy and closure—for actions gone wrong, in violation of one of the basic tenets of market capitalism (at least as it is supposed to be practiced in the United States). Such firms enjoy implicit subsidies relative to their non-TBTF competitors. They are thus more likely to take greater risks in search of profits, protected by the presumption that bankruptcy is a highly unlikely outcome. The phenomenon of TBTF is the result of an implicit but widely taken-for-granted government-sanctioned policy of coming to the aid of a financial institution deemed to be so large, interconnected and/or complex that its failure could substantially damage the financial system. By reducing a TBTF firm’s exposure to losses from excessive risk taking, such policies undermine the discipline that market forces normally assert on management decisionmaking. The reduction of market discipline has been further eroded by implicit extensions of the federal safety net beyond commercial banks to their nonbank affiliates. Moreover, industry consolidation, fostered by subsidized growth (and during the crisis, encouraged by the federal government in the acquisitions of Merrill Lynch, Bear Stearns, Washington Mutual and Wachovia), has perpetuated and enlarged the weight of financial firms deemed TBTF. This reduces competition. Dodd–Frank does not do enough to constrain the behemoth banks’ advantages. Indeed, given the economies of scale in handling regulation, Dodd–Frank’s excessive complexity works to undermine the competitiveness of smaller banks, thereby offsetting some of the act’s other aspects that curtail TBTF banks’ dominance. It unwittingly exacerbates the problem it set out to solve. Andrew Haldane, the highly respected member of the Financial Policy Committee of the Bank of England, addressed this at last summer’s Jackson Hole, Wyo., policymakers’ meeting in witty remarks titled, “The Dog and the Frisbee.”[ 10 ] I highly recommend this speech to you. Haldane noted that Dodd–Frank comes against a backdrop of ever-greater escalation of financial regulation. He pointed out that nationally chartered banks began to file the antecedents of “call reports” after the formation of the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in 1863. The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 required state-chartered member banks to do the same, having them submitted to the Federal Reserve starting in 1917. They were short forms; in 1930, Haldane noted, these reports numbered 80 entries. “In 1986, [the ‘call reports’ submitted by bank holding companies] covered 547 columns in Excel; by 1999, 1,208 columns. By 2011 … 2,271 columns.” “Fortunately,” he added wryly, “Excel had expanded sufficiently to capture the increase.” Though this increasingly complex reporting failed to prevent detection of the seeds of the debacle of 2007–09, Dodd–Frank has layered on copious amounts of new complexity. The legislation has 16 titles and runs 848 pages. It spawns litter upon litter of regulations: More than 8,800 pages of regulations have already been proposed, and the process is not yet done. In his speech, Haldane noted—conservatively, in my view—that a survey of the Federal Register showed that complying with these new rules would require 2,260,631 labor hours each year. He added: “Of course, the costs of this regulatory edifice would be considered small if they delivered even modest improvements to regulators’ ability to avert future crises.” He went on to argue the wick is not worth the candle, before concluding: “Modern finance is complex, perhaps too complex. Regulation of modern finance is complex, almost certainly too complex. That configuration spells trouble. As you do not fight fire with fire, you do not fight complexity with complexity. [The situation] requires a regulatory response grounded in simplicity, not complexity.” This case for more effectively treating TBTF is especially compelling given the subsidy these institutions now enjoy by virtue of their protected status. This TBTF subsidy is quite large and has risen after the financial crisis. Recent estimates by the Bank for International Settlements, for example, suggest that the implicit government guarantee provides the largest U.S. bank holding companies with an average credit rating uplift of more than two notches, thereby lowering average funding costs a full percentage point relative to smaller competitors.[ 11 ] Our aforementioned friend, Andy Haldane, estimates the implicit TBTF global subsidy to be roughly $300 billion per year for the 29 global institutions identified by the Financial Stability Board (2011) as “systemically important.”[ 12 ] To put that $300 billion estimated annual subsidy in perspective, all the U.S. bank holding companies summed together reported 2011 earnings of $108 billion. Harvey Rosenblum and I, and our team at the Dallas Fed, have proposed a simple amendment to Dodd–Frank to remedy the TBTF pathology. We would eliminate the mumbo-jumbo, ineffective and costly complexity of the law; relieve the regulatory imposition it imposes on non-TBTF banks that do not pose systemic or broad risk to the economy or financial system; and eliminate the unfair subsidy the TBTF holding companies enjoy at the expense of their smaller competitors. Our proposal would effectively level the playing field for all banking organizations and provide better protection for taxpaying citizens. I laid our proposal out in a speech in Washington, D.C., on Jan. 16. You might access it and study its details.[ 13 ] In a nutshell, we recommend that within a complex bank holding company, only the commercial banking operations that intermediate short-term deposits into longer-term loans would benefit from federal deposit insurance and access to the Federal Reserve’s discount window. All other operations of a complex bank holding company and all “shadow banking” affiliates of that company would not have this protection or access to the Fed’s window. To reinforce the understanding that taxpayers will not come to the aid of the risks taken by those entities, every customer, creditor and counterparty of every shadow-banking affiliate and of the senior holding company would be required to sign a new covenant, a simple disclosure that need be no more complex than this: “Conducting business with this affiliate of XYZ bank holding company carries NO federal deposit insurance or other government protection or guarantees. The counterparty herein fully understands that in conducting business with XYZ’s banking affiliate, it has NO federal government protection or guarantees, and its investment is totally at risk.” Unfortunately, established customer relationships are slow to change. To accelerate the transition to a more competitive financial system, our proposal has a third element to help level the playing field. Specifically, we recommend that the largest financial institutions be restructured so that every one of their corporate entities is subject to a speedy bankruptcy process, and in the case of banking entities, that each be of a size that is “too small to save.” This would underscore to customers and creditors that a credible regime shift has taken place, and the reign of TBTF policies is over. To circle back to Irving Kristol, I believe this suggested remedy to the pathology of TBTF “works, in a quite simple, material sense” and is “congenial to a large measure of personal liberty.” It most certainly dispenses with fantastical notions of the way people really are. I have thrown a lot at you in this long speech. Thank you for tolerating me. Now, in the best tradition of central bankers, I will do my utmost to avoid answering any questions you and the good professors present may ask. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs, Spring 2013 Distinguished Speaker in International Finance and Economic Policy. “About the film: Finding My Way to the Alcoves (1999),” by director Joseph Dorman, PBS Online. Two Cheers for Capitalism , by Irving Kristol (New York: Basic Books 1978). “Three Cheers for Irving,” by David Brooks, New York Times , Sept. 22, 2009, p. A31. See “The State of the West (With Reference to George Shultz, Eisenhower, Buzz Lightyear, George Strait, the San Francisco Fed and Adam and Eve),” speech by Richard W. Fisher, Nov. 15, 2012. See, for instance, “When Will the U.S. Housing Market Stabilize?” by John V. Duca, David Luttrell and Anthony Murphy, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Letter , vol. 6, no. 8, 2011. Ritalin is a psychoactive drug classified with cocaine and morphine as highly addictive. It is widely used to treat children and is considered by many to be overprescribed. See chart below: See “The Blob That Ate Monetary Policy,” by Richard W. Fisher and Harvey Rosenblum, Wall Street Journal , Sept. 27, 2009. See “The Dog and the Frisbee,” by Andrew G. Haldane and Vasileios Madouros, Bank of England, paper presented at “The Changing Policy Landscape” symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., Aug. 30-Sept. 1, 2012. Bank for International Settlements 2011/2012 Annual Report, June 24, 2012, pp. 75–6. See “On Being the Right Size,” speech by Andrew Haldane, Bank of England, at the 2012 Beesley Lectures, Institute of Economic Affairs’ 22nd Annual Series, London, Oct. 25, 2012. See “ Ending ‘Too Big to Fail’: A Proposal for Reform Before It’s Too Late (With Reference to Patrick Henry, Complexity and Reality), ” speech by Richard W. Fisher, Jan. 16, 2013. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.
