The National Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Presented to the Greater Johnstown Cambria County Chamber of Commerce Johnstown, PA October 8, 2013 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 The National Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Greater Johnstown Cambria County Chamber of Commerce October 8, 2013 Johnstown, PA Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights: • President Charles Plosser provides his economic outlook and notes that since there is little evidence that additional asset purchases will improve the economic recovery, the time has come for an expeditious phaseout of the purchase program. • He indicates that the FOMC missed an excellent opportunity to begin this tapering process in September, which illustrates just how difficult it will be to initiate any steps toward normalization of monetary policy. • Delaying the decision to taper the asset purchase program without clear and significant departures from prior guidelines suggested the FOMC was changing the goalposts and deviating from June’s forward guidance. Because the FOMC failed to adjust the pace of asset purchases at that meeting, he believes the FOMC undermines the credibility of its own forward guidance. • President Plosser expects growth of around 3 percent in 2014. He expects unemployment rates near 7 percent by the end of this year or early next year and close to 6.25 percent by the end of 2014. Inflation expectations will be relatively stable, and inflation will move up toward the FOMC target of 2 percent over the next year. • President Plosser notes that while some of the decline in labor force participation has been a result of transitory factors, the labor markets are also adjusting to longer-term structural adjustments driven by demographics and technological advancements. Monetary policy would be ineffective in counteracting such structural trends – and it should not be used to try to do so. Introduction I want to thank the Greater Johnstown Cambria County Chamber of Commerce and Johnstown Area Regional Industries (JARI) for hosting today’s luncheon. I especially want to thank Glenn Wilson, president and CEO of AmeriServ Financial, Inc., and Bill Polacek, president and CEO of JWF Industries, who both serve on advisory councils for 2 the Philadelphia Fed. Their valuable contributions to the councils help to ensure that your local business conditions factor into the formulation of monetary policy. Later this year, the Federal Reserve System will begin its centennial year, marking 100 years from the signing of the Federal Reserve Act on December 23, 1913, by President Woodrow Wilson. The centennial period will run through the 100th anniversary of when the 12 Federal Reserve Banks opened their doors on November 16, 1914. While many Americans hear about the Fed in the news every day – perhaps a bit too much these days – not everyone knows how we work or how we are structured. So, I will begin with a little background on the Fed before I talk about my thoughts on the economic outlook and monetary policy. I have often described the Federal Reserve System as a uniquely American form of central banking – a decentralized central bank. To understand how it came to be, it is useful to review a little history. Just a few blocks from the Philadelphia Fed stand the vestiges of our country’s two earlier attempts at a central bank, dating back to the early years of our nation when Philadelphia was the major financial and political center of the country. Alexander Hamilton, our nation’s first secretary of the Treasury, championed the first Bank of the United States, which received a 20-year charter from Congress and operated from 1791 to 1811. Although the First Bank’s charter was not renewed, the War of 1812 and the ensuing inflation and economic turmoil convinced Congress to establish the second Bank of the United States, which operated from 1816 to 1836. However, like its predecessor, the Second Bank did not have its charter renewed by Congress. Both institutions failed to overcome the public’s mistrust of centralized power and special interests. It took nearly 80 years before Congress tried again to establish a central bank. The outcome was a new central bank with a unique governance structure designed to decentralize authority and promote public confidence. With the passage of the Federal 3 Reserve Act of 1913, Congress provided for the establishment of independently chartered regional Reserve Banks throughout the country, overseen by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. The act created a Reserve Bank Organization Committee to divide the country into no fewer than eight and no more than 12 Federal Reserve Districts. As you can imagine, almost immediately after the law was enacted, the committee started receiving numerous letters and telegrams from local business owners, bankers, farmers, and others, making the case for why a Reserve Bank should be located in their area. The committee held meetings in 18 cities around the country before submitting a report to Congress in April 1914, naming 12 cities as sites for Federal Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia serves the Third District, which includes Delaware, the southern half of New Jersey, and the eastern two-thirds of Pennsylvania. The Reserve Banks distribute currency, act as a banker’s bank, and generally perform the functions of a central bank, including serving as the bank for the U.S. Treasury. A central bank also guides the country’s monetary policy. Within the Federal Reserve, the body that makes monetary policy decisions is the Federal Open Market Committee, or the FOMC. In establishing the FOMC in 1935, Congress gave votes to the seven Governors in Washington and five Reserve Bank presidents. The current arrangement has the New York Fed president serving as a permanent member and four of the other 11 presidents serving one-year terms on a rotating basis. This structure ensures that our national monetary policy has its roots not just in Washington or on Wall Street but also on Main Streets across our diverse nation. Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee's assessment of the economy and policy options. The Committee meets eight times a year to set monetary policy. It discusses economic conditions and, in normal times, adjusts short-term interest rates to best achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us in the Federal Reserve Act. Specifically, in 1977, Congress revised the act to instruct the 4 Fed to conduct policy “so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are stable, it is often said that Congress has given the Fed a “dual mandate.” The structure of the Fed was deliberately designed to preserve a diversity of views and to provide checks and balances. Indeed, I believe the diversity of opinion around the FOMC table is one of its great strengths, but that diversity of views also requires me to note that I speak for myself and not for the Federal Reserve Board or for my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Now let me turn to the state of our economy as we enter the final quarter of 2013. Economic Conditions The economic expansion began in July 2009 – more than four years ago. It hasn’t been a smooth path – frankly, it never is – and growth has been somewhat weaker than many anticipated. However, progress is being made, and there are signs of broad-based underlying strength in the economy. The economy expanded at an annualized rate of 2.5 percent in the second quarter of this year, up from 1.1 percent in the first quarter and just 0.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2012. Fiscal drag, especially at the federal level, has weighed somewhat on economic growth over the past three quarters. In the fourth quarter of 2012, sharp declines in federal government spending subtracted 1.3 points from overall GDP, and in the second quarter, it subtracted 0.2 points. Most of the decline has been in national defense spending. In contrast, the private sector has performed much better. Approximately half of the second-quarter growth came from higher personal consumption, which was well distributed across durable goods, nondurable goods, and services. The moderate pace 5 of spending was stronger than many expected. They had feared that the increased payroll taxes and other sources of fiscal constraint would significantly depress the consumer, but those concerns proved overblown. Improvements in household balance sheets, reflecting lower leverage and higher net worth, as well as moderate growth of disposable personal income, have supported spending this year. Business investment also contributed to growth in the second quarter, but investment has been increasing at only a modest pace so far this year. While sentiment has improved, the data on new orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods do not point to much of a pickup, at least in the near term. Better news comes from the manufacturing sector, which has shown encouraging signs of late. The September national ISM manufacturing survey and our own Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers in the Third District each registered their fourth consecutive month of expansion. Additionally, respondents to our recent survey were the most optimistic they have been since the spring of 2011. Nevertheless, as I travel the District and the country and talk to business leaders about their plans for capital spending and hiring, uncertainty about the course of fiscal policy is a common theme in their discussions. Most mention the stalemate in Washington and the uncertainties over tax and spending policies, and especially health care. There is no question that such factors are restraining investment and hiring and contributing in a significant way to the sluggish recovery. Housing, however, remains a bright spot. The housing sector has shown significant improvement over the past two years. Housing inventories are down, sales are up, and prices are now rising in many localities. Construction spending has also expanded, though activity has leveled off in recent months, which may reflect higher mortgage rates. I expect overall economic growth to accelerate to around 3 percent next year, a pace that is slightly above trend. This is far from the robust growth that many would like to 6 see, but uncertainties loom large. Nevertheless, it represents steady progress and an improving economy. My forecast is in line with those of my colleagues on the FOMC, whose most recent projections had a central tendency of growth of 2.0 to 2.3 percent for 2013, accelerating to 2.9 to 3.1 percent in 2014. The moderate pace of expansion has supported sustained growth in payroll employment and declines in the unemployment rate. Monthly job gains averaged 180,000 for the first eight months of this year, very similar to last year’s pace. The sustained expansion in payrolls means that the U.S. has regained more than three- quarters (78 percent) of the 8.7 million jobs lost in the Great Recession. Pennsylvania has seen a similar improvement, also regaining about 78 percent of the 258,000 jobs it lost. The unemployment rate has improved, dropping from 8.1 percent in August 2012 to 7.3 percent in August 2013, the most recent number available. The total number of people unemployed has declined by 1.2 million over the past 12 months and is down 4 million since the peak in October 2009. I anticipate that over the next year the unemployment rate will continue to decline at about the same pace we’ve seen over the past two years. This should lead to an unemployment rate of about 6.25 percent by the end of next year. This makes me somewhat more optimistic than many of my FOMC colleagues, who don’t see the unemployment rate reaching 6.5 percent until sometime in the first half of 2015. Many analysts have dismissed the steady decline in the unemployment rate because it has been driven to some degree by people dropping out of the labor force rather than finding jobs. Such actions depress the labor force participation rate. But even the unemployment rate measures that include these discouraged workers and those working part time for economic reasons have shown sustained declines as the recovery has progressed. 7 It is important to recognize that labor force participation is influenced not only by the state of the business cycle but also by longer-term factors, like demographics. For example, labor force participation for those aged 16 to 19 years has declined 7.2 percentage points since the start of the recession in December 2007, a sharp drop, to be sure. But in the seven-year period before the recession, participation by that age group fell 11 percentage points. For those aged 20 to 24 years, participation has fallen 3.6 percentage points since the start of the recession, the exact same trend as in the preceding seven-year period. In fact, every age group except those aged 55 and older saw decreasing participation rates well before the recession. And the overall participation rate was falling too. This longer-term decline in labor force participation is separate from the decline we typically see during recessions. For example, independent of the business cycle, the entry of more women into the labor force was a major factor in the rising participation rate for several decades. Our earliest data are from 1948, and at that time, only one in three women were in the labor force. That rate nearly doubled to a peak of 60 percent in the late 1990s. Since then, though, female participation has been drifting down. In addition, the male labor force participation rate has been declining steadily since we started collecting data in 1948. Some of the decline in both male and female participation is attributable to the aging baby boomers, who entered their prime working years in the 1970s and 1980s. As that generation moves through older age brackets, participation becomes lower, bringing down the overall rate. A broad research agenda is attempting to distinguish how much recent declines in participation can be explained by these demographic trends and how much is cyclical or transitory, but the estimates vary greatly.1 Still, there is widespread acknowledgment that the monthly job 1 Researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago estimate that nearly half of the decline in participation over the past 13 years is attributable to these long -running demographic trends. See Daniel Aaronson, Jonathan Davis, and Luojia Hu, “Explaining the Decline in the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate,” Chicago Fed Letter, No. 296, March 2012. Also, the Chicago Fed estimates that the monthly job growth required to bring down the unemployment rate is sharply lower than what was required in the 1980s and 1990s, when labor force participation rates were increasing. See Daniel Aaronson and Scott Brave, “Estimating the Trend in Employment Growth,” Chicago Fed Letter, No. 312, July 2013. 8 growth required to bring down the unemployment rate is considerably lower than what was required in the 1980s and 1990s when labor force participation rates were increasing. Consequently, while some of the decline in labor force participation is cyclical, there is certainly a secular component too. Monetary policy would be ineffective in counteracting such demographic and secular trends – and it should not be used to try to do so. What monetary policy is designed to do, at least over the long run, is control inflation. In my view, price stability is the key part of our mandate. The Fed’s preferred gauge for inflation, the change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, has averaged about 1.8 percent over the past three years and 2 percent over the past 20 years. Over the past year, it has averaged 1.2 percent. This is below the FOMC’s long- run goal of 2 percent, and some have voiced concerns about deflation. I do not perceive that we will have a deflation problem. Some of the lower readings on inflation appear to reflect some transitory factors, such as the cut in payments to Medicare providers imposed earlier this year as part of the sequester. More recent readings have been closer to goal, and I anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, that inflation will move back toward our target over the medium term. I do see some upside risk to inflation in the intermediate to longer term given the large amount of monetary accommodation we have added and continue to add to the economy. Monetary Policy So let me turn to some observations about monetary policy. Over the past five years, the Federal Reserve has taken extraordinary actions to support the economic recovery. The Fed has lowered its policy rate — the federal funds rate — to essentially zero, where it has been for almost five years. Since the policy rate cannot go lower, the Fed has attempted to provide additional accommodation through large-scale asset purchases, or quantitative easing. These purchases have greatly expanded the size and lengthened the maturity of the assets on the Fed's balance sheet. 9 The Fed is also using communications to inform the public about how monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. In Fed speak, this is called forward guidance. On interest rates, the FOMC has said that it expects to keep the fed funds rate at essentially zero at least until the unemployment rate falls to 6.5 percent, so long as inflation one to two years ahead is projected to be no more than 2.5 percent and the public’s inflation expectations remain well anchored. It also anticipates that the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens. On asset purchases, the FOMC has indicated that it will continue the purchases until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in the context of price stability. In addition, at his June press conference, Chairman Bernanke indicated that if incoming economic data were broadly consistent with the FOMC’s economic projections, which anticipated continued gains in labor markets, moderate growth that picks up, and inflation that moves back toward the 2 percent target over time, then the FOMC would begin to reduce the pace of its purchases sometime this year. And if the economy evolves as expected, we would continue to reduce the pace and end the purchases around the middle of next year. After the June press conference and over the course of the summer, there was an increasingly widespread public belief that the FOMC would begin to reduce the pace of its asset purchases in September. Yet at that September meeting, the Committee decided to make no change in monetary policy. The Fed continues to purchase $40 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities and $45 billion of longer-term Treasury securities each month. Proceeds of maturing or prepaid securities are being reinvested. As a result, the Fed's balance sheet, which includes about $3.7 trillion in assets, is growing at a pace of about $85 billion a month. The decision to maintain the pace of purchases and await more evidence of sustained economic progress came as quite a surprise to the public and there ensued widespread public debate about the FOMC’s communications surrounding its policy intentions. 10 In my view, the incoming data between the June and September meetings were largely in line with our June forecasts. While it is true that the FOMC projections for 2013 were revised down slightly, the differences between the central tendencies reported in June and September were statistically and economically insignificant. To delay tapering of our current asset purchase scheme without clear and significant departures from prior guidelines suggested the FOMC was changing the goalposts and deviating from June’s forward guidance. This undermines the credibility of the Committee and reduces the effectiveness of forward guidance as a policy tool. It also contributes to additional uncertainty regarding the future course of monetary policy. The decision not to begin tapering our asset purchases was also read in some quarters as a sign that the FOMC had become much less confident that growth would be sustained in the manner the Committee envisioned in June. Thus, we undermined our own credibility as well as the public’s confidence in the economy. These were not the messages that I wanted to send. Thus, I disagreed with the decision not to go forward with a modest reduction in the pace of our asset purchases. The Fed’s balance sheet is expanding rapidly due to these purchases and complicating the eventual exit from this period of extraordinary monetary ease. There is little evidence that continued efforts to increase accommodation through asset purchases will lead to any significant improvement in the labor markets or economic growth. Thus, I believe the time has come for an expeditious phaseout of the purchase program. Conclusion In summary, I believe that the economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. We are likely to see growth of around 2.5 percent this year, but that pace should pick up to around 3 percent in 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve gradually, and I expect unemployment rates near 7 percent by the end of this year and 6.25 percent by the end of 2014. I believe that inflation expectations will be relatively stable and that inflation will move up to our goal of 2 percent over the next year. 11 Based on this outlook and the improvement in labor market conditions, I believe it would be appropriate for the Fed to begin to reduce the pace at which we are expanding our balance sheet and to bring the purchase program to a close. We missed an excellent opportunity to begin this tapering process in September. In my mind, this illustrates just how difficult it is going to be to wean ourselves off the extraordinary process of increasing accommodation we have embarked upon and begin to normalize monetary policy in a timely manner that ensures a healthy and stable economy in the future. Because the FOMC failed to adjust the pace of asset purchases in response to the improvement in economic conditions, I believe the FOMC undermines the credibility of its own forward guidance.

A Limited Central Bank Cato Institute’s 31st Annual Monetary Conference WAS THE FED A GOOD IDEA? Washington, D.C. November 14, 2013 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 A Limited Central Bank Cato Institute’s 31st Annual Monetary Conference WAS THE FED A GOOD IDEA? Thursday, November 14, 2013 Washington, D.C. Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights: • President Charles Plosser discusses what he believes is the Federal Reserve’s essential role and proposes how this institution might be improved to better fulfill that role. • President Plosser proposes four limits on the central bank that would limit discretion and improve outcomes and accountability. o First, limit the Fed’s monetary policy goals to a narrow mandate in which price stability is the sole, or at least the primary, objective; o Second, limit the types of assets that the Fed can hold on its balance sheet to Treasury securities; o Third, limit the Fed’s discretion in monetary policymaking by requiring a systematic, rule- like approach; o And fourth, limit the boundaries of its lender-of-last-resort credit extension. • These steps would yield a more limited central bank. In doing so, they would help preserve the central bank’s independence, thereby improving the effectiveness of monetary policy, and they would make it easier for the public to hold the Fed accountable for its policy decisions. Introduction: The Importance of Institutions I want to thank Jim Dorn and the Cato Institute for inviting me to speak once again at this prestigious Annual Monetary Conference. When Jim told me that this year’s conference was titled “Was the Fed a Good Idea?” I must confess that I was little worried. I couldn’t help but notice that I was the only sitting central banker on the program. But as the Fed approaches its 100 th anniversary, it is entirely appropriate to reflect on its history and its future. Today, I plan to discuss what I believe is the Federal Reserve’s essential role and consider how it might be improved as an institution to better fulfill that role. 2 Before I begin, I should note that my views are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Douglass C. North was cowinner of the 1993 Nobel Prize in Economics for his work on the role that institutions play in economic growth.1 North argued that institutions were deliberately devised to constrain interactions among parties both public and private. In the spirit of North’s work, one theme of my talk today will be that the institutional structure of the central bank matters. The central bank’s goals and objectives, its framework for implementing policy, and its governance structure all affect its performance. Central banks have been around for a long time, but they have clearly evolved as economies and governments have changed. Most countries today operate under a fiat money regime, in which a nation’s currency has value because the government says it does. Central banks usually are given the responsibility to protect and preserve the value or purchasing power of the currency. 2 In the U.S., the Fed does so by buying or selling assets in order to manage the growth of money and credit. The ability to buy and sell assets gives the Fed considerable power to intervene in financial markets not only through the quantity of its transactions but also through the types of assets it can buy and sell. Thus, it is entirely appropriate that governments establish their central banks with limits that constrain the actions of the central bank to one degree or another. Yet, in recent years, we have seen many of the explicit and implicit limits stretched. The Fed and many other central banks have taken extraordinary steps to address a global financial crisis and the ensuing recession. These steps have challenged the accepted boundaries of central banking and have been both applauded and denounced. For example, the Fed has adopted unconventional large-scale asset purchases to increase accommodation after it reduced its 1 For more about Douglass C. North and his cowinner Robert W. Fogel and the 1993 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, see Nobel Media, "The Prize in Economics 1993 - Press Release," (1993), www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/1993/press.html (Accessed November 11, 2013). See also Douglass C. North, “Institutions,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5:1 (1991), pp. 97–112. 2 Countries can and do pursue different means of setting the value of their currency, including pegging their monetary policy to that of another country, but I will not concern myself with such issues in these comments. 3 conventional policy tool, the federal funds rate, to near zero. These asset purchases have led to the creation of trillions of dollars of reserves in the banking system and have greatly expanded the Fed’s balance sheet. But the Fed has done more than just purchase lots of assets; it has altered the composition of its balance sheet through the types of assets it has purchased. I have spoken on a number of occasions about my concerns that these actions to purchase specific (non-Treasury) assets amounted to a form of credit allocation, which targets specific industries, sectors, or firms. These credit policies cross the boundary from monetary policy and venture into the realm of fiscal policy.3 I include in this category the purchases of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) as well as emergency lending under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, in support of the bailouts, most notably of Bear Stearns and AIG. Regardless of the rationale for these actions, one needs to consider the long-term repercussions that such actions may have on the central bank as an institution. As we contemplate what the Fed of the future should look like, I will discuss whether constraints on its goals might help limit the range of objectives it could use to justify its actions. I will also consider restrictions on the types of assets it can purchase to limit its interference with market allocations of scarce capital and generally to avoid engaging in actions that are best left to the fiscal authorities or the markets. I will also touch on governance and accountability of our institution and ways to implement policies that limit discretion and improve outcomes and accountability. Goals and Objectives Let me begin by addressing the goals and objectives for the Federal Reserve. These have evolved over time. When the Fed was first established in 1913, the U.S. and the world were operating under a classical gold standard. Therefore, price stability was not among the stated 3 See Charles Plosser, “Ensuring Sound Monetary Policy in the Aftermath of Crisis,” speech given to the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, The Initiative on Global Markets, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, NY, February 27, 2009, and Charles Plosser, “Fiscal Policy and Monetary Policy: Restoring the Boundaries,” a speech to the same group, February 24, 2012. 4 goals in the original Federal Reserve Act. Indeed, the primary objective in the preamble was to provide an “elastic currency.” The gold standard had some desirable features. Domestic and international legal commitments regarding convertibility were important disciplining devices that were essential to the regime’s ability to deliver general price stability. The gold standard was a de facto rule that most people understood, and it allowed markets to function more efficiently because the price level was mostly stable. But, the international gold standard began to unravel and was abandoned during World War I.4 After the war, efforts to reestablish parity proved disruptive and costly in both economic and political terms. Attempts to reestablish a gold standard ultimately fell apart in the 1930s. As a result, most of the world now operates under a fiat money regime, which has made price stability an important priority for those central banks charged with ensuring the purchasing power of the currency. Congress established the current set of monetary policy goals in 1978. The amended Federal Reserve Act specifies the Fed “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy's long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long- term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are stable and the economy is operating at full employment, many have interpreted these goals as a dual mandate with price stability and maximum employment as the focus. Let me point out that the instructions from Congress call for the FOMC to stress the “long run growth” of money and credit commensurate with the economy’s “long run potential.” There are many other things that Congress could have specified, but it chose not to do so. The act doesn’t 4 See Ben S. Bernanke, "A Century of U.S. Central Banking: Goals, Frameworks, Accountability,” speech to the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, July 10, 2013; and Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Global Interdependence and Central Banking,” speech to the Global Interdependence Center, Philadelphia, November 1, 2013. 5 talk about managing short-term credit allocation across sectors; it doesn’t mention inflating housing prices or other asset prices. It also doesn’t mention reducing short-term fluctuations in employment. Many discussions about the Fed’s mandate seem to forget the emphasis on the long run. The public, and perhaps even some within the Fed, have come to accept as an axiom that monetary policy can and should attempt to manage fluctuations in employment. Rather than simply set a monetary environment “commensurate” with the “long run potential to increase production,” these individuals seek policies that attempt to manage fluctuations in employment over the short run. The active pursuit of employment objectives has been and continues to be problematic for the Fed. Most economists are dubious of the ability of monetary policy to predictably and precisely control employment in the short run, and there is a strong consensus that, in the long run, monetary policy cannot determine employment. As the FOMC noted in its statement on longer- run goals adopted in 2012, “the maximum level of employment is largely determined by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market.” In my view, focusing on short-run control of employment weakens the credibility and effectiveness of the Fed in achieving its price stability objective. We learned this lesson most dramatically during the 1970s when, despite the extensive efforts to reduce unemployment, the Fed essentially failed, and the nation experienced a prolonged period of high unemployment and high inflation. The economy paid the price in the form of a deep recession, as the Fed sought to restore the credibility of its commitment to price stability. When establishing the longer-term goals and objectives for any organization, and particularly one that serves the public, it is important that the goals be achievable. Assigning unachievable goals to organizations is a recipe for failure. For the Fed, it could mean a loss of public confidence. I fear that the public has come to expect too much from its central bank and too much from monetary policy, in particular. We need to heed the words of another Nobel Prize winner, Milton Friedman. In his 1967 presidential address to the American Economic Association, he said, “…we are in danger of assigning to monetary policy a larger role than it can 6 perform, in danger of asking it to accomplish tasks that it cannot achieve, and as a result, in danger of preventing it from making the contribution that it is capable of making.”5 In the 1970s we saw the truth in Friedman’s earlier admonitions. I think that over the past 40 years, with the exception of the Paul Volcker era, we failed to heed this warning. We have assigned an ever- expanding role for monetary policy, and we expect our central bank to solve all manner of economic woes for which it is ill-suited to address. We need to better align the expectations of monetary policy with what it is actually capable of achieving. The so-called dual mandate has contributed to this expansionary view of the powers of monetary policy. Even though the 2012 statement of objectives acknowledged that it is inappropriate to set a fixed goal for employment and that maximum employment is influenced by many factors, the FOMC’s recent policy statements have increasingly given the impression that it wants to achieve an employment goal as quickly as possible.6 I believe that the aggressive pursuit of broad and expansive objectives is quite risky and could have very undesirable repercussions down the road, including undermining the public’s confidence in the institution, its legitimacy, and its independence. To put this in different terms, assigning multiple objectives for the central bank opens the door to highly discretionary policies, which can be justified by shifting the focus or rationale for action from goal to goal. I have concluded that it would be appropriate to redefine the Fed’s monetary policy goals to focus solely, or at least primarily, on price stability. I base this on two facts: Monetary policy has very limited ability to influence real variables, such as employment. And, in a regime with fiat currency, only the central bank can ensure price stability. Indeed, it is the one goal that the central bank can achieve over the longer run. Governance and Central Bank Independence 5 See Milton Friedman, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, 58:1 (March 1968), pp. 1–17. 6 See Daniel L. Thornton, “The Dual Mandate: Has the Fed Changed Its Objective?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 94 (March/April 2012), pp. 117–33. 7 Even with a narrow mandate to focus on price stability, the institution must be well designed if it is to be successful. To meet even this narrow mandate, the central bank must have a fair amount of independence from the political process so that it can set policy for the long run without the pressure to print money as a substitute for tough fiscal choices. Good governance requires a healthy degree of separation between those responsible for taxes and expenditures and those responsible for printing money. The original design of the Fed’s governance recognized the importance of this independence. Consider its decentralized, public-private structure, with Governors appointed by the U.S. President and confirmed by the Senate, and Fed presidents chosen by their boards of directors. This design helps ensure a diversity of views and a more decentralized governance structure that reduces the potential for abuses and capture by special interests or political agendas. It also reinforces the independence of monetary policymaking, which leads to better economic outcomes. Implementing Policy and Limiting Discretion Such independence in a democracy also necessitates that the central bank remain accountable. Its activities also need to be constrained in a manner that limits its discretionary authority. As I have already argued, a narrow mandate is an important limiting factor on an expansionist view of the role and scope for monetary policy. What other sorts of constraints are appropriate on the activities of central banks? I believe that monetary policy and fiscal policy should have clear boundaries. 7 Independence is what Congress can and should grant the Fed, but, in exchange for such independence, the central bank should be constrained from conducting fiscal policy. As I have already mentioned, the Fed has ventured into the realm of fiscal policy by its purchase programs of assets that target specific industries and individual firms. One way to circumscribe the range of activities a central bank can undertake is to limit the assets it can buy and hold. 7 See Plosser (2009) and Plosser (2012). 8 In its System Open Market Account, the Fed is allowed to hold only U.S. government securities and securities that are direct obligations of or fully guaranteed by agencies of the United States. But these restrictions still allowed the Fed to purchase large amounts of agency mortgage- backed securities in its effort to boost the housing sector. My preference would be to limit Fed purchases to Treasury securities and return the Fed’s balance sheet to an all-Treasury portfolio. This would limit the ability of the Fed to engage in credit policies that target specific industries. As I’ve already noted, such programs to allocate credit rightfully belong in the realm of the fiscal authorities – not the central bank. A third way to constrain central bank actions is to direct the monetary authority to conduct policy in a systematic, rule-like manner.8 It is often difficult for policymakers to choose a systematic rule-like approach that would tie their hands and thus limit their discretionary authority. Yet, research has discussed the benefits of rule-like behavior for some time. Rules are transparent and therefore allow for simpler and more effective communication of policy decisions. Moreover, a large body of research emphasizes the important role expectations play in determining economic outcomes. When policy is set systematically, the public and financial market participants can form better expectations about policy. Policy is no longer a source of instability or uncertainty. While choosing an appropriate rule is important, research shows that in a wide variety of models simple, robust monetary policy rules can produce outcomes close to those delivered by each model’s optimal policy rule. Systematic policy can also help preserve a central bank’s independence. When the public has a better understanding of policymakers’ intentions, it is able to hold the central bank more accountable for its actions. And the rule-like behavior helps to keep policy focused on the central bank’s objectives, limiting discretionary actions that may wander toward other agendas and goals. 8 See Charles Plosser, “The Benefits of Systematic Monetary Policy,” speech given to the National Association for Business Economics, Washington Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C., March 3, 2008. Also see Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 85 (January 1977), pp. 473–91. 9 Congress is not the appropriate body to determine the form of such a rule. However, Congress could direct the monetary authority to communicate the broad guidelines the authority will use to conduct policy. One way this might work is to require the Fed to publicly describe how it will systematically conduct policy in normal times – this might be incorporated into the semiannual Monetary Policy Report submitted to Congress. This would hold the Fed accountable. If the FOMC chooses to deviate from the guidelines, it must then explain why and how it intends to return to its prescribed guidelines. My sense is that the recent difficulty the Fed has faced in trying to offer clear and transparent guidance on its current and future policy path stems from the fact that policymakers still desire to maintain discretion in setting monetary policy. Effective forward guidance, however, requires commitment to behave in a particular way in the future. But discretion is the antithesis of commitment and undermines the effectiveness of forward guidance. Given this tension, few should be surprised that the Fed has struggled with its communications. What is the answer? I see three: Simplify the goals. Constrain the tools. Make decisions more systematically. All three steps can lead to clearer communications and a better understanding on the part of the public. Creating a stronger policymaking framework will ultimately produce better economic outcomes. Financial Stability and Monetary Policy Before concluding, I would like to say a few words about the role that the central bank plays in promoting financial stability. Since the financial crisis, there has been an expansion of the Fed’s responsibilities for controlling macroprudential and systemic risk. Some have even called for an expansion of the monetary policy mandate to include an explicit goal for financial stability. I think this would be a mistake. The Fed plays an important role as the lender of last resort, offering liquidity to solvent firms in times of extreme financial stress to forestall contagion and mitigate systemic risk. This liquidity is intended to help ensure that solvent institutions facing temporary liquidity problems remain 10 solvent and that there is sufficient liquidity in the banking system to meet the demand for currency. In this sense, liquidity lending is simply providing an “elastic currency.” Thus, the role of lender of last resort is not to prop up insolvent institutions. However, in some cases during the crisis, the Fed played a role in the resolution of particular insolvent firms that were deemed systemically important financial firms. Subsequently, the Dodd-Frank Act has limited some of the lending actions the Fed can take with individual firms under Section 13(3). Nonetheless, by taking these actions, the Fed has created expectations – perhaps unrealistic ones – about what the Fed can and should do to combat financial instability. Just as it is true for monetary policy, it is important to be clear about the Fed’s responsibilities for promoting financial stability. It is unrealistic to expect the central bank to alleviate all systemic risk in financial markets. Expanding the Fed's regulatory responsibilities too broadly increases the chances that there will be short-run conflicts between its monetary policy goals and its supervisory and regulatory goals. This should be avoided, as it could undermine the credibility of the Fed’s commitment to price stability. Similarly, the central bank should set boundaries and guidelines for its lending policy that it can credibly commit to follow. If the set of institutions having regular access to the Fed’s credit facilities is expanded too far, it will create moral hazard and distort the market mechanism for allocating credit. This can end up undermining the very financial stability that it is supposed to promote. Emergencies can and do arise. If the Fed is asked by the fiscal authorities to intervene by allocating credit to particular firms or sectors of the economy, then the Treasury should take these assets off of the Fed’s balance sheet in exchange for Treasury securities. In 2009, I advocated that we establish a new accord between the Treasury and the Federal Reserve that protects the Fed in just such a way.9 Such an arrangement would be similar to the Treasury-Fed Accord of 1951 that freed the Fed from keeping the interest rate on long-term Treasury debt 9 See Plosser (2009). 11 below 2.5 percent. It would help ensure that when credit policies put taxpayer funds at risk, they are the responsibility of the fiscal authority – not the Fed. A new accord would also return control of the Fed’s balance sheet to the Fed so that it can conduct independent monetary policy. Many observers think financial instability is endemic to the financial industry, and therefore, it must be controlled through regulation and oversight. However, financial instability can also be a consequence of governments and their policies, even those intended to reduce instability. I can think of three ways in which central bank policies can increase the risks of financial instability. First, by rescuing firms or creating the expectation that creditors will be rescued, policymakers either implicitly or explicitly create moral hazard and excessive risking-taking by financial firms. For this moral hazard to exist, it doesn’t matter if the taxpayer or the private sector provides the funds. What matters is that creditors are protected, in part, if not entirely. Second, by running credit policies, such as buying huge volumes of mortgage-backed securities that distort market signals or the allocation of capital, policymakers can sow the seeds of financial instability because of the distortions that they create, which in time must be corrected. And third, by taking a highly discretionary approach to monetary policy, policymakers increase the risks of financial instability by making monetary policy uncertain. Such uncertainty can lead markets to make unwise investment decisions – witness the complaints of those who took positions expecting the Fed to follow through with the taper decision in September of this year. The Fed and other policymakers need to think more about the way their policies might contribute to financial instability. I believe that it is important that the Fed take steps to conduct its own policies and to help other regulators reduce the contributions of such policies to financial instability. The more limited role for the central bank I have described here can contribute to such efforts. 12 Conclusion The financial crisis and its aftermath have been challenging times for global economies and their institutions. The extraordinary actions taken by the Fed to combat the crisis and the ensuing recession and to support recovery have expanded the roles assigned to monetary policy. The public has come to expect too much from its central bank. To remedy this situation, I believe it would be appropriate to set four limits on the central bank: • First, limit the Fed’s monetary policy goals to a narrow mandate in which price stability is the sole, or at least the primary, objective; • Second, limit the types of assets that the Fed can hold on its balance sheet to Treasury securities; • Third, limit the Fed’s discretion in monetary policymaking by requiring a systematic, rule- like approach; • And fourth, limit the boundaries of its lender-of-last-resort credit extension and ensure that it is conducted in a systematic fashion. These steps would yield a more limited central bank. In doing so, they would help preserve the central bank’s independence, thereby improving the effectiveness of monetary policy, and, at the same time, they would make it easier for the public to hold the Fed accountable for its policy decisions. These changes to the institution would strengthen the Fed for its next 100 years.

Economic Conditions and Monetary Policy Risk Management Association Philadelphia, PA November 18, 2013 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Economic Conditions and Monetary Policy Risk Management Association November 18, 2013 Philadelphia, PA Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights: • President Charles Plosser provides his economic outlook and reports that since there is little evidence that additional asset purchases will improve economic recovery, the time has come to phase out the purchase program. • He indicates that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) missed an excellent opportunity to begin this tapering process in September, which illustrates just how difficult it will be to initiate any steps toward normalization of monetary policy. • He also suggests the FOMC should communicate the amount of assets it intends to purchase in the current program and bring it to an end. • President Plosser expects growth of about 3 percent in 2014. He expects unemployment rates near 7 percent by the end of this year or early next year and about 6.25 percent by the end of 2014. Inflation expectations will be relatively stable, and inflation will move up toward the FOMC target of 2 percent over the next year. Introduction I thank Bill Githens and his staff for inviting me here today. It is my honor to welcome you to Philadelphia as the Risk Management Association (RMA) begins its commemoration of a century of promoting sound risk principles in the financial services industry. Next month, the Federal Reserve System also begins its centennial year, marking 100 years from when President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act on December 23, 1913. Our centennial period will continue until next November, the 100th anniversary of when the 12 Federal Reserve Banks first opened their doors on November 16, 1914. 2 Therefore, the RMA and the Federal Reserve System each have a long and rich history. I also noted that Philadelphia and Rochester, New York, figure prominently in your organization’s history and my own biography. The first meeting of what was then known as the “Robert Morris Club of the National Association of Credit Men” was held in Rochester in June 1914. I arrived in Rochester more than 60 years too late to attend, but I enjoyed more than 30 years at the University of Rochester before joining the Philadelphia Fed in 2006. During these past seven years, I have found that many people still find our nation’s central bank a mystery. People often hear about the Fed in the news, yet not everyone knows what we do or how we are structured. So, I will begin with a little background on the Fed before I share some thoughts on the economic outlook and monetary policy. Before I begin, though, I should note that my views are not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). A Historical Look at a Decentralized Fed So first, let me share a little history with you. I have often described the Federal Reserve System as a uniquely American form of central banking – a decentralized central bank. To understand how the Fed came to be, we need to look at two earlier attempts at central banking in the United States. Just a few blocks from here stand the vestiges of both institutions, dating back to the early years of our nation when Philadelphia was the nation’s major financial and political center. Alexander Hamilton, who was an aide to Robert Morris during the American Revolutionary War and later became our nation’s first secretary of the Treasury, championed the First Bank of the United States to help our young nation manage its financial affairs. The First Bank received a 20-year charter from Congress and operated from 1791 to 1811. Although this charter was not renewed, the War of 1812 and the ensuing inflation and economic turmoil convinced Congress to establish the Second 3 Bank of the United States, which operated from 1816 to 1836. However, as with the First Bank, Congress did not renew the Second Bank’s charter. Both institutions failed to overcome the public’s mistrust of centralized power and special interests. Nearly 80 years later, Congress tried again to establish a central bank. The outcome was a new central bank with a unique governance structure designed to decentralize authority and promote public confidence. This unique structure helped overcome political and public opposition that stemmed from fears that this new central bank would be dominated either by political interests in Washington or by financial interests in New York. To balance political, economic, and geographic interests, Congress created the Federal Reserve System with independently chartered regional Reserve Banks throughout the country, with oversight provided by a Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. The act created a Reserve Bank Organization Committee to divide the country into no fewer than eight and no more than 12 Federal Reserve Districts. The committee held meetings in 18 cities around the country before submitting a report to Congress in April 1914, naming the 12 cities as sites for Federal Reserve Banks we have today. These Reserve Banks distribute currency, act as a banker’s bank, and generally perform the functions of a central bank, which includes serving as the bank for the U.S. Treasury. Another important priority for central banks, especially those in a world of fiat currency, is to ensure the purchasing power of a nation’s currency through its monetary policy. Within the Federal Reserve, the body that makes monetary policy decisions is the Federal Open Market Committee, or the FOMC. Here again, Congress has designed a number of checks and balances into the system. In 1935, Congress gave voting rights on the FOMC to the seven Governors in Washington and five Reserve Bank presidents. Under the current arrangement, the New York Fed president serves as a permanent 4 voting member, and four of the other 11 presidents serve one-year terms on a rotating basis. This structure ensures that our national monetary policy is rooted not just in Washington or on Wall Street but also on Main streets across our diverse nation. Whether we vote or not, all Reserve Bank presidents attend the FOMC meetings, participate in the discussions, and contribute to the Committee’s assessment of the economy and policy options. The FOMC meets eight times a year to set monetary policy. It discusses economic conditions and, in normal times, adjusts short-term interest rates to achieve the goals of monetary policy that Congress has set for us in the Federal Reserve Act. Congress established the current set of monetary policy goals in 1978. The amended Federal Reserve Act specifies that the FOMC “shall maintain long run growth of the monetary and credit aggregates commensurate with the economy’s long run potential to increase production, so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” Since moderate long-term interest rates generally result when prices are stable and the economy is operating at full employment, many have interpreted these instructions as being a dual mandate to manage fluctuations in employment in the short run while preserving long run price stability. Economic Conditions With this mandate in mind, the Fed monitors the economy and makes its policy decisions. The current economic expansion began in July 2009 – more than four years ago. While economic growth has come in fits and starts, the underlying path is one of continued moderate expansion. The recent readings on third-quarter growth and the labor market are consistent with an economy that is experiencing a moderate, self- sustaining recovery. 5 We saw an advance estimate of 2.8 percent GDP growth in the third quarter, a bit higher than the 2.5 percent growth in the second quarter. That upward trend continued from the 1.1 percent growth in the first quarter of this year and the nearly flat 0.1 percent in the fourth quarter of last year. This acceleration in growth rates reflects steady progress in the private-sector economy and a waning drag from the government sector. Despite the increase in payroll taxes at the start of the year, consumer spending continues to increase at a moderate pace. Even more encouraging is the robust, double-digit growth we’ve seen in residential investment. Sales of existing homes are on the upswing, surpassing the 5 million mark, or about the same levels experienced before the housing boom. Home prices remain below their pre-crisis peaks, but prices have made strong double-digit gains over the past year, according to the national indexes. Manufacturing has also shown improvement. The national ISM Manufacturing index has indicated industry expansion for the past five months. Here in the Third District, the Philadelphia Fed’s Business Outlook Survey of manufacturers shows a similar pattern, with increased activity for five consecutive months as well as strong optimism regarding activity over the next six months. Nevertheless, as I travel through the District and the country and talk to business leaders about their plans for capital spending and hiring, I hear a common theme of uncertainty about the course of fiscal policy and regulation. Most mention the dysfunction in Washington and the uncertainties over tax and spending policies, and especially health care. Without a doubt, such factors are restraining investment and hiring, and generally contributing to the sluggishness of the recovery. As some of this uncertainty abates — I don’t expect it to vanish — I anticipate overall economic growth to accelerate somewhat to around 3 percent next year, a pace that is slightly above trend. This is far from the robust growth that many would like to see; 6 nevertheless, it does represent steady progress and a gradually improving economy. My forecast is in line with those of my colleagues on the FOMC, whose most recent projections had a central tendency of growth of 2.0 to 2.3 percent for 2013, and accelerating to 2.9 to 3.1 percent in 2014. The October jobs report came in stronger than many analysts expected. The economy added 204,000 jobs in October. In addition, upward revisions to the August and September figures added another 60,000 jobs. The unemployment rate ticked up a tenth of a point to 7.3 percent, but federal employees on temporary furloughs affected the household survey. The underlying detail showed an increase of 448,000 workers on temporary layoff in October. The data do not let us precisely measure how much of the increase is directly related to the shutdown, but that sharp increase was enough to push the unemployment rate higher than it otherwise would have been, possibly by as much as a third of a percentage point. Of course, we will have a better idea of how the labor market has progressed when we have the November report, which should not be distorted by the temporary shutdown. Substantial improvement in labor market conditions was one condition that the FOMC set last September for ending our current asset purchase program, popularly called QE3 for the third round of quantitative easing. I believe the labor market has made important progress. Monthly job gains have averaged 191,000 since last September, far better than the 130,000 average in the six months leading up to the announcement of the program. And the unemployment rate has fallen by 0.8 percentage points since last August. I anticipate that the unemployment rate will continue to decline over the next year at about the same pace we’ve seen over the past two years. This should lead to an unemployment rate of about 6.25 percent by the end of 2014. This makes me somewhat more optimistic than my FOMC colleagues, many of whom don’t see the unemployment rate reaching 6.5 percent until sometime in the first half of 2015. 7 Turning to inflation, the Fed’s preferred gauge for inflation, the change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, has averaged about 1.8 percent over the past three years and 2 percent over the past 20 years. Over the past year, it has averaged 1.1 percent. This is below the FOMC’s long-run goal of 2 percent, and some have voiced concerns about the risks of further disinflation. If this trend continues, it would be troubling. We must defend our 2-percent inflation target from below and above. One encouraging factor is that inflation expectations remain near their longer-term averages and consistent with our 2-percent target. But we must be vigilant that expectations remain anchored. Some of the lower readings on inflation appear to reflect some transitory factors, such as the cut in payments to Medicare providers imposed earlier this year as part of the sequester. More recent readings have been closer to goal, and I anticipate, as the FOMC indicated in its most recent statement, that inflation will move back toward our target over the medium term. But I do see some upside risk to inflation in the intermediate to longer term, given the large amount of monetary accommodation we have added and continue to add to the economy. Monetary Policy So let me turn to some observations about monetary policy. Over the past five years, the Federal Reserve has taken extraordinary actions to support the economic recovery. The Fed has lowered its policy rate — the federal funds rate — to essentially zero, where it has been for almost five years. Since the policy rate cannot go any lower, the Fed has attempted to provide additional accommodation through large-scale asset purchases, or quantitative easing. As I mentioned earlier, we are now in our third round of these purchases, or QE3. These purchases have greatly expanded the size and lengthened the maturity of the assets on the Fed’s balance sheet. The Fed is also using forward guidance that is intended to inform the public about the way monetary policy is likely to evolve in the future. As for interest rates, the FOMC has 8 reported that it expects to keep the fed funds rate at essentially zero at least until the unemployment rate falls to 6.5 percent, so long as the outlook for inflation one to two years is projected to be no more than 2.5 percent and the public’s inflation expectations remain well anchored. The Committee also anticipates that the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery continues to gain strength. On asset purchases, the FOMC has indicated that it will continue the purchases until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in the context of price stability. As I noted, I believe that labor markets have substantially improved from a year ago and that we should begin to wind down these asset purchases. There was widespread public expectation that the FOMC would begin to slow the pace of its asset purchases in September. Yet, at that September meeting and again in October, the Committee decided not to change the pace of purchases. The Fed continues to purchase $40 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities and $45 billion of longer-term Treasury securities each month. Proceeds of maturing or prepaid securities are being reinvested. As a result, the Fed’s balance sheet is now just shy of $4 trillion in assets and growing at a pace of about $85 billion a month. The decision to maintain the pace of purchases in September and await more evidence of sustained economic progress came as quite a surprise to the public, generating widespread public debate about the FOMC’s communications surrounding its policy intentions. Not dissuading the public from its expectation of a tapering and then not taking action undermines the credibility of the FOMC and reduces the effectiveness of forward guidance as a policy tool. The failure to follow through also contributes to additional uncertainty regarding the future course of monetary policy. In some quarters, the decision not to begin tapering was also interpreted as a sign that the FOMC had become much less confident that growth would be sustained. Thus, we undermined our own credibility as well as the public’s confidence in the economy. These were not the 9 messages that I wanted to send. So, I disagreed with the decision not to go forward with a modest reduction in the pace of our asset purchases. In my view, this whole episode also demonstrates how difficult it is to fine-tune our open-ended asset purchases and our forward guidance about them. We cannot continue to play this bond-buying game by ear and risk the Fed’s credibility while creating lingering uncertainty about the course of monetary policy. We need to define simple, clear dimensions to “right-size” the program. This will reduce policy uncertainty and move the economy forward. My preference would be for the FOMC to announce a fixed amount for QE3, just as we did for the two prior rounds of asset purchases. When we reach that amount, we should stop the asset purchases, and then reassess the state of the economy to determine if further action would be beneficial. At that point, monetary policy would still be highly accommodative. We are still learning how asset purchases affect the economy, but many believe it is the ultimate size and composition of the assets, rather than the flow of purchases, that influences interest rates and thus the economy. This was the premise of the early rounds of purchases. Setting the ultimate size of our asset purchase program will lead us away from trying to fine-tune our decision about purchases based on the latest numbers and creating uncertainty from meeting to meeting about the FOMC’s next step. We should be gearing our asset purchase policy to the underlying trends in the economic expansion rather than the most recent month-to-month variations, which reflect very noisy signals of the economy at best. Just recall the surprises in the revisions to the employment data we experienced. By specifying a fixed amount, we would help the public understand that reducing the pace of asset purchases does not signal a change in our policy rate. Indeed, even an end to purchases only stops the efforts to increase accommodation. It is not a tightening of policy. As I said, after our purchases stop, policy will remain highly accommodative. An end to the purchase program does not 10 imply that increases in the policy rate are imminent. We will simply set our policy rate consistent with promoting the FOMC’s goals of price stability and maximum employment. Conclusion In summary, I believe that the economy is continuing to improve at a moderate pace. We are likely to see growth pick up to around 3 percent in 2014. Prospects for labor markets will continue to improve gradually, and I expect unemployment rates near 7 percent within the next few months and 6.25 percent by the end of 2014. I also believe that inflation expectations will be relatively stable and that inflation will move up to our goal of 2 percent over the next year. Based on this outlook and the improvement in labor market conditions, I believe it would be appropriate for the Fed to communicate the amount of assets it intends to purchase in the current program and bring it to an end. We should then reassess the economic trends and the outlook to determine if further efforts to increase accommodation are required. This approach would also yield a simpler program — one that is easier for policymakers to manage, easier to explain to the public, and easier to exit when the time comes.

Observations on the Centennial of the Federal Reserve System The Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum Philadelphia, PA December 6, 2013 Charles I. Plosser President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the FOMC. 1 Observations on the Centennial of the Federal Reserve System The Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum "The History of Central Banking in the United States" December 6, 2013 Philadelphia, PA Charles I. Plosser President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Highlights: • President Charles Plosser welcomes participants to the 2013 Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum with some thoughts about the 100th anniversary of the Federal Reserve System. • He notes that our central bank’s decentralized structure has evolved and that the balance of power has shifted over time in response to economic events and legislation. • He argues that trust and credibility are essential features for a successful central bank. In the spirit of the work by Nobel Prize-winning economist Douglass North, Plosser believes we should seek ways to ensure that these qualities are embodied in the institution itself. • He stresses that a central bank can never be completely independent, nor should it be. In a democracy, independence should come with constraints and limits on the central bank’s authority and scope of activities. The power to print money is a significant one, and central banks should be limited in how they can use that power. Good morning and welcome to the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia as we begin the 2013 Policy Forum. It is a pleasure to see so many familiar faces and to welcome those who are attending our forum for the first time. This is our 10th Policy Forum, and as you can see from the program, this is a special occasion. The Federal Reserve will officially begin its centennial year on December 23rd. On that date in 1913, President Woodrow Wilson signed into law the act that created the Federal Reserve System. The 12 Reserve Banks officially opened their doors on November 16, 1914. In achieving this milestone, it seems appropriate to take a step back, reflect on our central bank’s history, and seek a better understanding of its successes and its failures. 2 One of our objectives today is to highlight specific historical episodes to see how they have influenced or shaped the evolution of the institution itself. Like the Nobel Prize-winning economist Douglass North, I think institutions matter. In particular, I believe the institutional structure of the central bank matters. The central bank’s goals and objectives, its policy framework, and its governance structure all play a part in its performance. Given the historical perspective we want to take, what better place to begin than here in Philadelphia, the birthplace of our nation, both politically and economically. And we can start by looking at the earliest attempts to create a central bank for the United States. The first institution was the brainchild of our first Treasury secretary, Alexander Hamilton. His efforts led to the creation of the First Bank of the United States, which was awarded a 20-year charter by Congress in 1791. Although the First Bank’s charter was not renewed, the War of 1812 and the ensuing inflation and economic turmoil convinced Congress to establish the Second Bank of the United States, which operated from 1816 to 1836. However, it too did not win a renewed charter, with President Andrew Jackson leading the opponents in a heated political debate. I believe that both these institutions failed because they were unsuccessful in overcoming the public’s mistrust of centralized power and special interests. Indeed, without public confidence in these institutions, they were doomed. Like many of our nation’s earliest institutions, the vestiges of both the First and Second Banks are located just a few blocks from where we now sit. The First Bank is located near Third and Chestnut streets, and the Second Bank is directly across the street from the hotel where some of you are staying, near Fourth and Chestnut streets. After the first two attempts, it took nearly 80 years before Congress tried again to establish a central bank. The outcome was a new central bank with a governance structure designed to decentralize authority and promote public confidence — a decentralized central bank. This structure helped overcome political and public opposition that stemmed from fears that a central bank would be dominated either by political interests in Washington or by financial 3 interests in New York. Yet even this structure, which has now lasted a century, has evolved, and the balance of power has shifted over time in response to economic events and legislation. I believe that the fundamental concept of a decentralized central bank has great merit, in part, because it helps to preserve the independence and maintain the public trust in the institution. Independence is essential if a central bank is to play its fundamental role in preserving the purchasing power of a fiat currency. History is replete with examples of governments using the power to print money as a substitute for making tough fiscal choices, and the results were disastrous. But, of course, a central bank can never be completely independent, nor should it be. In a democracy, independence should come with constraints and limits on the central bank’s authority and scope of activities. The power to print money is a significant one, and central banks should be limited in how they can use that power. Such constraints can help build public trust and instill credibility in the institution. For me, trust and credibility are essential features for a successful central bank. In the spirit of Douglass North’s work, I believe we should seek ways to ensure that these qualities are embodied in the institution itself. Our program today will be a fascinating one. We have a distinguished array of economic historians, monetary policy experts, and former policymakers. The goal is to review the history of the central banking experience in the United States, beginning with the Second Bank. We have organized the sessions to focus on critical economic and legislative events that have shaped our central bank. We are particularly pleased to have former Chairman Alan Greenspan and former Vice Chair Don Kohn to close our program. This will undoubtedly be a lively and thought-provoking day. And I hope you will find it as instructive and fascinating as I will. As I already mentioned, Philadelphia has a rich history in the political and economic founding of our country. Before we begin, I would like to recognize one guest in the audience. In our first session, we will hear about the legacy of the Second Bank of the United States. Many of you know that the president of the Second Bank was Nicholas Biddle. We are pleased to have with us today the great-great-great-granddaughter — I think that is the right number of greats — of 4 Nicholas Biddle, Cordelia Frances Biddle. Cordelia is actually my neighbor. She is an author and actress who is fascinated with history, particularly the history of Philadelphia. She has done research in our library here at the Philadelphia Fed while writing a book on another of her ancestors, the financier and founder of Drexel University, Anthony Drexel. Cordelia, thank you for joining us today. And thank all of you for coming. Let’s get the program started.
