Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the American Council of Life Insurers Executive Roundtable, Naples, Florida Share Members of the American Council of Life Insurers (ACLI), I appreciate this opportunity to speak with you. It needs no retelling in this audience that the insurance industry is of significant importance to the economy, both domestically and internationally. Insurers occupy a meaningful role in the financial sector, meeting the financial needs of consumers and businesses with a distinct business model that calls for appropriately tailored policies. As you know, the Federal Reserve has a role as consolidated supervisor of some insurers, a role we continually strive to fulfill in the most appropriate and tailored manner. The Federal Reserve also participates as a member of "Team USA"--together with the state insurance supervisors, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), and the Federal Insurance Office (FIO)--in the international insurance standard-setting process, including the ongoing development of an insurance capital standard (ICS) for internationally active insurance groups. In my remarks today, I will touch on these topics. In the hope of providing greater transparency, I will also provide some updates on the Board's forthcoming proposal on insurance holding company capital requirements, often referred to as the Building Block Approach (BBA). The Insurance Industry's Importance in the Economy The U.S. insurance market, the largest in the world, generated over $2 trillion of direct written premium in 2017, over 10 percent of the total U.S. gross domestic product for that year and the highest direct premium volume in the years following the financial crisis. 1 Over a quarter of that premium came from life insurers, 2 including, of course, the institutions represented in this room. In addition to its role providing insurance products--taking on risk and enabling policyholders to plan financially--the insurance industry plays an immensely important role through its investments. In 2017, nearly 65 percent of the insurance industry's $6.5 trillion in cash and invested assets was from the life insurance industry. 3 Over 70 percent of life insurers' invested assets were held in bonds, 4 including corporate bonds, which fuel growth in the real economy. Historically, insurers have been relatively conservative, buy-and-hold investors. This has served both the industry and the economy well. 5 As we all appreciate, life insurance and annuities are in many ways a spread business, with investment of premium dollars funding later payments to policyholders. In the years since the financial crisis, the insurance industry has shown resilience, with capital and surplus increasing at an average annual growth rate of 4.1 percent since 2007. 6 With an approach to investment and financial management that focuses on the long-term, the U.S. insurance industry continues to play a valued role in the financial sector. The Federal Reserve's Consolidated Supervision of Insurance Firms Now in its eighth year of having a supervisory role over certain insurers, the Federal Reserve continues to thoughtfully approach its mandates and authority. The Dodd-Frank Act gave the Federal Reserve regulatory responsibilities for insurance holding companies that choose to own a federally insured depository institution and those designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. The insurance thrift holding companies supervised by the Federal Reserve represent just under 10 percent of U.S. insurance industry assets and span a wide range of sizes, structures, and business activities. 7 With a core focus on ensuring the safety and soundness of the supervised insurance institutions, and protecting their subsidiary depository institutions, the Board aims to continue fulfilling its role as consolidated supervisor by tailoring its oversight to the insurance business of the supervised firms, complementing the existing work of state insurance supervisors. The Federal Reserve has aimed to develop policies that are insurance-centric and appropriate for insurance risks. For instance, the Board's advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) on insurance capital requirements set out two frameworks for capital standards that are each unlike the Board's capital rules for bank holding companies. 8 The BBA, as set out in the ANPR, was fashioned as a framework that builds upon the regulatory capital rules of subsidiaries' functional regulators--state or foreign insurance regulators for insurance subsidiaries and federal banking regulators for insured depository institutions--to provide a consolidated capital requirement. We appreciate the comments we have received, including from the ACLI and other interested parties, and have worked hard to reflect the perspectives of commenters in developing the framework. We expect to publish a formal proposal in the not-too-distant future, and I will provide a high-level preview here today. The Board's Approach to a Capital Standard for Insurance Holding Companies It is worth sharing some further context for the Board's development of the BBA before previewing its design and key attributes. As outlined in the ANPR, the Board strove to develop a framework that encompassed all material risks across the entire supervised enterprise. We favored an approach that is as standardized as possible, rather than relying on internal capital models of supervised firms, in order to promote transparency and facilitate comparability across firms. We also aimed to strike an efficient balance between simplicity and risk sensitivity in order to ensure accurate reflection of risks while minimizing regulatory burden. To further limit regulatory burden, the Board envisioned a BBA that would rely upon existing U.S. accounting and capital frameworks to the greatest extent possible. In designing the BBA, there were, of course, a number of ideas for how we should construct this framework. At the outset, we decided against applying the Board's bank holding company capital rules to supervised insurance firms at the enterprise level, in light of the very different business models of insurance and banking. We considered that a capital approach akin to the European Solvency II framework would not adequately incorporate U.S. accounting frameworks that, relative to other approaches, tend to be less prone to volatility and procyclicality. Volatility in a valuation approach that is used in a capital standard can especially affect long-term contracts, with the potential for unintended consequences on the ability of insurers to provide long-term life insurance and retirement planning products. Moreover, use of an approach that entails more reliance on internal models could undermine our desire for consistent, cross-firm comparisons and can lack transparency to market participants and supervisors. Another framework that could have informed the development of the BBA is the ICS, but much of ICS's evolution has been in the direction of a valuation method and overall framework that reflect approaches used elsewhere in the world. This may not be optimal for the United States insurance market. Importantly, the BBA will appropriately reflect, rather than unduly penalize, long duration liabilities in the United States, facilitating the continued robustness of product availability in the U.S. that contributes to greater financial security for Americans. In the U.S., an aggregation-based approach like the BBA could also strike a better balance between entity-level, and enterprise-wide, supervision of insurance firms. Having spoken enough about what the proposed BBA is not, I should spend some time previewing what it is, and I suspect there is some interest in this room about that topic. Preview of the Building Block Approach The proposed BBA is an approach to a consolidated capital requirement that considers all material risks within the enterprise by aggregating the capital positions of companies under an insurance holding company, after making some adjustments and scaling them to a common capital regime. To streamline implementation burden while reflecting all material risks, I think it would make sense to use the NAIC's insurance capital framework as the common capital regime. As the name implies, the BBA constructs "building blocks"--or groupings of entities in the supervised firm--that are covered under the same capital regime. These building blocks are then used to calculate combined, enterprise-level capital resources and requirements. In each building block, the BBA generally applies the capital regime for that block to the subsidiaries in that block. For instance, in a life insurance building block, subsidiaries within this block would be treated in the BBA the way they would be treated under life insurance capital requirements. In a depository institution building block, subsidiaries would be subject to bank regulatory capital requirements. The financial crisis taught us that certain activities in an insurance enterprise--for instance, derivatives activity--could pose risks to the enterprise that may not always be reflected through affiliates subject to capital regimes. To address regulatory gaps and arbitrage risks, like those made manifest in the financial crisis, the BBA generally would apply bank regulatory capital requirements to nonbank/non-insurance building blocks. Once the enterprise's entities are grouped into building blocks, and capital resources and requirements are computed for each building block, the enterprise's capital position is produced by generally adding up the capital positions of each building block. In order for the BBA's aggregation to function appropriately, and to reflect the Board's supervisory objectives, the BBA needs to make certain adjustments to the building blocks. For instance, to compare similar activities across building blocks, the BBA would apply insurance capital rules consistently, without regard to permitted accounting practices granted by an individual state, thus uniformly applying statutory accounting principles as set forth by the NAIC. Measures to avoid double-counting, including double-leverage, that could arise from intercompany transactions would be built into the BBA's aggregation process. Other areas where adjustments would be made include provisions to comply with the Collins Amendment of the Dodd-Frank Act 9 --for instance, allowing only instruments meeting the criteria under the Board's bank capital rules to qualify as capital for an insurance holding company--and technical adjustments. Aggregation requires a further step after adjustments are applied to each building block, a step that is frequently termed "scaling." Two building blocks under two different capital regimes cannot simply be added together if, as is frequently the case, each regime has a different scale for its ratios and thresholds. The BBA proposes to scale and equate capital positions in different regimes through analyzing historical defaults under those regimes. Once the insurance holding company's aggregate capital position is calculated, the BBA would impose a minimum requirement that is calibrated to be consistent with the Board's role to ensure that the risks of the enterprise do not present undue risk to the safety and soundness of the depository institution. Our goal with the BBA is to capture all material risk of each supervised organization, leverage existing legal-entity standards, and minimize burden. In developing the BBA, we have been mindful of the role that the insurance industry plays through its buy-and-hold, long-term approach to investments. A capital standard can have incentive effects, sometimes substantial. A capital standard that uses market-based valuation can introduce volatility and procyclicality, and one that is excessively volatile or procyclical can influence a firm to veer away from a long-term perspective and concentrate instead on the short term. This can have undesirable consequences, including diminishing product availability. In contrast, a capital standard that is stable in its valuation, conservative in its design, and appropriately reflective of financial soundness can influence firms to plan for the long term, consistent with the nature of life insurance and retirement products, and similarly invest for the long term through assets like government and municipal bonds, corporate bonds, and infrastructure. Moreover, a capital standard like the BBA that largely builds on state-based insurance capital standards would tend to reinforce, rather than frustrate, the important role that insurers' investments play in our economy. Engagement with the NAIC In developing the BBA, we also have been mindful of the potential interaction with the valuable work of another Team USA member, the NAIC, to develop its Group Capital Calculation (GCC). We also applaud the NAIC's efforts to address life insurers' potential liquidity risks and develop a liquidity stress testing framework for large life insurers through the NAIC's Macro Prudential Initiative. The primary functional supervisor for insurance companies for which the Board is consolidated supervisor is a state insurance regulator. It is just good policy for the authorities that mutually supervise firms to coordinate efforts in order to streamline, seek harmony, and minimize inconsistencies. To that end, in August of 2017, the Federal Reserve initiated contact with the NAIC and state insurance supervisors to engage in dialogue with the aim of achieving consistency, wherever possible, between the two capital frameworks under development. We have met frequently and engaged substantively with representatives of the NAIC and the states. Input from the NAIC and the states has helped identify areas of commonality while remaining respectful of the somewhat different objectives of the relevant supervisory bodies and legal environments. Some differences between the Board's BBA and the NAIC's GCC may arise. There are reasons for this. The Board's mandate includes protection of a federally insured depository institution and the attendant safety-and-soundness objectives. As to a firm's insurance subsidiaries, the states' focus is on policyholder protection, while the Board serves as the overall firm's consolidated safety-and-soundness supervisor. The Board's capital standard also must comport with federal law for insurance holding companies with depository institution subsidiaries, while the NAIC's GCC interfaces primarily with state laws. Moreover, because of the characteristics of the current population of insurance thrift holding companies, the BBA currently would only need to scale between two regimes: the NAIC's insurance risk-based capital regime and federal bank capital rules. By contrast, the firms to which the GCC may apply can encompass operations in a number of non-U.S. jurisdictions, calling for a much more extensive set of scaling parameters. The NAIC has announced its plan to conduct a field test of the GCC this spring. Likewise, to be transparent, gather additional input, and provide a valuable test of our approach, the Federal Reserve intends to conduct a quantitative impact study of the BBA as part of our rulemaking process. We hope supervised firms will take advantage of this opportunity to contribute valuable information and feedback on our approach. Our dialogue with the NAIC and state insurance regulators has been productive and helpful in the BBA's development. Moreover, this engagement has been helpful for Team USA's efforts in the international insurance standard-setting arena. The Federal Reserve's Advocacy in International Insurance Standard Setting It is our intent that the Federal Reserve's development of the BBA, together with the NAIC's development of the GCC, will assist with Team USA's advocacy of an aggregation method that can be deemed comparable to the ICS. In 2013, through the Federal Reserve's role as consolidated supervisor of certain insurers, we joined the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), strengthening our collaboration with the other members of Team USA that continues to this day. The standards produced through the IAIS are, of course, not binding upon the United States. However, it remains in our national interest to engage in the international insurance standards-development process so that it produces standards that are appropriate for the U.S. market and consumers and for U.S. companies operating abroad. I see this philosophy as being important not only in the Federal Reserve's engagement in the IAIS, but also with the broader Financial Stability Board. Team USA's collaboration is prominently visible in our advocacy at the IAIS. In order for any form of an ICS to be implementable globally, it needs to be suitable for the U.S. insurance market. The current core proposal in the ICS would face implementation challenges in the United States. For instance, such a framework may fail to adequately account for U.S. accounting frameworks, both Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and the NAIC's Statutory Accounting Principles, introduce excessive volatility, and involve excessive reliance on supervised firms' internal models. Among other things, this motivates our advocacy of an aggregation alternative, and the use of an alternative valuation method that derives from U.S. GAAP, in the ICS. Furthermore, we support the collection of information on an aggregation-based approach that would reside within the ICS, and actively participate, together with other jurisdictions that espouse aggregation-based approaches, in the development of such an approach for the ICS. Among other things, aggregation approaches bring advantages, including sensitivity to local products and risks. The BBA, in adding to Team USA's work on aggregation methods with a tangible example, can assist in our collective advocacy. In sum, we remain committed to discharging our domestic authority responsibly and in a way that recognizes the unique business of insurance companies. Additionally, we will continue to advocate for international insurance standards that promote a global level playing field and work well for the U.S. insurance market. Thank you again for the opportunity to speak with you today. 1. Federal Insurance Office, Department of the Treasury, Annual Report on the Insurance Industry (PDF) (September 2018), 65-70; see, for example, National Association of Insurance Commissioners, State Insurance Regulation: Key Facts and Market Trends (PDF) (2018), 4. See also Bureau of Economic Analysis, " Gross Domestic Product, Third Quarter 2018 (Advance Estimate) (PDF) ," news release, October 26, 2018, 9. Return to text 2. FIO 2018 Annual Report , 65-70; see, for example, NAIC 2018 Key Facts and Market Trends , 4. Return to text 3. National Association of Insurance Commissioners, Capital Markets Special Report , " U.S. Insurance Industry's Cash and Invested Assets Rise 5.1% in 2017 (PDF) ," (August 16, 2018), 2. In 2017, the life insurance industry held approximately $7 trillion in total assets. FIO 2018 Annual Report , 66; National Association of Insurance Commissioners, 2017 Life, A&H and Fraternal Insurance Industry Analysis Report (PDF) (2018), 1. Return to text 4. 2017 Life, A&H and Fraternal Insurance Industry Analysis Report (2018), 1; see also FIO 2018 Annual Report , 80. Return to text 5. See Anna Paulson and Richard J. Rosen, " The Life Insurance Industry and Systemic Risk: A Bond Market Perspective ," Working Paper 2016-04 (Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, March 2016), 9-17. Return to text 6. FIO 2018 Annual Report , 76. Return to text 7. See FIO 2018 Annual Report , 66. Return to text 8. Capital Requirements for Supervised Institutions Significantly Engaged in Insurance Activities , 81 Fed. Reg. 38,631 (June 14, 2016). Return to text 9. The so-called Collins Amendment (Section 171) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires, among other things, that the Board establish consolidated, minimum risk-based capital requirements that are not less than the current generally applicable capital requirements for insured depository institutions nor quantitatively lower than the generally applicable capital requirements for these institutions in effect at the time of the Dodd‑Frank Act's enactment. A 2014 amendment to this provision set out that, in applying these minimum capital requirements, the Board is not required to include a person regulated by a state insurance regulator or a regulated foreign subsidiary or affiliate of such person engaged in the business of insurance. Return to text Last Update: January 09, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles To the Council for Economic Education, New York, New York Share Thank you, Nan, for that kind introduction, and thank you to President Mester of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland for inviting me to speak this evening. I am honored to be here and to support the mission that you and the Council for Economic Education have worked so hard to advance--that every student in America gets a strong, early start on their financial education. That mission is critical in its own right, but it also reflects the deeply held value of participation--of giving young people the chance to shape not just their own futures, but also the futures of their communities and their country. Because so much of the language of finance is couched in terms of metrics and rationality, we often forget that finance is something we never do alone. It is, by definition, a collaboration, which helps us work together to achieve common goals. The Federal Reserve is no exception. Tonight, I want to briefly discuss the role that participation plays in the Federal Reserve's work and outline one effort to solicit broad participation--an upcoming conference on stress tests, intended to make those tests more open, transparent, and effective. Public institutions exist under a grant of trust from the people they serve, to pursue a specific policy goal. When the public holds an institution accountable for that grant, the institution becomes stronger. The Federal Reserve System we know today emerged through decades of legislation, public consultation, and debate--from the original Federal Reserve Act, which created the Federal Reserve System, to the Banking Act of 1935, 1 which established the modern Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), to the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord of 1951 (PDF) , which ensured the separation of monetary and fiscal policy. 2 These changes made our economy and our country stronger, because they improved the Federal Reserve's ability to accomplish the mission Congress assigned it. Throughout this evolution, a key principle has been that accountability allows the Federal Reserve to be independent--that we are subject to challenge, to counterargument, and to the emergence of new evidence and ideas. For our work to remain legitimate, the public must be able to see, understand, and engage with our efforts; to reaffirm their support when we have earned it; and to offer informed guidance on when to change course. Accountability is only one reason the Federal Reserve relies on public outreach and participation. We also rely on participation for our effectiveness, because the best ideas in finance and economics can, and often do, come from a wide variety of sources. Agencies like the Federal Reserve are a collection of expertise--informed by experience and positioned to turn a broad range of information into policy. But we are not, and cannot be, a monopoly on insight or wisdom. The Federal Reserve recognizes these limits, and the need to invite new ideas, through a variety of initiatives. We seek out a qualified, diverse workforce, and foster an inclusive workplace. 3 We meet frequently with a range of advisory councils, drawing on expertise in banking, modeling, and consumer and community finance. 4 We have increased transparency around our policy process and issued new reports on financial stability and banking supervision and regulation, with new details about our work. 5 And across the Federal Reserve System, our staff publishes a wide range of economic and policy research and plays an active role in academic discourse. Monetary policy itself shows the value of participation and transparency. U.S. monetary policy is the sole responsibility of the Federal Reserve. Yet some of the most important innovations in the field have come from outside the Reserve System. Since 1935, we have decided monetary policy by committee, a structure that has served us well because it is designed to capture different views of a wide and varied national economy. And over the past several decades, the FOMC has greatly increased its own transparency--from postmeeting announcements, to announcing an objective for inflation, to a published survey of economic projections, to postmeeting press conferences (which will now take place after every FOMC meeting). 6 As many of you know, over the course of 2019, we will be reviewing our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices, and we will hold a research conference on the subject with outside speakers, as well as "Fed Listens" events at a number of Reserve Banks, to hear from a broad range of constituencies. But these improvements are more than a simple matter of disclosure. They are an invitation to participate, and a way to provide the public with the means and opportunity to inform our work. This year, we are taking similar steps to improve a cornerstone of our post-crisis rules. Supervisory stress tests offer an independent and valuable lens on the health of the banking system. They offer us a forward-looking measurement of bank capital, a view of common and systemic risks across the banking sector, and a broader understanding of the health of the financial system. The results are valuable for markets, analysts, and ultimately, the participating firms. Ten years have passed since the Federal Reserve conducted its first supervisory stress tests. That initial experiment helped stabilize financial markets and shore up our banking system at a critical and uncertain time. Our challenge now is to preserve the strength of the test, while improving its efficiency, transparency, and integration into the post-crisis regulatory framework. To that end, the stress tests have not remained static. Just in the past several days, the Board acted to suspend stress tests this year for lower-risk firms--generally, those with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion. 7 That move follows the passage of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act. 8 The extended cycle provides administrative burden relief for these institutions and recognizes the different risks that they typically pose--especially compared to the largest and most complex firms, whose failure poses the greatest risk to the real economy. Even with this change, the stress tests remain a core part of our supervision of these firms. Our experience with this "interim" year will inform the move to a permanently longer testing cycle--a change that would, of course, be subject to a full notice and comment process. 9 Improvements like these are necessary to ensure our supervisory framework evolves from its post-crisis origins to an effective steady state. The question of how best to consolidate the gains from the first 10 years of stress testing deserves the attention and effort of the country's best minds. We should welcome changes and novel ideas, even when they explore stress testing in a new and unfamiliar light. In July, as a forum for such ideas, we will host a public conference focused on the transparency and effectiveness of stress testing. Called Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review , the event will convene panel discussions, drawing on a mix of presenters with industry, academic, and regulatory backgrounds. It will involve written papers, which will be compiled and published to spur further research. We expect the insights from the conference to inform the evolution of our stress-testing framework--and we hope to continue the conversation well after the conference ends. This input is as essential to our work as any public outreach we do. Stress testing provides insight into a dynamic financial system, and our stress-testing process must be dynamic as well. More broadly, the core of the Federal Reserve's independence is a broad consensus around the value and public worth of our mission. The Federal Reserve is the steward and trustee of that mission, but the public is its owner. To serve the public, we must not just allow input, but welcome it; not just permit debate, but foster it; not just allow participation, but treat it as essential to our work. Thank you. 1. Pub.L. No. 305 (1935) . Return to text 2. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Treasury and Federal Reserve Statements ," Federal Reserve Bulletin 37 (March 1951): 237. Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Diversity and Inclusion Strategic Plan 2016-19 (Washington: Board of Governors, December 2016). Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Advisory Councils " (January 25, 2019). Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Financial Stability Report (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, November 2018); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Supervision and Regulation Report (Washington: Board of Governors, November 2018). Return to text 6. The FOMC's "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," first issued in January 2012 and reaffirmed each January, specifies that the Committee judges that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate and that the Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective. Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Federal Reserve Board releases scenarios for 2019 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) and Dodd-Frank Act stress test exercises ," news release, February 5, 2018. Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, " Interagency Statement Regarding the Impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) (PDF) ," news release, July 6, 2018. Return to text 9. Changes proposed as part of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act have been proposed but not finalized. Similarly, changes as part of the proposed "stress capital buffer" have been proposed but not finalized. Both proposals will inform the final rule governing the methodology for capital distributions. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Framework that Would More Closely Match Regulations for Large Banking Organizations with Their Risk Profiles ," news release, October 31, 2018; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Federal Reserve Board Seeks Comment on Proposal to Simplify Its Capital Rules for Large Banks while Preserving Strong Capital Levels that Would Maintain Their Ability to Lend Under Stressful Conditions ," news release, April 10, 2018. Return to text Last Update: February 06, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K. Quarles At Bank for International Settlements Special Governors Meeting, Hong Kong Share Let me begin by thanking the Bank for International Settlements and Agustín Carstens for the invitation to join you today. In considering venues for my inaugural speech as chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), I found this particular opportunity quite fitting. It is an honor to be here, in Hong Kong, with colleagues from around the world, representing central banks who are committed to advancing financial stability not only in their home countries but also globally. I would like to discuss with you tonight my view of how the work of the FSB must evolve, and some key principles that I think should inform that work. My predecessor, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney, guided the FSB for the last seven years along a path that was formidably challenging. The Global Financial Crisis had exposed fault lines in the financial system that had to be addressed immediately, comprehensively, and vigorously. The body of post-crisis regulation that has resulted, though it involved the energy and efforts of a kaleidoscopically varied host of standard setters, regulators, and central banks--including all the institutions in this room--was nonetheless accomplished under the aegis and at the instigation of the FSB. It was a tour de force of orchestration, and it has unquestionably made the financial system safer and more resilient. Today, however, the post-crisis reform agenda has been largely completed. Basel III is final, the largest global banks have substantially more capital and liquidity, over-the-counter derivatives markets are safer, and steps have been taken to address the risks of too-big-to-to fail institutions. Through greater monitoring and policy measures, the FSB is addressing risks from non-bank financial intermediation. And there has been remarkable progress on the difficult and unsung task of establishing workable resolution regimes that are consistent with the FSB's clearly defined principles. Yes, we all have work to do to ensure full, timely, and consitent implementation of the agreed reforms, and, yes, we will do that work, but, it is time for the FSB to turn more of its energy and attention to the future. Tonight I would like to outline a few core principles that should guide this pivot forward. First, engagement: to maintain the legitimacy of our work, to increase understanding of it, and to enhance its effectiveness, we must improve our outreach and transparency--including to our membership, other global authorities, the public, and key stakeholders. Second, rigor: as we devote more attention to evaluation of new and evolving risks in the financial sector, we must ensure that our assessment of vulnerabilities is based on cutting-edge thinking and a disciplined methodology. And third, analysis: regulation has evolved rapidly in the last decade, and--if we are doing our jobs right--will continue to evolve with rapid developments in the financial sector. An important part of our work must be continual, critical analysis of the effects of regulaton with an eye to making useful improvements where possible. Engagement: Outreach and Transparency Let me begin with the principle of engagement, and let me lay the groundwork for this discussion by reviewing the way the FSB was established and its mandate, to see how we can continue to fulfill that mandate going forward. As we all know, the FSB was born out of the crucible of the 2007-09 Global Financial Crisis--a crisis that demonstrated in the starkest possible way the importance of global financial stability to the well-being of families and businesses around the world. In the months following the peak of the crisis, the world was struggling with financial market turmoil, and the resultant macroeconomic effects were felt by people everywhere around the world. It was clear that the response to this crisis needed to be global, and the G7 and G10, without any emerging market representation, were not the right bodies to organize a global response. As such, the Heads of State and Government of the G20 called for the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), a relatively small and unmuscular group, to expand its membership and to strengthen its institutional framework. The result was the Financial Stability Board, which was designed as a mechanism for national authorities, global standards-setting bodies, and international authorities to identify and address vulnerabilities in the global financial system and to develop stronger regulatory and supervisory policies to create a more resilient global financial system. This new group is more representative of the interconnected global economy and financial system and can more effectively mobilize to promote global financial stability than anything that existed before. Whereas the FSF included only 11 jurisdictions (all of which were advanced economies), the FSB includes 24 jurisdictions and 73 representatives, which include all the members of the G20 and of which 10 are emerging market economies. In fostering global financial stability, the actions of the FSB have the potential to affect the global economy and financial system in important ways. Success in promoting global financial stability should benefit everybody, through more sustainable and stronger economic growth. At the same time, financial stability policy will also affect institutions and markets beyond the FSB's membership. Recognizing the wide-reaching effects of its work, the FSB must seek input from a broad range of stakeholders, each of whom brings a different perspective to the issues under consideration. While we are directly accountable to the G20, we are, through the G20, accountable to all of the people affected by our actions. In my view, that means we must engage in genuine, substantial dialogue with all of these stakeholders, to a greater and more effective degree than we have in the past. Let me take an example that may be of particular relevance to many of you here tonight: our Regional Consultative Groups or RCGs. These are six groups around the globe--the Americas, Europe, the Middle East and North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, the Commonwealth of Independent States, and Asia--that bring together FSB members with about 70 additional jurisdictions. These groups help the FSB get broader input into its policy development and improve our outreach efforts. Each RCG meets once or twice a year to discuss policy development, regional and global financial vulnerabilities, and other current topics of particular interest to the respective region. For instance, topics discussed at the last meeting in Asia included capital flow volatility, cyber resilience of financial institutions, and fintech. These RCGs are great in concept, but they have struggled in practice. We have already begun a study to look back at how the RCGs have operated since their creation in 2011, how they interact with the FSB, and what best practices have been learned. Even while that study is underway, I am committed to improving our mechanisms for reaching out to countries outside the FSB for genuine learning about the effects of FSB actions. I plan to attend a number of RCG meetings each year because of the importance I place on making sure these groups are truly useful tools, and we will improve these vital conduits of two-way information in order to improve our effectiveness and our transparency. While the RCGs may be of particular interest to some here tonight, they are just the tip of the iceberg for what we have to do to improve our engagement and outreach. Because the FSB's authority is ultimately derived from the people and from the political power given to authorities in their countries, we have a responsibility to seek input from and to provide information about our deliberations and actions to the broader public. To that end, for the first time in the FSB's history, we will shortly publish our work program to the public to provide people with a full picture of the issues we are investigating over the coming year. Finally, there are the businesses, institutions, and market participants that are directly affected by the policy recommendations of the FSB. We currently engage with those entities to gather information as we consider recommendations to the G20. For example, we have in the past conducted public consultations on FSB policy recommendations--but often on a very short timetable, which limits the ability for true exchange. We have now established an expectation that the public consultation period will be at least 60 days. The key point is that when it comes to outreach to inform our work and transparency in the communication of it, we must do more, and more eagerly. This discussion of engagement, outreach and transparency may seem like an odd place to begin a "vision" speech, but I think it is foundational. The FSB must maintain its legitimacy in order to be effective, and to do that we have to work hard to hear from all relevant parties when deliberating. What's more, we have to do so publicly and methodically. Everyone around the world should understand that we only make recommendations once we have gathered and considered all points of view. Process is important, and good process leads to good substance. Assessing Financial Stability With that said, let me turn to the core piece of the FSB's mission--assessing and mitigating vulnerabilities, especially in the nonbank sector. The FSB's work has a natural flow. We strive to identify vulnerabilities in the financial system that could threaten financial stability when a shock hits. When a vulnerability has been identified, we examine possible policy responses. If a policy is recommended to the G20 and adopted, we then monitor the implementation of that recommendation globally. Finally, when enough time has passed for the enacted policies to have had measurable effects, we study those effects. For much of the post-crisis period, our focus was on developing policy recommendations to address vulnerabilities made apparent by the crisis. Now, however, with nearly all of the post-crisis reform agenda complete, the FSB needs to put more of our resources into identifying new vulnerabilities in a financial sector that continues to evolve and to studying the effects of the many reforms that have been enacted. Let me start by discussing vulnerability assessment. The reforms that have been implemented over the past decade have changed the financial system for the better. However, that does not mean we are immune from future financial crises. It means that we have boosted the financial system's resilience to some of the types of shocks and vulnerabilities that precipitated the crisis. To be sure, some of these measures, like higher bank capital and liquidity requirements, after effective against a wide range of shocks. However, we cannot be complacent and assume that we are safe from all shocks. As a result, the FSB has decided to undertake a review of its framework for assessing vulnerabilities to ensure that we are at the cutting edge of financial stability vulnerability assessment. This work will be undertaken by our committee charged with assessing vulnerabilities under the leadership of FSB Vice Chair Klaas Knot of the Dutch National Bank (De Nederlandsche Bank). This should be a framework that starts from first principles and benefits from substantial dialogue with nonbanks as well as banks, regulators, and other relevant official bodies. There is a lot that we can draw on. The crisis led to an explosion of work in this area aimed at improving the ability of authorities to identify financial vulnerabilities in order to be able to take appropriate action in a timely fashion. I trust that the framework will harness the strength of the broad and diverse membership of the FSB, that it will be forward looking, and that it will be flexible enough to handle a financial system that will continue to evolve over time. This will not be easy--developments like the emergence of crypto-assets may challenge any framework--but that makes the goal of a robust framework all the more important. Evaluating the Effects of Reform Finally, let me turn to the FSB's evaluation of the effects of reforms that have been implemented. In the past few years, we have reached a point where many of the reforms have been in place for long enough to have effects that we can measure and analyze. For those reforms, we need to ask several key questions. First, to what extent are those reforms having the intended effects and building a more resilient financial system? Second, have those reforms had any unintended, adverse effects that we can address? These first two questions are, perhaps, apparent. We should also ask a third question, however, that is equally important: can we achieve a strong level of financial resilience with reforms that are more efficient, simple, transparent, and tailored? If so, we owe it to everyone affected by the policies recommended by the FSB to try, because there is a strong public interest in the efficiency of the financial sector, just as there is in its safety and soundness. If reforms are unnecessarily burdensome and we can achieve strong resiliency more efficiently and simply, we should be able to boost sustainable financial and economic activity, thus benefitting everyone. Evaluating reforms in light of these questions requires rigor--in terms of the selection of evaluation topics, the choice of analytical methods, the assessment of effects, and the development of policy conclusions. This rigor is critical for the quality and credibility of the evaluation work. For this reason, the FSB developed a clear Evaluation Framework, under which the evaluations are based, as much as possible, on quantitative data to measure the costs and benefits of reforms. Equally critical to a successful review is a truly open mindset with which to evaluate the relevant data. One public measure of whether we are doing this review process well will be whether we recommend any improvements or revisions on the basis of it. In any system as complex and consequential as the body of post-crisis financial regulations, there will always be aspects--and sometimes material aspects--that can be improved on the basis of experience and analysis. A credible review process that is both rigorous and dispassionate will find a few. Last year, the FSB completed the first two evaluations under its framework, of the effects of reform on infrastructure fin ance and the clearing of derivative contracts. We are currently engaged in work examining the effects of reforms on the financing of small and medium enterprises, which are the lifeblood of many of the world's economies. We will consult publicly on the findings of this evaluation in June, ahead of the G20 Summit in Osaka. And we are in the process of launching an important study on the effects of reforms aimed at ending too big to fail. This evaluation is being led by Claudia Buch, vice president of the Deutsche Bundesbank. Conclusion This is an important time for the FSB. We are nearing completion of the post-crisis reform agenda, a major accomplishment. With that comes the opportunity to turn our focus to ways in which we can improve the FSB and prepare it for the next phase of its existence. We will work diligently to enhance our transparency and to expand our efforts to reach out to as many stakeholders as possible. We will prepare for the next crisis by making sure that our framework to assess vulnerabilities to financial stability is state of the art and remains so going forward. And, we will work hard to maintain the important reforms in place, ensure they are working as intended, and, where possible, improve them. Last Update: February 10, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York Share When I was asked to participate on this panel in the middle of last year, the prevailing metaphor regarding Federal Reserve balance sheet policy was "as boring as watching paint dry." Well, times have changed, and I commend the conference organizers for their foresight. Today I would like to discuss some of the recent decisions that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has made regarding the balance sheet and lay out a rough framework for some further issues that are on the horizon. 1 In January, after much discussion, including in previous meetings, the FOMC announced its intent to continue operating in a framework of ample reserves. 2 In this regime, active management of the reserve supply is not needed. The Federal Reserve controls the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates primarily through the use of administered rates, including the rate paid on reserve balances and the offered rate on overnight reverse repurchase agreements. This regime is sometimes referred to as a floor system, because the administered rates place a floor under the rate at which banks and others will lend in the federal funds market. In adopting this framework, the Committee stated its intention to continue operating as it has for the past decade. The announcement was an important step in our normalization process. And we are now set up to make further decisions on the eventual size and composition of our balance sheet. Before providing more context on those decisions, let me first provide a little more detail around our decision to remain in the current framework of ample reserves. The most important factor in the decision was that the current system has worked very well. It has supported the achievement of our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. And it has shown itself to be flexible and well suited to maintaining interest rate control through various changes in money markets, bank regulation, and the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. Since the FOMC began lifting interest rates in December 2015, money market rates have generally moved closely with the federal funds rate, which in turn has followed changes in administered rates. Now that the decision on the operating framework has been made, a natural next step is to contemplate the appropriate size of the Fed's balance sheet and reserves and the process for getting there. In line with the requirements of operating with ample reserves--and boosted by the growth in nonreserve liabilities--the Fed will maintain a larger balance sheet and reserve supply relative to the pre-crisis period, with the goal of remaining on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve. I would note that reserves have already declined appreciably from their peak, falling by $1.2 trillion to a current level of around $1.6 trillion. At the same time, we have seen a substantial increase in our nonreserve liabilities, such as currency in circulation and the Treasury General Account balance. In our statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, we outlined an intention to hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. 3 As the balance sheet continues to shrink, we are now in the process of determining that necessary size. Ultimately, the size of the balance sheet will be determined by a number of factors, including demand for nonreserve liabilities, such as currency (which has been rising), and, importantly, the quantity of reserves necessary to remain reliably on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve. Survey results suggest that banks have greatly increased their demand for reserves in the post-crisis period. Responses to the September 2018 Senior Financial Officer Survey report that banks would be comfortable with a level of reserves in the system in the neighborhood of $800 billion, taking into consideration the level of interest rates at the time. 4 In part, this increased demand reflects a response to regulatory changes introduced after the crisis. These changes include, importantly, the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), which has improved banks' liquidity resilience by requiring firms to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to cover potential outflows during times of stress. Reserves, along with Treasury securities, are favored under the LCR, and, consequently, firms currently meet a sizable fraction of their LCR requirements by holding reserves. Notwithstanding survey results, the level of reserve demand remains quite uncertain. It is possible that, over time, the preferences of banks will shift, or that demand will prove more price elastic than banks are currently expecting. As I have discussed previously, bank holdings of reserves to meet LCR requirements could shift toward Treasury securities, as aggregate reserves decline, without much upward pressure on the federal funds rate. 5 That said, even if uncertain, it is probably safe to say that reserve demand is much higher than before the crisis. As we work to calibrate ample reserves, there are some tradeoffs that are worth noting. For example, we could operate with a level of reserve balances at the lower end of what might be considered ample. In that case, there would likely be occasions when unexpected declines in the supply of reserves or increases in the demand for reserves would require an open market operation to offset temporary upward pressures on the federal funds rate. Alternatively, we could operate with an average supply of reserves large enough to keep the federal funds rate determined along the flat portion of the reserve demand curve even with an unexpected shift in the supply of or demand for reserves. This approach would be operationally convenient but would also leave the size of the balance sheet and reserves larger than necessary most of the time. In my view, it might be appropriate for us to operate somewhere in between these two extremes, with a sizable quantity of reserves large enough to buffer against most shocks to reserve supply. On those few days when that buffer is likely to be exhausted, we could conduct open market operations to temporarily boost the supply of reserves. With so much uncertainty over the level and slope of the reserve demand curve, a degree of caution is warranted. As outlined in the minutes of the January FOMC meeting, the Committee has discussed ending the reduction in the Fed's aggregate asset holdings sometime in the latter half of this year, with still-ample reserves in the system. 6 At that point, one option discussed, without any decision being made at this point, is to hold the level of total assets roughly fixed for a time. Even as the total size of the balance sheet remains fixed, the composition of the liabilities would gradually change, in part as demand for currency grows in line with the economy. Over time, the gradual increase in nonreserve liabilities would displace reserves as the overall balance sheet remains fixed. This plan would substantially reduce the pace of the decline in reserves, allowing us to gradually approach our assessment of the appropriate amount of reserves for the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy. Of course, in the longer run, once we reach our preferred level of reserves, the balance sheet would have to resume growth to match a continued increase in demand for nonreserve liabilities. I would like to wrap up with a brief discussion of some of the other decision points we will encounter as we continue the process of normalizing our balance sheet. In particular, what does the Committee judge to be normal in regard to the type and duration of assets that we will hold? On composition, in line with our previously announced normalization principles, I favor a return to a balance sheet with all Treasury securities, allowing our mortgage-backed securities (MBS) holdings to run to zero. In those principles, we also state that while we do not expect sales of MBS as part of the normalization process, later we would be open to limited sales to reduce or eliminate residual holdings of MBS. In regard to duration, moving to shorten the duration of our holdings could increase the Fed's ability to affect long-term interest rates if the need arose. However, it might be preferable to have the composition of our Treasury holdings roughly match the maturity composition of outstanding Treasury securities, minimizing any market distortions that could arise from our holdings. Over the course of our upcoming meetings, I look forward to what promises to be an interesting discussion on these issues with my colleagues. Finally, in assessing our balance sheet policy, it is important to point out that the Fed remains entirely focused on meeting its statutory dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. The normalization of the balance sheet is not a competing goal. If ever it appears that our plans for the balance sheet are running counter to the achievement of our dual-mandate objectives, we would quickly reassess our approach to the balance sheet. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. For more information, see the Committee's Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm . Return to text 3. The Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans were adopted on September 16, 2014, and can be found on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_policynormalization.pdf . The FOMC adopted addenda to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans on March 18, 2015 (PDF) , and on June 13, 2017 (PDF) . Return to text 4. The survey is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sfos/files/senior-financial-officer-survey-201809.pdf . Return to text 5. See Randal K. Quarles (2018), " Liquidity Regulation and the Size of the Fed's Balance Sheet ," speech delivered at "Currencies, Capital, and Central Bank Balances: A Policy Conference," a Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., May 4. Return to text 6. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, January 29-30, 2019 ," press release, February 20. Return to text Last Update: February 22, 2019 Back to Top
