Star Tribune Op-Ed: Affordable housing crisis demands more supply And governments must reform policies that drive up housing costs October 18, 2018 Authors Ron J. Feldman First Vice President and Chief Operating Officer Mark L. J. Wright Senior Vice President and Director of Research Star Tribune Op-Ed: Affordable housing crisis demands more supply Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This commentary was first published in the Star Tribune . Minnesota is experiencing an affordable housing crisis. Housing costs eat up too much of the budget for many Minnesota families, particularly those with low incomes. But there is no consensus about how to fix this problem. Surprisingly, some “experts” refuse to see private market production of housing as a central solution to the affordability problem. They argue that relying on the market to increase supply will not lower prices (“Minneapolis 2040 Plan: An economic principle is being misused,” July 23 ). More government subsidies for housing are the only path to affordability, in their view. We will not mince words: These views are dead wrong, and dangerous. Market supply must be a critical part of the solution. And governments must reform policies that drive up housing costs. Arithmetic alone shows that increasing private market supply is critical to reducing the cost of housing. In 2006, the Metropolitan Council estimated that the Twin Cities would need to provide an additional 51,000 homes affordable to low-income households during the 2011-20 period. Government subsidies to builders have yielded only about 7,000 such affordable homes so far during that time frame. Even if governments had subsidized builders at quadruple that rate, we would still be 23,000 units short of what is needed by 2020. The record over a long period of time suggests that state and city budgets will not fund future building subsidies of a magnitude that would produce the needed units. What about giving housing subsidies to households instead? Sounds appealing. But housing subsidies increase the demand for housing, so unless total supply also increases, prices will just go up. Current landlords and homeowners will get richer, but low-income families will have even fewer options. We’re back to the market, then. How does building more market-rate housing increase the supply — and lower the price — of housing affordable to low-income households? Let’s look to other cities for an example. In Portland and Seattle, thousands of new market-rate apartments have lowered rents in previously existing properties. If the new market-rate apartments had not been built, new arrivals to these cities would have competed for older and cheaper units. This would have bid up prices, displaced current residents and reduced the supply of affordable homes. Building more housing of any type affects the price of all other types of housing. For every luxury unit filled, a more modest home is left behind for another family to move up into. Build enough luxury homes, and the prices of regular homes fall, too. There also is a longer-term effect. Housing tends to decline in value over time, as it ages and as tastes for housing change. Older housing then becomes more affordable. Indeed, the Met Council found that the greatest source of new affordable housing comes from existing market-rate homes that have become cheaper over time. This takes time, but increasing supply now will prevent a re-emergence of the affordable housing crisis in the future. And research shows that this process occurs much faster than observers think. But we are not simply relying on markets to work. Our governments have the power to encourage the creation of new, lower-cost, market-rate housing. Governments can start by looking at policies that constrict housing supply by artificially inflating building costs. Relaxing zoning regulations to allow greater density is one option. Eliminating building code requirements that raise costs without commensurate benefits is another. And there are many more options for policymakers. Unlike subsidies, constructing market-rate homes costs our state and local governments nothing. To be absolutely clear: The private sector cannot solve all of our housing problems. State and local government support will remain necessary. Even massive increases in supply won’t make housing affordable for families in extreme poverty. The problem for these families is poverty itself; the solution is income support for housing and other needs. But for most of our neighbors, focusing too heavily on housing subsidies as the solution is wrong. Increasing market supply must be central to the response. And that means building many more homes in all communities throughout the Twin Cities. Ron Feldman is first vice president and Mark Wright is senior vice president and director of research at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. More On Public Policy Housing Region & Community More On Public Policy Housing Region & Community Related Content Burned out on hemp Article Baby is here. How much leave do parents take? Article Jesse Rothstein wants to say yes Article Related Content Burned out on hemp Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

WSJ Op-Ed: Pause Interest-Rate Hikes to Help the Labor Force Grow The Fed can tolerate inflation slightly above its 2% target and should take its foot off the brakes October 26, 2018 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO WSJ Op-Ed: Pause Interest-Rate Hikes to Help the Labor Force Grow Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This commentary was first published in the Wall Street Journal . The Federal Reserve formally set its annual inflation target at 2% in 2012. Then in 2016 it made a subtle but important clarification. It stated that the target is “symmetric”—rather than a “ceiling” as the European Central Bank has adopted. This means inflation can deviate modestly above or below the target in the short run without causing alarm. The Fed has raised the federal-funds rate eight times in the past three years, and inflation now stands right at the 2% goal. A hard inflation ceiling would justify pre-emptive rate increases to ensure inflation doesn’t climb any higher. But the symmetric objective gives the Federal Open Market Committee the flexibility to see how the economy evolves before determining if further rate increases are necessary. The FOMC should seize this opportunity for a pause. With the federal-funds rate at 2% to 2.25%, monetary policy is now close to neutral, neither stimulating nor restricting the economy. Prematurely tapping the brakes could restrain wage growth and keep many Americans from participating in the economic recovery. The Fed has consistently undershot its 2% inflation target. Core inflation averaged 1.6% over the past six years and hit the target only in March of this year. If inflation were to climb modestly above the target in the short run, there would be little need for the Fed to respond. If the 2% goal is truly symmetric, the Fed should be as tolerant of core inflation of 2.4% over six years as it has been with its downside misses over the last six. A pause on rate increases would allow the FOMC to gain important insights. Crucially, it would help determine how much slack remains in the labor market. For the past few years, policy makers have repeatedly thought the U.S. was at full employment, only to be surprised as Americans continued to enter the labor force in large numbers. In 2015 the FOMC estimated unemployment could not go below 5.1% without triggering inflation. Its current estimate is 4.5%; the actual unemployment rate is down to 3.7%, and wage growth and inflation are still muted. And the formal unemployment rate only counts people actively looking for work. By another measure—the percentage of prime-age Americans who are employed—nearly a million adults are still missing from the job market relative to 2006, and more than 2.5 million fewer are working relative to 1999. How many more of those missing workers would re-enter the labor force if wages picked up? We don’t know. There is also considerable uncertainty surrounding the long-run impact of the 2017 tax cut. Advocates argued it would boost private-sector investment, which would increase the capacity and productivity of the U.S. economy. If that turns out to be true, the tax cuts shouldn’t lead to higher inflation in the long run. Critics argue the tax cut is delivering a Keynesian sugar high, that modest growth rates will return once the high has worn off, and that taxpayers will be left holding $1.8 trillion in additional outstanding debt. Who’s right? It will take time to find out. If consumers and investors believe the economy is overheating and that additional debt from the tax cut will lead to greater price increases in the future, that should show up in inflation expectations. Yet expectations for inflation five to 10 years from now show little sign of increasing. If inflation or inflation expectations climb meaningfully above the Fed’s 2% target, the Fed should do whatever it takes to keep them in check. It was wrong to allow inflation to accelerate dramatically in the 1970s, and the American people paid a steep price in the form of high unemployment and very high interest rates. But until inflation or inflation expectations get meaningfully higher, the Fed should allow the economy to continue to strengthen, so as to allow as many Americans as possible to participate in the recovery. More On Monetary Policy Region & Community More On Monetary Policy Region & Community Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Is remote work declining? What the latest data show Article AI adoption in business grows steadily but unevenly Article Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
