Page 1 of 14 Interest Rates and the “New Normal” John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Community Banking in the 21st Century Research and Policy Conference Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis October 5, 2017 Introduction Good morning everyone. Today I’m going to talk about interest rates… in a lot of detail… so I hope you all got yourselves an extra large cup of coffee before you found your seats this morning. Why am I talking about interest rates? First, as President of the San Francisco Fed it’s a favorite subject of mine! Second, there are a lot of misperceptions out there about what’s going to happen to interest rates, when they’ll rise and by how much. As bankers, interest rates play a pivotal role in your lives, so I thought that you might appreciate a deeper dive into the current thinking. I frequently hear people say, “as things return to normal, and rates rise, we’ll be able to do A, B, or C.” It’s true that, post-financial crisis, things are returning to Page 2 of 14 normal. But normal may look and feel quite a bit different from what you’re used to, so I want to talk about this “new normal”. Since it’s clear I’m going to be talking about interest rates, now is the perfect time to insert the usual Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. First, the good news: The economy is growing at a moderate pace. In fact, we’re now in the ninth year of the expansion. As a result of the progress we’ve made getting our economy back on track, we’re in the process of slowly moving interest rates back up to more normal levels. But what does “normal” mean? I know that for many in finance the word normal conjures memories of the ’90s, when interest rates were often above 4 percent. But like the pager, the Walkman, and the Macarena, we’re unlikely to see such rates return. Bottom line: In the new world of moderate economic growth, banks need to plan for lower rates. Why is this? To explain why, I’m going to talk a bit about something called r-star, which is shorthand for normal interest rates. Then I’m going to talk a bit about growth, a bit about inflation, and discuss some interesting factors behind why Page 3 of 14 inflation’s remained stubbornly low (despite strong employment). Finally, I’m going to switch tacks and talk about the Fed balance sheet and what it means for longer-term rates. Please pay attention, because I’m looking forward to a lively discussion afterwards about the new normal and what that means for community banking. R-star With that road map in mind, let’s dive into r-star. R-star is what economists call the natural rate of interest; it’s the rate expected to prevail when the economy is at full strength, and it’s a helpful way to understand the new normal both in the short and longer term. While a central bank like the Fed sets short-term interest rates, r-star is a result of structural economic factors beyond the influence of central banks and monetary policy. My own view is that r-star today is around 0.5 percent. Assuming inflation is running at our goal of 2 percent in the future, the typical, or normal short-term interest rate would be 2.5 percent. That’s a full 2 percentage points below what a Page 4 of 14 normal interest rate looked like 20 years ago.1 We’ve seen this trend across other major economies: Average r-star across Canada, the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom is a bit below 0.5 percent.2 A variety of factors have pushed r-star to this low level, and they appear poised to stay that way.3 The major one is that the sustainable growth rate of the economy has slowed dramatically from prior decades.4 I put that growth rate at 1.5 percent for inflation-adjusted GDP, the slowest pace we’ve seen in our lifetimes. This slowdown reflects a one-two punch of a sharp decline in labor force growth and slower productivity growth.5 What’s caused the decline in labor force growth? Two main things: First, the baby boomers are retiring in droves. Second, the fertility rate in the United States has been declining and recently reached an unusually low level.6 Monetary policy can only go so far, and it’s beyond my job description to encourage people to have more babies! 1 For comparison, the median longer-run value of the federal funds rate in the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) most recent economic projections is 2.75 percent (Board of Governors 2017b). 2 Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017), Fujiwara et al. (2016). 3 Williams (2017). 4 Population aging and longer lifespans also have contributed; see Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2017). 5 Fernald (2016). 6 Hamilton et al. (2017). Page 5 of 14 The same thing is true about productivity growth, which has also slowed in contrast with earlier decades. In the 1990s and early 2000s, annual productivity gains averaged 2 to 3 percent. Productivity gains since the recession have generally hovered below 1 percent. Productivity growth is influenced by technological innovation, investments in education, research and development. I know that productivity in San Francisco would rise by leaps and bounds if there were fewer hipster coffee shops. But this, like policy decisions on education, are beyond the scope of the Federal Reserve System. This very low r-star rate has two implications: For bankers, a new normal of moderate growth and lower interest rates will have a significant bearing on lending growth and profitability. Stepping back, the broader implication is that conventional monetary policy has less room to stimulate the economy during an economic downturn. Looking through this lens, we will need to lean more heavily on unconventional tools, like Page 6 of 14 central bank balance sheets, keeping interest rates very low for a long time, and potentially even negative policy rates.7 Thank you for indulging my foray into r-star and what it means for rates. Of course, I can’t talk about interest rates without discussing its bedfellows: growth, inflation, and employment. Growth, inflation, and employment Despite the terrible human tragedy caused by recent hurricanes, the economic expansion appears to remain on track. I see the economy over the next few years continuing on the same moderate path. That may seem disappointing, but as I’ve already said, changes in demographics and slow gains in productivity mean the economy’s growth potential is moderate too. Given the current conditions, if growth were to increase too much, it could lead to an asset price bubble or other problems like high inflation. This is exactly what we want to avoid in order to keep the economy on an even footing and reduce the likelihood of another deep recession. 7 Reifschneider (2016). Page 7 of 14 Turning to inflation, I feel the agony of Sisyphus, as core inflation rolled back down the hill after being so near to our 2 percent goal earlier in the year. This low inflation, against a background of steady growth and strong employment, has been attracting a lot of attention from Fed commentators in recent months. For context, the Fed’s preferred measure of inflation has been running a little under 1.5 percent, below our longer-term goal of 2 percent. In July, the Financial Times described the Fed as being “baffled” by low inflation numbers.8 I assure you that Fed economists are rarely baffled, but when they do see something that doesn’t make sense, they work hard to find out why it’s happening. My own staff at the San Francisco Fed recently took a closer look at what’s been holding inflation down. They distinguished between prices of goods and services that tend to move up and down with the overall economy and those that mostly move in response to factors unique to their industry or sector. 8 Martin (2017). Page 8 of 14 They found that inflation rates for prices that tend to be sensitive to the state of the economy have moved back up to around pre-recession levels as the economy has recovered. So, no mystery there. But, they also found that inflation rates for other categories that tend to be less sensitive to the economy had fallen a lot and have remained very low. Some of this is the result of outsize drops in prices for pharmaceuticals, airline tickets, cellular phone services, and education. In the past, such sharp price movements in these industries have proven to have a temporary effect on inflation, and I don’t expect them to last this time either. An even bigger contribution to low inflation has been coming from the health- care sector. Mandated cuts to Medicare payment growth, which also tend to be incorporated into payments for nongovernment health services, have kept inflation in overall health-care services unusually low for several years.9 These legislated changes have been a key factor holding inflation below the Fed’s 2 percent target, despite a strengthening economy. 9 Clemens, Gottlieb, and Shapiro (2016). Page 9 of 14 As these effects wane and the strong economy pushes inflation higher for prices that tend to be sensitive to the economy, I am optimistic that inflation will move up to our 2 percent goal over the next couple of years. As inflation rises and the economic expansion continues, we will be able to move interest rates up to their new normal level. Which brings me to employment – Congress has given the Federal Reserve two key monetary policy goals: maximum employment and price stability. When it comes to our employment goal, I think of this in terms of the unemployment rate relative to the natural or “normal” rate of unemployment – you might be shocked to hear that this is what economists call u-star, but I’ll save that topic for another day. We can’t know precisely what the normal rate of unemployment is, but I put it at about 4¾ percent.10 The unemployment rate is 4.4 percent – meaning that we’ve not only reached the full employment mark, we’ve exceeded it. Given the strong job growth we’ve been seeing in the United States, I expect the unemployment rate to decline over the next year, ultimately falling a bit below 4 percent. We’ve only experienced 10 For comparison, the Congressional Budget Office (2017) puts the natural rate at 4.7 percent, the median value from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 2017) is 4.5 percent, and the median projection from the FOMC (Board of Governors 2017b) is 4.6 percent. Page 10 of 14 such a low unemployment rate a few times during my lifetime, at the end of the 1960s and the end of the 1990s. These favorable employment numbers, combined with the findings on inflation and the steady pace of growth, are all behind my confidence that rates will need to rise to their new normal levels. Long-term interest rates and the Fed balance sheet We’ve discussed the new normal of short-term rates, so as promised I’m now going to turn to longer-term rates and the Fed balance sheet. In response to the recession and slow recovery, the Fed purchased trillions of dollars of long-term Treasury and mortgage-backed securities. The goal was to lower long-term interest rates and give the economy an extra boost. In the pursuit of getting interest rates back to new normal levels, we’re now starting the process of gradually reducing these holdings.11 This will tend to push long-term rates back up gradually over the next few years. 11 Board of Governors (2017a) Page 11 of 14 With short-term interest rates likely to average around 2.5 percent in the future, what does all this mean for long-term rates? Historically, the yield on the benchmark 10-year Treasury note averaged about 1.5 percentage points above the federal funds rate. This spread between long-term and short-term yields is an important source of banks’ profitability, and it narrowed during the period of very low interest rates. The question is whether it will return to the old normal level or if there is a new normal spread as well. To answer that question, you need to take account of two major factors that affect the spread between short and long-term rates. The first is the Fed’s expanded balance sheet. One estimate is that the Fed’s holdings are currently pushing down long-term rates by a little less than 1 percentage point.12 As the Fed unwinds its balance sheet, this should put increasing upward pressure on longer- term yields. Second, there are reasons to believe that the spread between short and long- term rates will not return to levels we saw in the past. For one, these large 12 Bonis, Ihrig, and Wei (2017). Page 12 of 14 spreads occurred during an extended period when interest rates were falling. This downward trend may have artificially widened spreads. I don’t claim to have a crystal ball, but a reasonable educated guess for the future normal spread between a 10-year Treasury note and the federal funds rate is somewhere close to 1 percentage point. In fact, this is the figure implied by the long-run Blue Chip forecast. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, the Fed is moving towards more normal monetary policy, and that means rising interest rates. But r-star, a slower sustainable pace of growth, and inflation all point to a new normal where interest rates are lower than the heady days of the 1990s and early 2000s. For those of you still listening to a Walkman, it may be time to get a smartphone. The new normal is likely to be 2.5 percent, and banks, and everyone else, need to prepare accordingly. That is, of course, until the data tell us something different. Page 13 of 14 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017a. “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement.” Press release, September 20. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170920a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017b. “FOMC Projections materials, accessible version.” September 20. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20170920.htm Bonis, Brian, Jane Ihrig, and Min Wei. 2017. “Projected Evolution of the SOMA Portfolio and the 10-year Treasury Term Premium Effect.” FEDS Notes. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 22. https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2081 Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2017. “Demographic Transition and Low U.S. Interest Rates.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-27 (September 25). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2017/september/demographic-transition-and-low-us-interest-rates/ Clemens, Jeffrey, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Adam Hale Shapiro. 2016. “Medicare Payment Cuts Continue to Restrain Inflation.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-15 (May 9). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/may/medicare-payment-cuts-affect-core-inflation/ Congressional Budget Office. 2017. “An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027.” Report, June. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/52801 Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. 2017. “Survey of Professional Forecasters.” Third Quarter (August 11). https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey- of-professional-forecasters/2017/survq317 Page 14 of 14 Fernald, John. 2016. “What Is the New Normal for U.S. Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-30 (October 11). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/october/new-normal-for-gdp-growth/ Fujiwara, Shigeaki, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo. 2016. “Developments in the Natural Rate of Interest in Japan.” Bank of Japan Review 2016-E-12 (October). https://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/rev_2016/data/rev16e12.pdf Hamilton, Brady E., Joyce A. Martin, Michelle J.K. Osterman, Anne K. Driscoll, and Lauren M. Rossen. 2017. “Births: Provisional Data for 2016.” Vital Statistics Rapid Release 2 (June), National Center for Health Statistics. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/vsrr/report002.pdf Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2017. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants.” Journal of International Economics 108(1, May), pp. S59–S75. Working paper version available at http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/working-papers/2016/11/ Martin, Felix. 2017. “Back to the Future on Inflation.” Financial Times, July 27. https://www.ft.com/content/e2cdc6c0-72a3-11e7-93ff-99f383b09ff9 Reifschneider, David. 2016. “Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-068. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.068 Williams, John C. 2017. “Three Questions on R-star.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-05 (February 21). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2017/february/three-questions-on-r-star-natural-rate-of-interest/

What’s the Future of Interest Rates? The Answer’s in the Stars Speech Info Remarks at the Salt Lake Area Community Leaders Luncheon Salt Lake City, Utah By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on October 11, 2017 President Williams delivered similar remarks to the Community Banking in the 21st Century Research and Policy Conference in St. Louis, Missouri, on October 5, 2017. Introduction Good afternoon everyone. As the famous philosopher, Yogi Berra once said: “It’s difficult to make predictions, especially about the future.” But that’s ‎exactly what I’m going to do today, talk about where I predict interest rates are headed and why. Why am I talking about interest rates? First, as President of the San Francisco Fed it’s a favorite subject of mine! Second, there are a lot of misperceptions out there about what’s going to happen to interest rates, when they’ll rise, and by how much. From business leaders to citizens, interest rates play an important role in all our lives, so I thought that you might appreciate a deeper dive into this topic. I frequently hear people say, “as things return to normal, and rates rise, we’ll be able to do A, B, or C.” It’s true that, post-financial crisis, things are returning to normal. But normal may look and feel quite a bit different from what you’re used to, so I want to talk about this “new normal.” Since it’s clear I’m going to be talking about interest rates, now is the perfect time to insert the usual Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. First, the good news: The economy continues to grow at a moderate pace. It’s been more than eight years since the end of the recession, making this the third longest economic expansion on record. As a result of the progress we’ve made getting our economy back on track, we’re in the process of slowly moving interest rates back up to more normal levels. But that begs the question: What does “normal” mean? I know that for some the word normal conjures memories of the ’90s, when interest rates were often above 4 percent. But like the pager, the Walkman, and the Macarena, we’re unlikely to see such rates return. Bottom line: In the new world of moderate economic growth, we all need to plan for relatively low rates for the foreseeable future. Why is this? To explain why, I’m going to talk a bit about something called r-star, which is shorthand for normal interest rates. Then I’m going to talk about growth, inflation, and discuss some recent research into why inflation’s remained stubbornly low (despite strong employment). Finally, I’m going to switch tacks and talk about the Fed’s balance sheet and what it means for longer-term rates. I know this is a lot of ground to cover, but I promise I’ll leave plenty of time for Q&A and discussion. R-star With that road map in mind, let’s dive right into r-star. R-star is what economists call the natural rate of interest; it’s the rate expected to prevail when the economy is at full strength, and it’s a helpful way to understand the new normal both in the short and longer term. While a central bank like the Fed sets short-term interest rates, r-star is a result of structural economic factors beyond the influence of central banks and monetary policy. Economists tend to think of r-star in terms of the real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rate. My own view is that r-star today is around 0.5 percent. Assuming inflation is running at our goal of 2 percent in the future, the typical, or normal short-term interest rate would be 2.5 percent. 1 That’s a full 2 percentage points below what a normal interest rate looked like 20 years ago. This isn’t just affecting the U.S. economy – lower r-star is a global phenomenon. In fact, the average r-star in Canada, the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom is a bit below 0.5 percent. 2 A variety of factors have pushed r-star to this low level, and they appear poised to stay that way. 3 The major one is that the sustainable growth rate of the economy has slowed dramatically from prior decades. 4 Perhaps unsurprisingly , economists call the sustainable growth rate g-star, and I put g-star at 1.5 percent for inflation-adjusted GDP. This is the slowest pace we’ve seen in our lifetimes, and it reflects a one-two punch of a sharp decline in labor force growth and slower productivity growth. 5 I’ll take each of these in turn. What’s caused the decline in labor force growth? Two main things: First, the baby boomers are retiring in droves. Second, the fertility rate in the United States has been declining to very low levels, which directly translates to fewer people joining the workforce. 6 We see something similar with productivity growth, which has declined compared with earlier decades. In the go-go years of the late 1990s and early 2000s, productivity growth averaged 2 to 3 percent a year. In contrast, productivity gains since the recession have generally hovered below 1 percent. There’s been a lot of research into why productivity growth has slowed, despite all the advances in technology. The key takeaway is that, unless the trend line makes a dramatic turn, the new normal for productivity growth is likely to be around 1 percent. This discussion of r-star has two major implications: First, we all need to get accustomed to, and make plans based on, a new normal of moderate growth and relatively low interest rates. Second, it means that conventional monetary policy has less room to stimulate the economy during an economic downturn. In the event of a future recession we will need to lean more heavily on unconventional tools, like central bank balance sheets, keeping interest rates very low for a long time, and potentially even negative policy rates. 7 Thank you for indulging my foray into r-star and what it means for the new normal for interest rates. I’ll now discuss how the outlook for growth, inflation, and employment shape the path of rates back to the new normal. Growth Starting with growth, a question I’m getting asked a lot at the moment is: “What will the recent hurricanes mean for the economy?” Before I get into the details, it’s important to recognize that the hurricanes have had a tragic effect on the lives not of thousands, but millions of people. For our part, my colleagues at the Federal Reserve have been working tirelessly to ensure that there’s enough cash in the affected areas. 8 Sadly, the U.S. is no stranger to natural catastrophes, so past experience can give us a good indication of the likely effect on growth and jobs. 9 In the near term, the main effect will be declines in employment and production in the hardest-hit areas: This was reflected in an outright drop in employment in September’s report. But as people return to their homes and resume their lives, those jobs will return and the affected regions will bounce back. Looking beyond the near term, I expect the economy will continue on the same moderate growth path. Aside from the hurricanes, the other feature of discussions about growth is a sense of disappointment that Fed forecasts are not more optimistic. But as I’ve already said, changes in demographics and slow gains in productivity mean the economy’s growth potential (g-star) is moderate too. Given the current conditions, if growth were to increase too much, it could lead to a financial bubble or other problems like high inflation. This is exactly what we want to avoid in order to keep the economy on an even footing and reduce the likelihood of another deep recession. Put simply, the goal of monetary policy is to keep the expansion going as long as possible, which means maintaining a sustainable pace. Inflation Turning to inflation, I feel the agony of Sisyphus, as core inflation rolled back down the hill after being so near to our 2 percent goal earlier this year. This low inflation, against a background of steady growth and strong employment, has been attracting a lot of attention from Fed commentators in recent months. For context, the Fed’s preferred measure of inflation has been running a little under 1.5 percent. That’s below our longer-term goal of 2 percent. In July, the Financial Times described the Fed as being “baffled” by low inflation numbers. 10 I assure you that Fed economists are rarely baffled, but when they do see something that doesn’t make sense, they work hard to figure out what’s going on. My own staff at the San Francisco Fed recently took a closer look at what’s been holding inflation down. They distinguished between prices of goods and services that tend to move up and down with the overall economy and those that mostly move in response to factors unique to their industry or sector. They found that inflation rates for prices that tend to be sensitive to the state of the economy have moved back up to around pre-recession levels as the economy has recovered. So, no mystery there. But, they also found that inflation rates for other categories that tend to be less sensitive to the economy had fallen a lot and have remained very low. Some of this is the result of outsize drops in prices for pharmaceuticals, airline tickets, and cellular phone services. In the past, such sharp price movements in these industries have proven to have a temporary effect on inflation, and I don’t expect them to have a lasting effect this time either. An even bigger contribution to low inflation has been coming from the health-care sector. Mandated cuts to Medicare payment growth have reduced prices, and these changes tend to be incorporated into payments for other health-care providers. 11 These changes have been a key factor holding inflation below the Fed’s 2 percent target, despite a strengthening economy. 12 As these effects wane and the strong economy pushes inflation higher for prices that tend to be sensitive to the economy, I am optimistic that inflation will move up to our 2 percent goal over the next couple of years. Employment Which brings me to employment – Congress has given the Federal Reserve two key monetary policy goals: price stability and maximum employment. When it comes to our employment goal, I think of this in terms of the unemployment rate relative to the natural or “normal” rate of unemployment. Now, you’re going to be really shocked to hear that this is what economists call u-star. We can’t know precisely what the normal rate of unemployment is, but I put it at about 4¾ percent. 13 The unemployment rate fell further to 4.2 percent in September – meaning that we’ve not only reached the full employment mark, we’ve exceeded it. After accounting for the effects of the hurricanes, the trend in job growth remains strong. I expect the unemployment rate to decline further over the next year, ultimately falling below 4 percent. We’ve only experienced such a low unemployment rate a few times during my lifetime, at the end of the 1960s and again at the end of the 1990s. These favorable employment trends, combined with the findings on inflation and the steady pace of growth, are all behind my confidence that rates will need to continue rising to their new normal levels. To be specific, based on my outlook for employment and inflation, I view a gradual pace of increases over the next two years, bringing the federal funds rate to its new normal of 2.5 percent, to be appropriate. Long-term interest rates and the Fed balance sheet I’ve discussed the new normal of short-term rates, so as promised I’m now going to turn, briefly, to longer-term rates and the Fed’s balance sheet. In response to the recession and slow recovery, the Fed purchased trillions of dollars of long-term Treasury and mortgage-backed securities. The goal was to lower long-term interest rates and give the economy an extra boost. In the pursuit of getting interest rates back to new normal levels, we’re now starting the process of gradually reducing these holdings. 14 It should take about four years to shrink the balance sheet to the point that we’re holding no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy effectively. 15 Unwinding the balance sheet will tend to push long-term rates back up gradually over the next few years. I want to emphasize that we will continue to use conventional monetary policy tools to bring interest rates to their “new normal” levels. 16 The process of shrinking the balance sheet will happen in the background, in a gradual and predictable manner. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen: The stars are aligned. They all point to a new normal for interest rates. For those of you still listening to a Walkman, it may be time to get a smartphone. The new normal is likely to be 2.5 percent, and we all need to prepare accordingly. That is, of course, until the data tell us something different. End Notes 1. For comparison, the median longer-run value of the federal funds rate in the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) most recent economic projections is 2.75 percent (Board of Governors 2017b). 2. Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017), Fujiwara et al. (2016). 3. Williams (2017). 4. Population aging and longer lifespans also have contributed; see Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2017). 5. Fernald (2016). 6. Hamilton et al. (2017), Toossi (2015). 7. Reifschneider (2016). 8. See https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg/hurricane-maria.htm and https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/statements/2017/0927-2017 . 9. See, for example, Strobl (2011) regarding the significant local effects but limited national effects of past U.S. hurricanes and Wilson (2017) regarding the effects of storm damage on local employment growth. 10. Martin (2017). 11. Clemens, Gottlieb, and Shapiro (2016). 12. If you’d like an even deeper dive into the behavior of inflation over the past few years, I highly recommend reading the recent speech by Chair Yellen (2017). 13. For comparison, the Congressional Budget Office (2017) puts the natural rate at 4.7 percent, the median value from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 2017) is 4.5 percent, and the median projection from the FOMC (Board of Governors 2017c) is 4.6 percent. 14. Board of Governors (2017a). 15. Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2017). 16. Board of Governors (2017b). References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017a. “Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement.” Press release, September 20. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017b. “FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans.” Press release, June 14. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017c. “FOMC Projections materials, accessible version.” September 20. Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2017. “Demographic Transition and Low U.S. Interest Rates.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-27 (September 25). Clemens, Jeffrey, Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Adam Hale Shapiro. 2016. “Medicare Payment Cuts Continue to Restrain Inflation.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-15 (May 9). Congressional Budget Office. 2017. “An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027.” Report, June. Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 2017. “Projections for the SOMA Portfolio and Net Income.” July update. Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. 2017. “Survey of Professional Forecasters.” Third Quarter (August 11). Fernald, John. 2016. “What Is the New Normal for U.S. Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-30 (October 11). Fujiwara, Shigeaki, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo. 2016. “Developments in the Natural Rate of Interest in Japan.” Bank of Japan Review 2016-E-12 (October). Hamilton, Brady E., Joyce A. Martin, Michelle J.K. Osterman, Anne K. Driscoll, and Lauren M. Rossen. 2017. “Births: Provisional Data for 2016.” Vital Statistics Rapid Release 2 (June), National Center for Health Statistics. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2017. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants.” Journal of International Economics 108(1, May), pp. S59–S75. Working paper version available at Martin, Felix. 2017. “Back to the Future on Inflation.” Financial Times , July 27. Strobl, Eric. 2011. “The Economic Growth Impact of Hurricanes: Evidence from U.S. Coastal Counties.” Review of Economics and Statistics 93(2, May), pp. 575–589. Reifschneider, David. 2016. “Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-068. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Toossi, Mitra. 2015. “Labor Force Projections to 2024: The Labor Force Is Growing, but Slowly.” Bureau of Labor Statistics Monthly Labor Review , December. Williams, John C. 2017. “Three Questions on R-star.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-05 (February 21). Wilson, Daniel J. 2017. “The Impact of Weather on Local Employment: Using Big Data on Small Places.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-21 (revised June). Yellen, Janet. 2017. “Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy.” Speech at the 59 th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, OH, September 26.

Page 1 of 11 When the United States Sneezes… Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco At the 2017 Asia Economic Policy Conference: Monetary Challenges in a Changing Global Environment Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco November 16, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY INTRODUCTION Good afternoon everyone. The more astute among you will have already noticed that I’m not Stan Fischer. As you undoubtedly know, Stan stepped down as Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve Board earlier this year. When I found out he was unable to attend this conference, I thought the natural thing to do was to invite myself to speak in his place, so here I am. Page 2 of 11 I’ve chosen a cheery topic for today. I’m going to talk about the next recession and what we should do to prepare for it. The timing of this topic may seem strange at first. After all, we’re finally seeing the sustained rebound in global growth that we’ve long been hoping for. But, history teaches us that a recession will come at some point, and prudence demands that we use this time of relative economic calm to plan for the storms ahead. Economic realities for the world’s developed economies have fundamentally changed and dealing with the challenges of the future is going to be much harder than it was in the past. Today I want to discuss how the world we live in has transformed. The global economy and the policy challenges that we face will be defined by slow trend growth, a very low natural rate of interest, and the lower bound on interest rates. Befitting this conference, I’m going to frame this in an international context. The challenges ahead of us aren’t unique to the United States. They’re shared by many economies around the world. And a global challenge requires a global perspective that recognizes the interdependence of our economies and financial systems. Austrian diplomat, Klemens von Metternich is credited with saying when France sneezes, Europe catches a cold. The same can be said about the United States and the global economy. We are painfully aware that a recession in the United States can have serious consequences for the rest of the world: When the U.S. economy contracted double pneumonia in 2008, the world’s financial system stood on the edge of a precipice. Page 3 of 11 Given the new global realities, how can we all be better prepared for the next recession? Before I ponder this question further, I think it would be wise to give the usual Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. In fact, it would probably have been even wiser to have said that five minutes ago! A world of low r-star To answer the question of how best to respond to future challenges, we first need to understand the ways in which economic fundamentals have altered the economic and policy landscape. Most of the attention right now is on policy normalization. Central banks are pivoting towards unwinding monetary stimulus. From a monetary policy perspective, the world is starting to look more “normal.” But what we’re looking at is actually a “new normal,” characterized by trend growth and interest rates much lower than we’re used to. Why is this? This is largely due to low r-star, the natural rate of interest, which is being held down by a number of structural issues largely beyond the control of central banks and monetary policy. Several factors appear to be at play in driving down r-star around the globe. One is a lower sustainable growth rate, reflecting slower productivity and labor force growth. Page 4 of 11 A second is demographics: People are living longer and that is pushing up the supply of savings and depressing their returns.1 Third, global demand for safe assets remains elevated, pushing down yields on central bank policy rates.2 These trends predate the recession and are unlikely to turn on a dime. So what does that mean for r-star going forward? Averaging across various estimates, r-star in the United States appears to be about 0.5 percent in real terms, and that’s my view as well. Assuming inflation is running at our goal of 2 percent in the future, the typical, or normal short-term interest rate would be 2.5 percent. That’s a full 2 percentage points below what a normal interest rate looked like 20 years ago.3 Very low r-star is not confined to the U.S. economy. We’ve seen it across other major developed countries: Demographics, slow productivity growth, and other influences have driven the average r-star across Canada, the euro area, Japan, and the United Kingdom below 0.5 percent.4 For many central banks, the near-term focus is still on the process of policy normalization. But the fundamental changes taking place in developed economies mean it’s important we use this time to look at what’s on the horizon and build resiliency for the future. 1 Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2017), Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), and Eggertsson, Mehrotra, and Robbins (2017). 2 Del Negro et al. (2017). 3 For comparison, the median longer-run value of the federal funds rate in the Federal Open Market Committee’s most recent economic projections is 2.75 percent (Board of Governors 2017). 4 Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017), Fujiwara et al. (2016). Page 5 of 11 Monetary policy and the zero lower bound If interest rates are only around 2 to 3 percent when the next recession hits, conventional monetary policy will have lost much of its punch. We won’t be able to cut interest rates by the typical 5 percentage points to stimulate the economy because we’ll quickly hit the zero lower bound. The Fed, alongside other central banks, will again have to consider unconventional monetary policy to stimulate the economy: whether forward guidance, negative interest rates, and quantitative easing, to get the economy back on track.5 In the United States, we managed to avoid using negative interest rates, but plenty of others have used this unconventional tool to manage the crisis. Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland, and Japan have all pushed interest rates below zero. Of course, there are limits to how low you can go before people start stuffing their mattresses with cash. Given the persistent challenge of the lower bound created by this world of low r-star, what are the options for monetary policy to tackle the next recession? A brief history of monetary policy Before getting to the options, it’s important to understand the current framework for monetary policy and how we arrived at it. 5 Williams (2014, 2016). Page 6 of 11 I recognize that it’s now fashionable to communicate in 140 characters or fewer. I can’t give you a 150 year history of international monetary policy frameworks in 140 characters, but I can do it in just seven sentences. During the late 19th century, most economies were on the gold standard, the first monetary policy framework where currency was valued at a fixed amount of gold. Following the First World War and the Great Depression, countries started to move off the gold standard, and policymakers started to think about what might replace it. Out of that came the Bretton Woods system in 1944, which also tied the currencies of developed economies to the price of gold. But the cost of the Vietnam War and inflation that followed led to the collapse of Bretton Woods in the early 1970s. Once again policymakers looked around for a solution, and in 1989, the small country of New Zealand announced the main objective of its monetary policy was to target the inflation rate. In the subsequent quarter century, nearly all central banks in major economies coalesced around this approach of aiming for a low inflation rate, and, indeed, inflation targeting is the monetary policy framework du jour. But even New Zealand has admitted this framework was more “by default than by high design,” and one must ask if it’s the right approach for the future we have before us.6 6 Archer (2000). See also Williams (2015) for a longer version of this history of monetary policy . Page 7 of 11 An international approach I quoted Metternich earlier by saying, “When France sneezes, Europe catches a cold.” One of the major challenges of the interconnectedness of the global economy is that, when one major player gets a virus, the rest of us tend to catch it too, and central banks need to react rapidly to reduce the seriousness of the contagion. While it may not be an epidemic, most major economies are grappling with the consequences of a lower natural rate of interest. So a reexamination of the monetary policy framework needs to happen in that context, rather than each central bank considering its problem in isolation. Policies that may work if only one country is at the lower bound may not succeed if all are. To take one example, not all countries can depreciate their currencies at the same time. We will all be better able to contain the next economic recession if we develop approaches that succeed even when many countries are simultaneously constrained by the lower bound. And that means taking into account the nature of monetary policy spillovers. Let me be clear: This is not about creating a formal agreement, because as you learned from my rapid history of monetary policy in seven sentences, these don’t tend to be very successful. This is more about recognizing the global nature of today’s economy and developing a framework and strategies that work well together, rather than at cross-purposes. Page 8 of 11 So, what are the options? In the best of all worlds, fiscal and other policies would be put in place that propel long-run economic prosperity and boost r-star on a sustained basis.7 But I fear that those changes may not arrive soon enough, if at all, and we need to prepare for a world of low r-star for the foreseeable future. Absent such a reversal in r-star, there are a number of potential alternative strategies to cope with a low natural rate of interest. One approach is to plan on relying on unconventional policy tools, that is, follow the same playbook as during this past decade and hope that suffices.8 A second is to find ways to make the lower bound more negative, giving conventional monetary policy more room to maneuver.9 A third is to raise the inflation target.10 And fourth is to modify inflation targeting by moving to a price level or nominal income target.11 Each of these alternatives has significant advantages and disadvantages, which need further careful study and discussion. I’m talking about these choices today not because I advocate an abrupt about-face in policy, but to advance a conversation about what a different international framework might look like.12 Of course the major problem with some of these approaches such as price level targeting is that no one’s tried it yet! And experiments where the safety of the world’s financial system is at stake are high risk, to say the very least. 7 Williams (2016). 8 Reifschneider (2016). 9 Bernanke (2016). 10 Williams (2009), Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro (2010), and Ball (2014). 11 Williams (2017), Bernanke (2017). 12 See additional discussion in Williams (2016). Page 9 of 11 That said, I am encouraged by the willingness of leading experts and policymakers to seriously discuss and develop these ideas in the context of low r-star in the United States. I and others have discussed the merits of price level targeting. Ben Bernanke recently built on this work by suggesting a temporary price level target, to apply only when short-term interest rates are at or very near the zero lower bound.13 These are the kinds of conversations we need to be having to put us in the best position possible to tackle the next recession. But these discussions need to happen across all countries to ensure that the next recession causes only coughs and colds rather than widespread pneumonia. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, I am by nature an optimist. But even for a glass half-full kind of guy, it would be downright naïve to assume we won’t face another economic downturn. So it’s prudent to spend this period examining our monetary policy framework and considering how to make ourselves more resilient. No one’s yet come up with a cure for the common cold, but we do know that good hand-washing, vitamin C, and rest can reduce symptoms and prevent it from spreading. Now is the time to stock up on tissues and make sure we’re as well prepared as we can be for the next recession. 13 Bernanke (2017). Page 10 of 11 References Archer, David J. 2000. “A Presentation to a Seminar on Inflation Targeting.” International Monetary Fund, March. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/seminar/2000/targets/archer.htm Ball, Laurence. 2014. “The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent.” IMF Working Paper 14/92, June. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2016/12/31/The-Case- for-a-Long-Run-Inflation-Target-of-Four-Percent-41625 Bernanke Ben S. 2016. “What Tools Does the Fed Have Left? Part 1: Negative Interest Rates.” Ben Bernanke’s Blog, Brookings, March 18. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben- bernanke/2016/03/18/what-tools-does-the-fed-have-left-part-1-negative-interest-rates/ Bernanke, Ben S. 2017. “Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy.” Ben Bernanke’s Blog, Brookings, October 12. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben- bernanke/2017/10/12/temporary-price-level-targeting-an-alternative-framework-for-monetary- policy/ Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro. 2010. “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42(s1), pp.199–215. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017. “FOMC Projections Materials, accessible version.” September 20. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20170920.htm Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2017. “Demographic Transition and Low U.S. Interest Rates.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-27 (September 25). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2017/september/demographic-transition-and-low-us-interest-rates/ Del Negro, Marco, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti. 2017. “Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring). https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/safety-liquidity-and-the-natural-rate-of-interest/ Eggertsson, Gauti B., Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacob A. Robbins. 2017. “A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23093. http://www.nber.org/papers/w23093 Fujiwara, Shigeaki, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo. 2016. “Developments in the Natural Rate of Interest in Japan.” Bank of Japan Review 2016-E-12 (October). https://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/rev_2016/rev16e12.htm/ Page 11 of 11 Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and J. David Lopez-Salido. 2016. “Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.080 Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2017. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants.” Journal of International Economics 108(1, May), pp. S59–S75. Working paper version available at http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/working-papers/2016/11/ Reifschneider, David. 2016. “Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-068. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.068 Williams, John C. 2009. “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Lower Bound.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009-2, pp. 1–37. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea- articles/heeding-daedalus-optimal-inflation-and-the-zero-lower-bound/ Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings. January. https://www.brookings.edu/research/monetary-policy-at-the-zero-lower-bound-putting-theory- into-practice/ Williams, John C. 2015. “Monetary Policy and the Independence Dilemma.” Presentation to Chapman University, Orange, CA. May 1. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents- speeches/williams-speeches/2015/may/monetary-policy-independence-dilemma/ Williams, John C. 2016. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23 (August 15). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/august/monetary-policy-and-low-r-star-natural-rate-of-interest/ Williams, John C. 2017. “Preparing for the Next Storm: Reassessing Frameworks and Strategies in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-13 (May 8). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2017/may/preparing-for-next-storm-price-level- targeting-in-low-r-star-world-speech/

Page 1 of 7 Monetary Policy and the Economic Outlook: A Fine Balancing Act Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco At the 54th Annual Economic Forecast Luncheon Phoenix, Arizona November 29, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY INTRODUCTION Ladies and gentlemen, I hope you enjoyed your lunch. It’s my pleasure to speak at the 54th Annual Economic Forecast Luncheon. This is my third visit to Phoenix this year and it’s a huge relief to be back outside of the summer months! I’m also particularly pleased that you’ve asked me to speak about the U.S. economy at a time when it’s in such good shape. We’re in the midst of a lengthy economic expansion, the stock market is at record levels, and confidence is soaring. Page 2 of 7 Today I’m going to talk about current conditions in relation to growth and employment, and I’m going to shed some light on the number one topic of the day for U.S. monetary policy: the fact that inflation remains stubbornly low despite a strong economy. I’m then going to give my perspective as a policymaker and explain what that means for how I approach my work at the Federal Reserve Bank in San Francisco and at the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. When people think about the Fed, they tend to think about us as getting up in the morning and setting interest rates. But what many people don’t realize is we do that within a specific framework and we’re guided by a long-term strategy.1 The Federal Reserve System has two goals, both set by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. We lay out our strategy for achieving these goals in regular statements. At the moment, we’re in particularly interesting times because there’s a certain tension between our two primary objectives: It’s a balancing act managing a growing economy with very low inflation. And that’s something I’m going to go into detail on: How policymakers deal with the pleasant challenge of a strong economy and minimal inflation. Before I go any further, I think it’s wise I give the usual Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Economic outlook So, what is the current state of the economy? I’m going to take growth, employment, and inflation each in turn. Despite the terrible human tragedy caused by recent hurricanes in the Southeast and the wildfires in my home state of California, the economic expansion remains on track. I see the economy continuing on a moderate growth path over the next few years. Our overall measure of the economy, gross domestic product or GDP for short, grew at an annual rate of 3 percent in the third quarter, and I forecast growth 1 Board of Governors (2017). Page 3 of 7 will average 2.5 percent for 2017, before slowing back down toward its trend pace over the next few years.2 My role as a policymaker is to keep this expansion going for as long as possible, and that means maintaining a sustainable pace of growth consistent with labor force and productivity growth. If you weren’t overly impressed with my GDP figures, you should be blown away with the unemployment rate, which stands a touch above 4 percent. We’ve not only achieved our maximum employment goal, we’ve exceeded it. It may sound strange to say that we can exceed full employment when four out of every hundred potential workers is unemployed. But the way economists think about unemployment is that, even in a very strong economy, there will always be a certain number of people who are either between jobs or who have recently joined the labor market. Although we’ll never reach an unemployment rate of zero, a rate in the 4 percent range is clearly a sign of a very strong labor market. We’re on track to add 2 million jobs to the economy this year and with continued strong momentum in the labor market, I expect the unemployment rate to continue to drift downward, bottoming out at around 3¾ percent next year. As I said earlier, one of the Fed’s two monetary policy goals is maximum employment, so our report card’s looking very good on that front. The other goal is price stability, and this is where we’ve faced some challenges. The inflation goal we’ve set for ourselves is 2 percent, but over the past few years it’s remained stubbornly below that and currently stands at 1.6 percent. Now, let’s be honest: Most Americans are very happy with the status quo. They have no desire to see prices rise rapidly and neither do I. In fact, there’s something called the misery index, which is a combination of inflation and unemployment. The higher that number, the more miserable people tend to be. The misery index has been running at 6½ percent so far this year. For context, in 2011 when we were dealing with the fallout of the crisis it was around double that figure and in 1980, if you can remember those dark days, it reached an all-time peak of 2 Third quarter growth is based on the initial estimate. The text of this speech was finalized prior to the release of the revised estimate on November 29. Page 4 of 7 over 20 percent. The average American should be far from “miserable” about the current state of the economy. But for policy wonks and economists, low inflation against a backdrop of such strong employment numbers seems a bit surprising. The newspapers would have you believe that it’s a mystery of Sherlock Holmes proportions. However, at the Fed in San Francisco we’ve done some good old-fashioned detective work and we’re fairly sure we have a handle on why it’s so low.3 My staff found that inflation rates for prices that tend to move up and down with the economy have recovered. But inflation for things that tend to be less sensitive to the economy have fallen or remained low. This includes price drops for pharmaceuticals, airline tickets, cell phones, and education. For example, Verizon and AT&T were in a price war for much of the early part of this year, which pushed down the cost of your phone bill. An even bigger contribution to low inflation has come from the health-care sector, where mandated cuts to Medicare payment growth have muted price rises in overall health-care services. On top of the lack of price rises in these categories, there tends to be a delay in the effect of a strong labor market on prices. It typically takes about 12 months for a shift in the economy to have its full effect on inflation. With the economy doing so well this year and based on the historical pattern, I expect to see a rise in inflation in 2018. In this regard, it’s important to remember that things like salaries and contracts tend to be negotiated on an annual basis, so it often takes a while for wages and prices to respond to the tightening labor market. So, the next time you see a headline about stubbornly low inflation, you can smile to yourself, knowing that the mystery isn’t all that mysterious after all. Monetary policy Now that I’ve given you a deep dive into growth, employment, and inflation, I’m 3 Mahedy and Shapiro (2017). Page 5 of 7 going to discuss what that means for how I think about monetary policy and interest rates. The challenge for policymakers is that at present our two goals, maximum employment and price stability, are somewhat in conflict with one another. As I’ve explained, with such strong employment numbers we would normally expect to start seeing inflationary pressures building. But the unusually low prices of certain goods and services, combined with the lagged effects of the economy on inflation, means we have this unexpected situation where we’re acing one goal, while struggling with the other. The usual remedy for undesirably low inflation is to keep interest rates low. But to add to the complexity of the situation, the Federal Reserve is in the process of what we call “normalizing” monetary policy. In practice this means slowly stepping back from the extraordinary support the Fed provided for the economy during the recession and thereafter. We are in the process of gradually raising interest rates and reducing the holdings of long-term assets on our balance sheet. Sometimes I get asked why we even need to normalize policy, when monetary stimulus had such a positive effect. Why not keep interest rates low, in the hopes of giving the economy a further boost? But the reality is that, if we don’t move interest rates back up to more normal levels, we risk undermining the sustainability of the expansion and creating conditions that could lead to a recession down the road. As long as the data continue to show steady growth and we see the uptick in inflation that we’re expecting, my own view is that we should continue to raise interest rates slowly over the coming year. I started talking about the framework and goals for the Fed and the FOMC. That our two main goals are in conflict with one another means these are challenging times for policymakers. But I want to emphasize that these are the kinds of challenges we like to be faced with. In the same way that there’s a lag between a falling unemployment rate and its effect on inflation, the effects of the decisions taken by the FOMC next year may not be realized until 2019 or even 2020. So, at the Fed we use data to guide us and help us Page 6 of 7 walk the tightrope between keeping the economy on an even keel and normalizing interest rates. Monetary policy is both a balancing act and a long game. Conclusion Ladies and gentlemen, the economy is in a very good place. Unemployment is low and confidence is high. While low inflation remains a challenge for someone in my position, I imagine most of you aren’t overly concerned about a 1.6 percent inflation rate! As we wrap up 2017 and look ahead to 2018, the problems we face are good ones: How to keep the economic expansion going, how to bring inflation up to its 2 percent target, and how we use this period to normalize monetary policy in general and interest rates in particular. The years ahead will be about taking a balanced approach, and my guiding principle will always be to follow the data. I’d like to wish you a very happy holiday season, and a healthy and prosperous new year. Page 7 of 7 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2017. “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” Amended January 31. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals. pdf Mahedy, Tim, and Adam Shapiro. 2017. “What’s Down with Inflation?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-35 (November 27). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2017/november/contribution-to-low-pce- inflation-from-healthcare/
