The U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The European Economics and Financial Centre Distinguished Speakers Seminar London, U.K. July 1, 2016 1 Introduction I thank the European Economics and Financial Centre for the invitation to speak to this distinguished audience, in this venerable venue, at this historically significant time. I will focus my remarks today on the other side of the pond – in particular, the U.S. economy and monetary policy. But as you know, we live in a global world, and so we are monitoring very closely what is happening on this side of the pond and assessing the implications for the economic outlook and monetary policy on my side of the pond. Before I begin, I should note that the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook The consequences of last week’s decision by U.K. voters to exit the European Union are on everyone’s mind. This is a developing story, and how it plays out will ultimately determine its implications for the global economy and monetary policy. For the U.S. economy, while the risks and uncertainty surrounding the outlook have increased, it is too early to judge whether conditions in the aftermath of the decision will necessitate a material change in the modal outlook. In structuring my remarks today, I think it would be helpful to first discuss my views on the U.S. economy prior to the vote. These were the views I carried into the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting two weeks ago and that helped inform the economic projections I submitted as part of the FOMC’s latest Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). I will then discuss the potential ramifications of the U.K.’s exit decision for the U.S. economic outlook. In thinking about the economic outlook, I try to stay focused on underlying fundamentals because they determine the outlook for the economy over the medium run, the time horizon over which monetary policy can affect the economy. In my view, the underlying fundamentals supporting the U.S. economic expansion remain sound. These include accommodative monetary policy, household balance sheets that have improved greatly since the recession, continued progress in the labor market, a more resilient banking system, and low oil prices. There are risks around all forecasts, but my modal forecast has been 2 that over the next two years the U.S. economy will continue to expand at a pace slightly above its longer- run trend, which I estimate to be about 2 percent; that the unemployment rate will remain slightly under its longer-run level, which I estimate to be about 5 percent; and that inflation will continue to gradually return to the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target. Of course, even in the best of times, without the increased uncertainty of our current situation, there is some variation in growth and other economic indicators over time. The trick is to extract the signal about where the economy is headed from economic and financial market information that can often be quite noisy. Economic growth We’ve seen this kind of variability in the quarterly measures of U.S. GDP growth. Growth in the first quarter of the year slowed, although less so than originally estimated. Incoming information suggests that we are seeing a rebound of growth in the second quarter. This is very similar to the pattern we saw in 2014 and 2015. Consumer spending, which makes up about two-thirds of output in the U.S., has accelerated in recent months. The continued improvement in household balance sheets, growth in personal income, low borrowing rates, and relatively low oil prices have all buoyed consumer spending. In the U.S., the drop in gasoline prices by almost $1 per gallon between 2014 and 2015 saved the average household about $700. Although gasoline prices have moved up in the past couple of months, the U.S. Energy Information Administration now forecasts that the average price of gasoline will be down again this year, resulting in another $200 in cost savings for the average household. Some of those savings have been spent. For example, we’ve seen high levels of auto sales for the past two years. Some households likely saved part of the windfall instead of spending it, or used it to pay down debt. Either way, stronger household balance sheets will help support future consumption spending. The U.S. housing sector has been gradually recovering for some time. In the aftermath of the housing crash, house prices in the U.S. began rising again in mid-2011, and for the past two years, they have been increasing at a 5 to 6 percent annual rate. At the aggregate level, homeowners lost an unprecedented $7 3 trillion in real estate equity during the housing crash, but the increases in house prices have allowed homeowners to recover nearly all of that. Sales of existing homes, which make up the bulk of home sales in the U.S., are now back near the levels seen before the housing bubble run-up in the early to mid-2000s. I am using the pre-bubble level as my benchmark because we shouldn’t want to see the housing market return to bubble proportions. Other parts of the housing sector haven’t yet fully recovered. Construction and sales of new homes have been rising at a gradual pace, but they are not back up to their pre-bubble levels. Starts remain below the levels consistent with projections of household formation over the longer run, and in some markets, the supply of housing hasn’t kept up with demand. In addition, the type of housing being built has shifted. Over the past five years, increases in multifamily housing starts have significantly outpaced increases in single-family starts. This may reflect a shift in preferences toward more urban living, but it likely also reflects the desire on the part of some people who lived through the crisis to rent rather than own. Mortgage rates are low but households are being careful in not taking on more mortgage debt than they can handle, and banks are lending to those with good credit quality. My assessment of conditions is that the recovery in housing should continue at a moderate pace. In contrast to housing, business fixed investment remains weak. While the sharp drop in oil prices since mid-2014 benefited consumers and many businesses, firms in the drilling and mining sector, their suppliers, and regions whose economies depend on the energy sector have been hurt. We have seen the effects in parts of the Cleveland Fed District where steel production has been down and firms tied to energy have had to cut jobs and reduce investment. Business contacts in the steel industry have told us they’ve been encouraged by the firming in oil and other commodity prices since the start of the year, but they remain uncertain about the sustainability of those increases. Other contacts in the energy sector have told us that the price increases have spurred moving forward on some investment projects that had been put on hold. But even outside of the energy sector, business investment has been soft despite generally accommodative financial conditions. Manufacturers have been investing but mainly to maintain current operations rather than to expand. Some manufacturers in the Cleveland District have told us that 4 businesses’ reluctance to expand capacity reflects concern about the overall longer-run direction of the economy rather than concerns about the economy in the near term or their own firms’ performance. Part of the softness in investment reflects weakness in demand outside of the U.S., which has hurt U.S. exports. Indeed, firms exposed to U.S. trade have had to operate in a very challenging environment. From mid- 2014 until last week, the nominal value of the U.S. dollar has appreciated about 18 percent on a broad trade-weighted basis. This has placed a significant drag on manufacturing output and export growth. But the slowdown in the rate of appreciation in recent months was starting to diminish the drag on growth from net exports. In the first quarter, net exports made a slightly positive contribution to U.S. output growth; in contrast, they subtracted about a half of a percentage point from growth last year. Of course, global growth, commodity price changes, and currency fluctuations are not necessarily independent events. For example, a portion of the more than 50 percent decline in oil prices since mid- 2014 likely reflects expectations of weaker growth in China and other countries, although supply factors have likely played a greater role. The appreciation of the U.S. dollar since mid-2014 has reflected expectations that real growth in the U.S. will continue to be stronger than growth abroad, as well as projected real interest rate differentials between the U.S. and other economies. We have to be careful not to think of these shocks as independent events and merely sum their effects. We live in an interconnected global economy. Changes in prices and currency values are one way economies reach a new equilibrium after a shock. While I would expect investment to begin to pick up as overall economic growth expands, the weakness in investment and the associated slow pace of productivity growth pose a risk for the longer-run growth of the U.S. economy. Structural productivity growth is a key determinant of the longer-run growth of output and increases in living standards. And investment in capital, including human capital, is a key 5 determinant of productivity growth. Labor productivity growth has risen at only a half of a percent annual rate over the past five years. Part of this weakness is cyclical: weak investment during the recession and early part of the expansion contributed to slow productivity growth over this period. But the weakness in investment and productivity has persisted. Productivity growth is very difficult to forecast, so the softness may reverse itself, or it may be longer lasting and reflect a structural issue. If it’s the latter, then the longer-run growth rate of the U.S. economy may be lower than the 2 percent growth I’ve been assuming. As this overview suggests, some parts of the U.S. economy have fared better than others. But overall, economic growth has proven to be resilient and at a pace slightly above trend. The pace has been sufficient to generate significant progress in labor markets. Labor markets Since the trough in early 2010, the U.S. labor market has added more than 14 million jobs, which is about 10 percent of employment, and the unemployment rate has fallen more than 5 percentage points from its peak of 10 percent in late 2009. Over the past two years, there have also been significant improvements in other gauges of the under-utilization of labor, such as measures tracking the number of part-time workers who would rather work full-time and the number of people who have only been looking for work sporadically or have been discouraged from looking at all because they don’t think they will find a job. Increasingly, we are hearing from businesses that they are having trouble finding qualified workers. Early on, such reports were concentrated in high-skilled occupations in information technology, health care, and specialized construction. Now, the reports are expanding to include lower-skilled jobs and less- specialized occupations in a broader set of industries. So when the U.S. labor market report for May was released early last month, it garnered considerable attention. Just when we were beginning to see signs of a pickup in growth in the second quarter, we 6 received news that firms added just 38,000 jobs to their payrolls in May. Part of the weakness reflected the effects of a strike by workers at Verizon Communications. But even adjusting for that, which accounted for about 35,000 jobs, the pace was a considerable step down from the 200,000-plus jobs per month the U.S. economy was adding last year and early this year. The question is: was this the start of a reversal from the considerable progress that’s been made in labor markets, or was this the type of transitory change we typically see during expansions? My read of the available data puts me in the second camp: I believe the U.S. labor market remains sound and that we’ll continue to see further improvements in the job market, although the pace of improvement will necessarily slow given the progress that’s already been made. It’s important to put the May jobs report into context. One thing we have learned is that we shouldn’t take too much signal from one or two monthly reports. Payroll growth has slowed several times during this expansion, only to pick up again. We will see how payrolls behaved in June when the report is released next Friday. In addition, we should expect to see some slowdown in the pace of job growth as the economy nears full employment. The bigger surprise may have been the very strong job numbers early this year. Adjusting for the Verizon strike, over the past three months firms added an average of 127,000 jobs per month. That pace exceeds the 75,000 to 120,000 per month range of trend employment growth estimates from various models that take into account the aging of the population and other demographic factors affecting labor force participation. So it is enough to put further downward pressure on the unemployment rate. Other incoming data remain consistent with an improving labor market. Claims for unemployment insurance are low. The rates of job openings and hiring are high. The quit rate is also high, suggesting that workers are confident enough to be looking for better jobs. The unemployment rate is low. Of course, just as I discount taking a strong signal from weak May payrolls, I don’t read May’s sharp drop in the unemployment rate to 4.7 percent as indicating a significant tightening in labor market conditions. 7 The drop reflected not only a decline in the number of unemployed people but also an outsized decline in the labor force participation rate. The participation rate varies from month to month, but averaging over the past several months, the level of the participation rate is consistent with estimates of its longer-run downward trend. Another positive is that there are signs in the data and from anecdotal reports that wages may be accelerating. All of this suggests to me that labor market progress will continue. At the same time, I do not want to underestimate the difficulty that many people have had finding work during the recession and slow recovery and that many continue to have, or the persistent differences in the employment situation faced by different demographic groups in the U.S. There are serious longer-run workforce development issues affecting U.S. labor markets, and the deep recession and slow recovery have exposed and exacerbated these problems. Technological advances and globalization are changing the nature of available jobs and the skill sets needed to perform those jobs. As a country, the U.S. needs to ensure that people can enter and remain productive members of the modern labor force. This will raise our shared standard of living and make us more competitive in the global economy. I believe that government programs and private- public partnerships, including educational assistance, retraining programs, and apprenticeships, can be effective in addressing these long-run labor force challenges and should be brought to bear. On the other hand, I do not believe that monetary policy would be effective in addressing these longer-run problems. So from the standpoint of what monetary policy can do, I believe the economy is basically at maximum employment, one part of the Fed’s dual mandate. Inflation The other part of the Fed’s dual mandate is price stability. Inflation has been running below the Fed’s goal of 2 percent for quite some time. Low inflation partly reflects the effects of earlier declines in the price of oil and other commodities, which began in mid-2014, as well as the appreciation of the dollar, which has held down the prices of nonpetroleum imports into the U.S. According to dynamic simulations 8 of the Federal Reserve Board staff’s SIGMA model, a 10 percent rise in the real value of the dollar affects core inflation via import prices fairly quickly, resulting in a drop of about 0.5 percent in core inflation a year after the shock, which partially reverses over the subsequent year. A shock to the value of the dollar also tends to reduce GDP with a lag, and the model indicates that this would put additional downward pressure on inflation.1 The most recent inflation data have been encouraging and in accord with the pattern anticipated by the FOMC. Inflation measures have gradually risen as the effects of previous declines in oil prices and dollar appreciation have begun to fade. Headline PCE and CPI inflation, as measured by the year-over-year changes in the underlying indices, have moved up from the very low levels recorded last year and have been stable at a little more than 1 percent in recent months. The core inflation measures, which omit food and energy prices because they tend to be volatile, have also been moving up and are above the headline numbers. Another gauge of underlying inflation, the Cleveland Fed’s median CPI inflation rate, rose to over 2.5 percent in May, its highest level in over seven years.2 Stable inflation expectations are an important component of inflation dynamics. Even in the face of sizable declines in energy prices, inflation expectations have been relatively stable in my view. At this point I expect them to remain reasonably well anchored, but I am monitoring readings carefully. There are various measures of inflation expectations. Survey-based measures have tended to be more stable than those based on market data. Inflation compensation, as distinct from expectations, is the difference in yields between nominal U.S. Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities. Inflation compensation has fallen by more than the survey measures of expectations, but various models suggest 1 See Chart 5 in Stanley Fischer, “U.S. Inflation Developments,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 29, 2015. 2 The Cleveland Fed’s median CPI inflation rate is available at https://clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and- data/median-cpi.aspx. 9 that the movement more likely reflects changes in liquidity premia and inflation risk premia rather than changes in inflation expectations. Over a period of heightened market volatility and safe-haven flows into U.S. Treasury securities, I take less of a signal about inflation expectations from the market-based measure of inflation compensation than from the survey measures. The Cleveland Fed’s model of inflation expectations provides somewhat of a compromise by incorporating survey measures, as well as market data on nominal Treasury yields and inflation swaps. Its measure of 5-year inflation, 5 years from now has been stable, at about 1.9 percent, in recent months.3 Given these readings on inflation and inflation expectations, so long as the real side of the economy continues to perform as expected, I anticipate that inflation will continue to gradually move back to our goal of 2 percent over the next couple of years. Monetary Policy In setting monetary policy, the FOMC assesses both realized and expected progress on our statutory longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment. That assessment encompasses a wide range of economic information – the official economic statistical releases and financial market indicators, as well as the information FOMC participants garner by speaking with contacts in our regions. At its June meeting two weeks ago, the FOMC decided to maintain the target range of the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The FOMC indicated that with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, it anticipates further improvements in the economy. This was reflected in the Summary of Economic Projections also released at the June meeting. The median projection among the FOMC participants shows growth at about 2 percent over the next three years, consistent with the median 3 The Cleveland Fed’s inflation expectations measure is available at https://clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators- and-data/inflation-expectations.aspx. 10 estimate of longer-run trend growth; the unemployment rate coming down a bit from current levels and remaining under the median longer-run estimate of 4.8 percent through 2018; and inflation gradually moving up to 2 percent by the end of 2018. In June, the FOMC also indicated that economic developments will likely warrant only gradual increases in the fed funds rate. Of course, the timing of those rate increases and the overall slope of that gradual path will depend on how the economy, the economic outlook, and the risks evolve. Indeed, in the June projections, the median fed funds rate path of appropriate policy was somewhat shallower than in the last set of projections in March – partly reflecting somewhat slower growth projected for this year, and partly reflecting a lower estimate of the fed funds rate over the longer run. I supported the decision not to change rates in June. My reason did not reflect a fundamental change to my outlook. The progress being made on our policy goals and the outlook suggest that a gradual upward path of interest rates continued to be appropriate. A gradual path means that monetary policy will remain accommodative for some time to come, providing support to the economy and insurance against downside risks. As I said, I do not think we are at the start of a significant reversal in labor markets, and I view the inflation data as supportive of a gradual return to target. Now, some might argue that in an abundance of caution, we should wait for clarity on these issues, and I agree that there are risks to acting too soon. But there are also risks to forestalling rate increases for too long when we are continuing to make cumulative progress on our policy goals. Waiting too long increases risks to financial stability and raises the chance that we would have to move more aggressively in the future, which poses its own set of risks to the outlook. I believe waiting too long also jeopardizes our future ability to use the nontraditional monetary policy tools that the Fed developed to deal with the effects of the global financial crisis and deep recession. If we fail to gracefully navigate back toward a more normal policy stance at the appropriate time, then I believe there is a non-negligible chance that these tools will essentially be off the 11 table because the public will have deemed them as ultimately ineffective. This is a risk to the outlook should we ever find ourselves in a situation of needing such tools in the future. Of course, such a risk is hard to measure and is not one we typically consider. But we live in atypical times, and we need to take the whole set of risks into account when assessing appropriate policy. So why, then, did I think it appropriate not to raise rates in June? The reason was timing. There was considerable uncertainty about the outcome of the upcoming U.K. referendum on membership in the European Union. The vote was being held a week after the June FOMC meeting. It was clear there was going to be volatility in financial markets surrounding the vote. If the vote favored exit, there was the potential for disruption in markets. Given that I do not think U.S. monetary policy is behind the curve yet, I saw little cost in waiting to take the next step. After the U.K. Referendum It is an understatement to say that market volatility increased on the outcome of the U.K. referendum. We are now in a world of heightened economic and political uncertainty, and I expect we will be living with uncertainty for a while as the U.K. and Europe establish the terms of their new relationship. When a shock like this hits financial markets, the first task of central bankers is to ensure that there is sufficient liquidity and funding to allow markets to continue to function in an orderly way in the midst of extreme volatility, and to assure the public that we are prepared to act as necessary. The Bank of England, the finance ministers and central bank governors of the G7 countries, and several other individual central banks including the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Federal Reserve, put out statements last Friday indicating that they stand ready to use established liquidity tools to 12 support market functioning.4 Central banks are monitoring the situation for possible contagion across financial markets. Despite the volatility, markets have been functioning in an orderly manner. The considerable efforts undertaken in the U.K., Europe, the U.S., and other countries in response to the global financial crisis to increase the resiliency of the financial system, including higher capital and liquidity requirements, mean financial institutions are now in considerably better shape to withstand short-run volatility while continuing to extend credit to households and businesses. Ultimately, global economies will adjust to the new trading and labor relationships negotiated between the U.K. and Europe. It is too early to judge what the magnitude of the effects on the global economy will be and, for the U.S. economy, whether there will be a material change in the medium-run outlook. It will depend on how the situation evolves, so the assessment will take some time to fully develop. While the U.K. represents about 4 percent of world output and global trade, London is one of the major financial centers of the world. About 4 percent of U.S. exports go to the U.K., which is a relatively small share, but the financial ties between our two countries are larger. Barring any major disruption in financial and banking markets, one of the main mechanisms through which the exit decision could affect the U.S. economy is through dollar appreciation, which, depending on its persistence and magnitude, could dampen U.S. export growth and cause a delay in the return of inflation to 2 percent. Slower growth outside of the U.S. would also lower demand for U.S. exports. But it is important to remember that exports make up only about 12 percent of U.S. output, so whatever the reduction in export growth, it would mean a smaller reduction in overall GDP growth. 4 See the following statements released on June 24, 2016: Statement from the Bank of England; Statement from the Governor of the Bank of England Following the E.U. Referendum Result; Statement of G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors; ECB is Closely Monitoring Financial Markets; Statement by Minister Aso and Governor Kuroda on the U.K.’s Decision to Leave the E.U.; and The Federal Reserve is Carefully Monitoring Developments in Global Financial Markets. 13 Heightened and persistent uncertainty is another factor that can affect the economy. When the exit decision was announced, investors moved away from risk assets. Higher credit spreads and lower equity prices, coupled with continued uncertainty, could put firms and households in a wait-and-see mode, reducing economic activity for a time. In his speech yesterday, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney highlighted the dampening effect uncertainty could have on economic performance in the U.K. and indicated possible responses to it.5 As I said, it is too soon to judge the full magnitude of such effects. At this point, we need to continue to monitor developments. For example, some of the tightening in financial conditions after the announcement of the vote’s outcome has been reversed in recent days. As we see how things play out, we will have a better sense of whether the medium-run U.S. economic outlook has been meaningfully affected and whether that changes our assessment of appropriate U.S. monetary policy going forward. Monetary policymakers cannot let the lack of economic clarity distract us from our important mission. We must continue to use the best available models, analysis, and judgment to assess the situation. As an FOMC member, I will remain focused on and committed to setting monetary policy to promote the Federal Reserve’s longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment for the benefit of the public. 5 Mark Carney, “Uncertainty, the Economy and Policy,” Bank of England, June 30, 2016.

Monetary Policy and Financial Stability in the U.S. Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Sydney Banking and Financial Stability Conference University of Sydney Sydney, Australia July 12, 2016 These remarks are based on remarks that I made at the Sveriges Riksbank Conference on Rethinking the Central Bank’s Mandate in Stockholm, Sweden, on June 4, 2016. 1 Introduction I thank the University of Sydney for inviting me to participate in today’s conference on banking and financial stability. Since the 2008 global financial crisis, economists and policymakers all over the world have been evaluating the factors that led to the crisis, assessing what could have been done to prevent, or at least limit, the damage, and considering what can and should be done to reduce the probability and impact of future disruptions to financial stability. To its credit and understanding the importance of the financial system to a vital economy, Australia began undertaking thoughtful, periodic reviews of its financial system and regulatory structure well before the crisis. Based on the recommendations coming out of these inquiries, Australian policymakers implemented changes to address the evolving nature of the financial services landscape. I appreciate the opportunity to learn more about the financial stability efforts underway here and to provide a perspective from the other side of the Pacific. Today, I will focus my remarks on the connections between monetary policy and financial stability. To help put the discussion into context, I will start with a brief overview of the U.S. financial system regulatory structure as it pertains to financial stability. I should note that the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The U.S. Financial System Regulatory Structure and Financial Stability It is probably an understatement to say that the financial system regulatory structure in the U.S. is complex. In part, its complexity reflects the wide array of institutions that provide financial services, helping to support an $18 trillion economy. Banks, a category that includes commercial banks, savings and loans, and credit unions, provide only about a third of the credit in the U.S. Other providers include insurance companies; mutual funds; pension funds; government-sponsored enterprises, including Fannie 2 Mae and Freddie Mac, which issue mortgage-backed securities; and other non banks including broker- dealers, finance companies, and mortgage real estate investment trusts.1 These diverse financial institutions are able to provide valuable credit, risk-management, and liquidity services to businesses and households because they are designed to take risks and are highly leveraged compared with nonfinancial businesses. But this risk-taking and leverage raise the possibility of systemic problems that could threaten the functioning of the financial system, hurt real economic activity, and impose significant economic costs. The 2008 financial crisis exposed gaps in the regulatory and supervisory architecture in the U.S., which contributed to a buildup in financial imbalances and systemic risk. In response to the crisis, the Dodd- Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act was signed into law in 2010. Provisions in the act aim to foster financial stability in two ways: first, by lowering the probability of a financial crisis, and second, by reducing the costs imposed on the rest of the economy when a shock hits the financial system. Under Dodd-Frank, the Federal Reserve and other financial regulatory agencies in the U.S. were directed to augment their traditional microprudential approach, which promotes the safety and soundness of individual institutions, with a macroprudential approach in which examiners and supervisors take a horizontal view of risk across institutions rather than looking at only one institution at a time. Although there is still more to be done, U.S. regulators continue to make progress in developing tools to implement the macroprudential approach and to monitor the risks over the business and financial cycles. In the U.S., the application of these tools is complicated by the complexity of the regulatory structure itself. At the federal level, there are multiple financial regulators, including the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the 1 See Fischer (2015). 3 National Credit Union Association, the U.S. Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and the Federal Housing Finance Agency. There are financial system regulators at the state level as well. In many cases, the regulatory authority of these agencies is defined by type of institution rather than by instrument. The Dodd-Frank Act created the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to promote coordination and information sharing across these financial system regulators. The 10 voting members of the FSOC include the heads of the nine federal regulatory entities I just mentioned, and an independent member with insurance expertise, who is appointed by the president of the U.S. An important power of the FSOC is its ability to designate nonbanks as systemically important, bringing them under more banking-type supervision and regulation. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System has the responsibility for supervising systemically important financial institutions, including these FSOC-designated nonbank financial companies, large bank holding companies, and the U.S. operations of certain foreign banking organizations. The complexity of the financial system makes monitoring risks more complicated. The Office of Financial Research, established under Dodd-Frank, is collecting data to aid in this task. The Federal Reserve has also developed a framework for systematically tracking risks, which is helping us to better identify changes in conditions over time. Financial stability surveillance is receiving regular attention at meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the body within the Federal Reserve that is responsible for setting monetary policy.2 One might ask why that’s the case given that financial stability 2 This framework, which is described in Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013), involves tracking a standard set of financial system vulnerabilities, including the pricing of risk, leverage, maturity and liquidity transformation, and interconnectedness and complexity. Recognizing the complex nature of the U.S. financial system, Federal Reserve staff track these risks across four broad areas of the financial system: asset markets, the banking sector, shadow banks, and the nonfinancial sector. 4 is not an explicit part of the FOMC’s monetary policy mandate. It is because the goals of monetary policy and financial stability are interconnected. The Nexus Between Monetary Policy and Financial Stability In my view, a central bank should care about financial stability to the extent that it affects the health of the real economy. Volatility or minor disruptions in financial markets that represent the ebb and flow of a dynamic economy but do not threaten the health of the economy are not something the monetary policy authority should respond to. Indeed, to the extent that the word “stability” gives the impression that the financial system is static, we may want to adopt the language used in the United Kingdom and speak about financial system resiliency, that is, the financial system’s ability to continue to provide the core financial services of intermediation, risk management, and payments in the face of the inevitable shocks that will hit a dynamic economy.3 Monetary policy mainly works through its ability to affect current and expected future interest rates; however, in certain circumstances, it also has the ability to affect risk-taking by investors and financial institutions, and thereby is linked to financial stability.4 I believe that, in general, the goals of monetary policy and financial stability are complementary. For example, price stability helps businesses, households, and financial institutions make better decisions, thereby fostering the stability of the financial system. And a stable financial system allows for more effective transmission of monetary policy throughout the economy. I view this complementarity as similar to the complementarity between the two monetary policy goals that the U.S. Congress has given to the FOMC, namely, price stability and maximum employment. 3 See Tucker (2015). 4 See Adrian and Shin (2011) for a review of the literature on the risk-taking channel of monetary policy. 5 But during the financial crisis we learned that financial imbalances can build up even in a low-inflation environment, so that while price stability may promote financial stability, it is not a sufficient condition. We also learned that financial instability can arise from nonbanks and from institutions that are solvent and not necessarily highly leveraged.5 A large body of research has aided our understanding about how systemic risk can build up and propagate through the economy. Well before the financial crisis, Kiyotaki and Moore (1997) did seminal work on the important role collateral plays in lending markets. In their model, because borrowers cannot be forced to repay, all lending is collateralized. When the economy is performing well, the value of the collateral increases, which supports further borrowing and higher output. But when a negative shock hits the economy and output declines, collateral values also fall, which means borrowing falls, which depresses output even further. Thus, the collateral constraint is a mechanism that amplifies and propagates the effects of temporary shocks on the economy. Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014) build on the Kiyotaki and Moore model. In their model, an economic boom increases bank capital levels high enough so that credit is amply available to borrowers. This lowers the volatility of both output and asset prices. The lower volatility induces banks to increase their leverage and lend even more, so much so that the system is now vulnerable to a negative shock. Gorton and Ordoñez (2014) examine how private market activities generate endogenous accumulations of and subsequent collapses in leverage. These models illustrate that systemic risk is endogenous, determined by the choices of the model’s decision makers, and varies across the cycle. 5 Feroli, Kashyap, Schoenholtz, and Shin (2014) focus on market “tantrums,” which they define as periods in which risk premiums inherent in market interest rates fluctuate widely. Using data on inflows and outflows to open-end mutual funds, they conclude that market tantrums can arise independently of the degree of leverage in the system. 6 During the financial crisis, we saw that when financial markets are not functioning well, the transmission of monetary policy to the economy can be disrupted. In those circumstances, the actions taken to implement monetary policy can also affect financial stability. The FOMC has acknowledged that nonconventional monetary policy, including large-scale asset purchases and the extended period of very low interest rates, could pose potential risks to financial stability by affecting market functioning and by spurring risk-taking in a search for yield.6 Empirical work is beginning to document this effect. For example, Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina (2014) use data on 23 million bank loans from the Spanish credit registry and find that a lower overnight policy rate induces low-capitalized banks to lend more to ex ante riskier firms and to require less collateral compared to high-capitalized banks, direct evidence of monetary policy’s effect on risk-taking.7 Thus, while I believe that, in most circumstances, the goals of monetary policy and financial stability are complementary, we need to recognize that, at times, actions taken to foster financial stability and those taken to promote our monetary policy goals might be in conflict, at least in the short run. In the U.K., the Financial Services Act recognizes this potential tradeoff and explicitly says that the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) is not authorized to act in a way that it feels is “likely to have a significant adverse effect on the capacity of the financial sector to contribute to the growth of the U.K. economy in the medium or long term.”8 In deciding whether to take action against a growing imbalance, policymakers need to balance the expected improvement in future economic conditions against the potential cost of unduly limiting credit 6 The Board of Governors discusses developments related to financial stability in its monetary policy report to Congress. For example, see Board of Governors (2016), p. 20. 7 Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina (2014) separately identify how a change in the monetary policy rate affects the demand for credit and the volume and composition of credit supplied, in particular, the supply to riskier borrowers. 8 See Section 9c(4) of the U.K.’s Financial Services Act 2012. 7 extension. Too high a resiliency standard will thwart risk-taking and innovation, which will undermine longer-run economic growth. In setting the standard, we need to come to some common understanding about the amount of growth and prosperity we are willing to give up in order to lower the risk to financial stability. In the U.S., people who are 80 years old have lived through two major financial crises (the Great Depression and the 2008 crisis). Is that too many? Would we rather lower the probability of such an event to one every 1,000 years? What would we be willing to give up to do that? That may be a premature question at this point. There are likely things that can be done and that are being done to lower the risk to financial stability without much cost in terms of longer-run growth. If we think of there being a risk-return frontier relating financial stability risk to the economic return that a well- functioning financial system can provide, then it isn’t hard to imagine that we were operating at a point well interior to that frontier in the run-up to the crisis, and that the improvements being made in our financial regulatory and supervisory regime are moving us toward the frontier without sacrificing growth. Macroprudential Tools To foster the resiliency of the financial system, regulators in the U.S. and throughout the world are developing macroprudential tools aimed at lowering the probability that instability will arise and to limit the damage when financial shocks do arise. Some tools focus on building up the structural resiliency of the financial system throughout the business cycle. In my view, these structural resiliency tools are the most promising. They include the Basel III risk-based capital requirements, minimum liquidity requirements, central clearing for derivatives, and bank stress tests. Living-will resolution plans and the Orderly Liquidation Authority, which is housed at the FDIC, are intended to make it easier for regulators and policymakers to allow large complex financial institutions to fail. In addition to structural tools, there are countercyclical tools that aim to mitigate the systemic risk that can build up over the business cycle. These include the countercyclical capital buffer and the capital 8 conservation buffer.9 Other possible cyclical tools, not yet established in the U.S. but used in other countries, include loan-to-value ratio limits and debt-to-income ratio limits that vary over the cycle and which have been targeted to particular sectors like housing credit or household credit.10 The performance of the set of macroprudential tools is largely untested. Cross-country studies find mixed results, with the effectiveness of the tools varying with economic circumstances and the types of shocks hitting the financial sector.11 In the U.S., the need to coordinate countercyclical macroprudential policy actions across multiple regulators adds a complication to effectively using such tools in a timely way. Currently, policymakers in the U.K. are putting one of the countercyclical tools to the test. The uncertainty arising from U.K. voters’ decision to exit the European Union has the potential to dampen economic performance in the U.K. In response, policymakers there have taken steps to ease credit conditions. One such step, taken by the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC), is a reduction in the countercyclical capital buffer rate for banks to zero percent from half of a percent of banks’ U.K. exposures, with the expectation that the zero percent rate will be maintained until at least 9 The countercyclical capital buffer allows regulators to increase risk-based capital requirements when credit growth is judged to be excessive and leading to rising systemic risk. The capital conservation buffer ensures that banks raise capital above regulatory minimums in good times so that when they cover losses in bad times, their capital ratio will stay at or above the regulatory minimum. 10 For example, Canada tightened loan-to-value and debt-to-income limits on mortgage lending over the 2009 to 2012 period (Krznar and Morsink, 2014). Beginning in 2010, Israel also implemented a package of macroprudential tools to restrict the supply of housing credit (Fischer, 2014). Spain introduced dynamic loan-loss provisioning in 2000. This method builds up reserves during good economic times accord ing to the historical losses experienced by the asset classes held in the bank’s portfolio. This buffer is then available to absorb losses in bad times (Balla and McKenna, 2009). 11 For example, a study by economists at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) examined the effectiveness of macroprudential tools in reducing systemic risk in 49 countries. The authors concluded that many of the most frequently used tools were effective in reducing the pro-cyclicality of credit and leverage, but the effectiveness depended on the type of shock hitting the financial sector. (See Lin, Columba, Costa, Kongsamut, Otani, Saiyid, Wezel, and We, 2011.) Another study published by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) examined 57 countries over a span of up to three decades and found that imposing maximum debt-service-to-income ratios can limit the buildup of credit in housing markets, but maximum loan-to-value ratios were less effective, and instruments like reserve and liquidity requirements focused on the supply of credit had little impact on housing markets. (See Kuttner and Shim, 2016.) 9 June 2017.12 This is a reduction in regulatory capital buffers by 5.7 billion pounds, which the FPC estimates will raise banks’ capacity to lend by as much as 150 billion pounds, or the equivalent of about $260 billion AUD, or about $190 billion USD. Usually, when one thinks about the use of the countercyclical tools it is to mitigate building financial stability risk by tightening credit conditions, but here is an example of the use of a macroprudential tool to ease credit conditions in support of monetary policy goals – an illustration of the nexus between monetary policy and financial stability policy. Lessons from Monetary Policy for Financial Stability Policy Another connection between the two stems from hard-won lessons learned from years of monetary policy-setting, lessons that can now be productively applied to financial stability policy-setting. Let me discuss two of these lessons. First, to the extent possible, policymakers should take a systematic approach in applying financial stability policy rather than relying on discretion. The financial crisis underscored the important role of incentives in financial markets – not only the incentives of financial institutions but also those of regulators and policymakers. Time-inconsistency problems and moral hazard issues are important factors that need to be considered when designing a framework for implementing financial stability policy. These types of problems argue for taking a systematic approach to such policymaking. The benefits of systematic monetary policy are well established. When monetary policymakers respond in a systematic fashion to incoming information, the public will have a better sense of how policymakers are likely to react to economic developments – whether those developments are anticipated or unanticipated – so their policy expectations will better align with those of policymakers. This alignment helps the public make better financial and economic decisions, thereby making monetary policy more effective. 12 Another step was taken by the Chancellor of the Exchequer in encouraging banks to continue lending to households and businesses. See Carney (June 20, 2016 and July 5, 2016) and Joint Statement from the Chancellor of the Exchequer and Banks (July 5, 2016). 10 An additional benefit of a systematic approach is that it provides a mechanism through which policymakers can commit to policies aimed at promoting policy goals over the longer run. Being systematic can help alleviate time-inconsistency problems in monetary policy, whereby policymakers may favor the short run over the long run. Note that by systematic policy I do not mean that monetary policy will be set mechanically by a policy rule or that policymakers need to be prescient about the types of shocks that will hit the economy. Rather, I mean that policy will react in a systematic fashion to economic developments that change the economic outlook. A systematic approach to financial stability policy is perhaps even more important than in the case of monetary policy because of the important role played by incentives. The crisis shined a bright light on significant moral hazard problems that exist in financial markets. A financial stability policymaker that is systematic in how it applies its tools to promote stability will likely help tame some of the moral hazard problems and also some of the time-inconsistency problems to which the regulators themselves are subject. An important tool in this regard is the resolution of insolvent financial institutions. Without a credible resolution method, during the crisis in the face of serious distress at a large financial firm, governments faced a dilemma: either rescue the firm and create future moral hazard problems or let the firm fail and risk causing a cascade of other failures. The fact that policymakers had to make these decisions in the heat of the moment using their best judgment based on limited information didn’t help. Without a credible resolution method, it is reasonable to expect that even well-intentioned policymakers will be biased toward bailouts. A resolution method that can be applied systematically can help alleviate this problem. The living-will resolution plans and Orderly Liquidation Authority in the U.S. are promising, but still untested, tools in a process that will allow large firms to fail. This, in turn, provides incentives 11 for these large, systemically important institutions to reorganize themselves in a way that reduces the risk they pose to the financial system. As I mentioned, the Federal Reserve has become more systematic in monitoring risks across the financial system. Coupling that monitoring with the application of a resiliency standard across the entire financial services landscape, including the so-called shadow banking system that was less-heavily regulated in the past, would limit regulatory arbitrage. As the financial crisis made clear, taking an action that pushes risk from one set of institutions to another doesn’t eliminate the risk, it just moves it around, potentially to a part of the financial system where the risk is more difficult to monitor and control.13 I acknowledge that this broad application of the resiliency standard across the financial system may be particularly difficult in the U.S. with its complex regulatory structure. Still, we can devise ways to make the macroprudential tools more systematic and less discretionary. Regulators could agree in advance on the contingencies under which the cyclical macroprudential tools would be invoked, rather than waiting until the risks escalated before starting the process to coordinate action. For example, we can write down a formula for a countercyclical buffer, and we can define an explicit trigger for contingent convertible bonds. Knowing that such policies will be systematically applied and what will trigger them may induce financial market participants to limit the buildup of risks in the first place. Another lesson we’ve learned from setting monetary policy – or perhaps, we are still learning it – is the importance of transparency and clear communication. In my view, to be effective, macroprudential policy actions must be communicated in a clear way to avoid creating a conflict with or causing confusion 13 Application of a resiliency standard would allow the type of supervision to vary appropriately by the nature of the systemic risk associated with each part of the financial system. As discussed in Mester (2015), this is a component of the regime for financial stability advocated by Paul Tucker (2015). Several of the macroprudential tools are focused on those institutions that have been deemed systemically important, including the capital surcharge for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) and the U.S. stress tests for banks with more than $50 billion in assets. 12 over actions taken to foster monetary policy goals. Transparency and clear communication are hallmarks of best-practice monetary policymaking. Clear communication helps align the public’s policy expectations, which makes monetary policy more effective. Transparency is necessary so that the public and elected officials have the ability to hold monetary policymakers accountable for their decisions. The Federal Reserve has been given independence in setting monetary policy, which has been well documented as yielding more effective policy and better economic outcomes. But accountability must go hand-in-hand with independence. So the Federal Reserve regularly communicates the basis for its policy decisions. A parallel can be drawn with financial stability policy. Although, in some cases, prudential supervisory information should be kept private, as a general principle, I think financial stability policymakers should strive for greater transparency and more disclosure. Similarly, they should require more disclosure from financial firms so that creditors and other market participants can exert market discipline. Of course, clear communication is easier said than done. Three aspects make this even harder for financial stability policy than for monetary policy. First, the framework and tools of financial stability policy are new. It will take considerable effort on the part of the financial stability policymakers to explain the tools they are using and the rationale for their policy decisions. However, such communication is necessary so that the public understands when an action is being taken because of concerns about financial stability rather than concerns about monetary policy goals. This would be particularly true when the monetary policy authority is also responsible for taking financial stability actions, and if monetary policy were the tool used to address the financial stability concerns. It is worth considering whether separating decisions about financial stability from decisions about monetary policy 13 within the central bank, perhaps by having separate committees as in the U.K., could aid communication and decision-making.14 A second complication in effective communication of financial stability policy is timing. If effective monetary policy means taking away the punch bowl just as the party gets going, then effective financial stability policy might mean taking away the punch bowl before the guests have even arrived because the seeds of financial instability are sown much earlier and action must be taken earlier as well. If the need for monetary policy to be forward looking is a difficult concept for the public to grasp, the need for financial stability policy to act well before there are clear signs of instability may be even more difficult to explain. Yet a third complication in effective communication is the complexity of the financial regulatory regime itself.15 In my view, a sometimes overlooked lesson from the crisis is that regulatory complexity can complicate supervision, risk monitoring, compliance, and enforcement. Given the scope and ever- changing nature of the financial system, regulatory complexity is, to a certain extent, unavoidable. But the tradeoffs should be recognized. For example, it is reasonable to require banks to hold higher levels of capital against higher-risk assets, but a system of risk weights that is overly granular and complex would be counterproductive. In practice, too much complexity would make it harder for regulators to assess compliance and to determine whether institutions were engaging in some practices merely as a way to hide risk and lower their capital requirements. If regulators have made the rules so complex that they cannot assess compliance, then, in practice, there are no consequences for firms that fail to meet the standards. Complexity also makes it difficult to monitor the monitors. It might be worth exploring 14 Kohn (2015) discusses the benefits of such separation. 15 Haldane and Madouros (2012) discuss the benefits of a less complex financial regulatory structure and argue that the complexity of the financial landscape does not call for a complex financial regulatory structure, but just the opposite. 14 whether we would be better off with a much simpler macro- and microprudential supervisory structure, one that is easier to implement and simpler to govern and that is approximately right across various economic models and states of the world even if it is never optimal in any particular model or state. Of course, we aren’t in that simpler regime. So the question is, given the current financial structure in the U.S., how should policy respond to emerging financial stability risks and what role should monetary policy play? Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Risks I do not believe financial stability should be added to the Fed’s statutory monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment. But U.S. monetary policymakers need to remain cognizant of the linkages between financial stability and our monetary policy goals. In my view, the first line of defense against financial instability involves the tools that will make the structure of the financial system less prone to crisis. These structural resiliency tools include higher capital standards (including a minimum non-risk-based leverage ratio, as well as risk-based capital standards), liquidity standards, stress tests, living wills, and effective resolution methods for systemically important bank and nonbank financial institutions. Much work has been done to develop these structural resiliency tools, and I believe the system is in a better position to handle shocks now than it was before the financial crisis. Countercyclical macroprudential tools, such as limits on loan-to-value ratios in particular markets, are worth further study, but at this point, I am not convinced that we have enough knowledge and experience with them to use them effectively in the U.S. That consideration leads me to think that we should set standards for the structural resiliency tools somewhat higher than they would be if we had more confidence in the countercyclical tools. 15 What about using monetary policy to combat heightened financial stability risks? As I’ve discussed, monetary policy and financial stability goals and actions are interrelated. Very loose monetary policy increases the likelihood that financial instabilities will develop, thereby increasing the likelihood that macroprudential policy tools will be needed. Tight macroprudential policy can tighten financial conditions more generally, thereby increasing the likelihood that a monetary policy response will be needed. That said, in my view, U.S monetary policy should remain focused on promoting price stability and maximum employment, and financial stability should not be added as a third objective for monetary policy. First, it isn’t clear that monetary policy would be very effective against emerging financial stability risks. While interest rates affect the fundamental value of assets, it is not clear that they affect the speculative or bubble portion; the impact may depend on the underlying nature of the financial imbalance.16 Second, monetary policy tends to be a blunt instrument, so any benefits of using it to stem financial imbalances, mispricing of assets, or excessive leverage need to be weighed against the economic costs in terms of price stability and employment. Svensson (2016) brings some metrics to the question and concludes that the costs outweigh the benefits.17 While I don’t believe financial stability should be part of the Fed’s monetary policy mandate, monetary policymakers need to be aware of the linkages between our monetary policy actions and financial stability. In the case of the housing market, which precipitated the last crisis, policymakers underestimated the breadth and depth of the negative impact this would have on the rest of the economy 16 For example, in the Gali (2014) model, raising interest rates to combat a bubble can actually inflate it. 17 The benefit of “leaning against the wind,” that is, running monetary policy tighter than it otherwise would be in order to stem emerging financial instabilities, is a reduction in the probability of entering into a financial crisis. The cost is worse economic conditions today and higher economic costs should the economy enter into a crisis. By Svensson’s (2016) metrics, these costs outweigh the small reduction in the probability of a crisis. One caveat about Svensson’s analysis is that it is based on a log-linear model, but we know that financial crises involve extreme states and nonlinearities. 16 and financial system. To the extent that we misjudged the impact, there is a larger potential gain to carefully monitoring financial market conditions, implementing the structural macroprudential tools, and being open to taking offsetting action should imbalances develop.18 If our macroprudential tools proved to be inadequate and financial stability risks continued to grow, I believe monetary policy should be on the table as a possible defense. However, in this case, the blurring between financial stability goals and monetary policy goals would be high: if we assessed the risks to financial stability to be sufficiently great, achieving our dual mandate monetary policy goals would also be in jeopardy. Which brings me back to my original point: in most cases, the goals of price stability, maximum employment, and financial stability are complementary. Conclusion Let me conclude by noting that in his 2015 presidential address to the American Finance Association, Luigi Zingales (2015) posed the question, “Does Finance Benefit Society?” While academics, and, I believe, central bankers, typically say “yes,” a recent survey indicates that the average American is much less certain.19 I am hopeful that the considerable efforts underway across the globe will change that. I believe it is our responsibility to ensure that we create and maintain a financial system that the public views as being beneficial, and one that truly is. 18 Peek, Rosengren, and Tootell’s (2015) textural analysis of the transcripts of FOMC meetings from 1982 through 2009 suggests that the FOMC does consider financial stability when setting monetary poli cy. 19 Zingales (2015) cites the Chicago Booth-Kellogg School Financial Trust Index survey of a representative sample of about 1,000 American households, conducted by Social Science Research Solutions. Forty -eight percent of respondents to the December 2014 survey said that the U.S. financial system hurts the U.S. economy, while only 34 percent said that it benefits the U.S. economy. 17 References Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang, “Financial Stability Monitoring.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) paper 2013-21, Divisions of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, March 2013. Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin, “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics,” in Handbook of Monetary Economics, Vol. 3a, ed. by B. M. Friedman and M. Woodford. New York: Elsevier, 2011, pp. 601-650. Balla, Eliana, and Andrew McKenna, “Dynamic Provisioning: A Countercyclical Tool for Loan Loss Reserves,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 95, Fall 2009, pp. 383-418. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Developments Related to Financial Stability,” in the Monetary Policy Report, February 10, 2016, pp. 20-21. Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector,” American Economic Review 104, 2014, pp. 379-421. Carney, Mark, “Uncertainty, the Economy and Policy,” Bank of England, June 30, 2016. Carney, Mark, “Financial Stability Report Press Conference, Opening Remarks by the Governor,” Bank of England, July 5, 2016. Feroli, Michael, Anil K. Kashyap, Kermit Schoenholtz, and Hyun Song Shin, “Market Tantrums and Monetary Policy,” paper prepared for the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, NY, and Chicago Booth Research Paper 14-09, 2014. Fischer, Stanley, “Macroprudential Policy in Action: Israel,” in George A. Akerlof, Olivier J. Blanchard, David Romer, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds., What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the Crisis (Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press), 2014, pp. 87-98. Fischer, Stanley, “Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 59th Economic Conference: Macroprudential Monetary Policy, October 2, 2015. Gali, Jordi, “Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles,” American Economic Review 104, 2014, pp. 721-752. Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordoñez, “Collateral Crises,” American Economic Review 104, February 2014, pp. 343-378. Haldane, Andrew G., and Vasileios Madouros, “The Dog and the Frisbee,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Economic Policy Symposium, “The Changing Policy Landscape,” Jackson Hole, WY, August 31, 2012. Jiménez, G., S. Ongena, S., J.-L. Peydró, and J. Saurina, “Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk- Taking?” Econometrica 82, 2014, pp. 463-505. “Joint Statement from the Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, and Main British Banks and Building Society on Maintaining Support for Households and Businesses,” July 5, 2016. 18 Kiyotaki, Nobu, and John Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 1997, pp. 211-248. Kohn, Donald, “Implementing Macroprudential and Monetary Policies: The Case for Two Committees,” presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 59th Economic Conference: Macroprudential Monetary Policy, October 2-3, 2015. Krznar, Ivo, and James Morsink, “With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility: Macroprudential Tools at Work in Canada,” IMF Working Paper WP/14/83, May 2014. Kuttner, Kenneth N., and Ilhyock Shim, “Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 19723, December 2013, revised March 17, 2016. Lim, C., F. Columba, A. Costa, P. Kongsamut, A. Otani, M. Saiyid, T. Wezel, and X. Wu, “Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments and How to Use Them? Lessons from Country Experiences,” IMF Working Paper WP/11/238, October 2011. Mester, Loretta J., “Comments on ‘Microprudential Versus Macroprudential Supervision: Functions That Make Sense Only as Part of An Overall Regime for Financial Stability,’” presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 59th Economic Conference: Macroprudential Monetary Policy, October 2-3, 2015. Peek, Joe, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell, “Should U.S. Monetary Policy Have a Ternary Mandate?” presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 59th Economic Conference: Macroprudential Monetary Policy, October 2-3, 2015. Svensson, Lars E.O., “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning Against the Wind: Are Costs Larger Also with Less Effective Macroprudential Policy?” International Monetary Fund Working Paper 16/3, January 2016. Tucker, Paul, “Microprudential Versus Macroprudential Supervision: Functions That Make Sense Only as Part of an Overall Regime for Financial Stability,” paper presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 59th Economic Conference: Macroprudential Monetary Policy, October 2-3, 2015. U.K. Financial Services Act 2012. Zingales, Luigi, “Does Finance Benefit Society?” Journal of Finance 70, August 2015, pp. 1327-1363.

The U.S. Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Australian Business Economists Sydney, Australia July 13, 2016 These remarks are an update of remarks that I made at the European Economics and Financial Centre’s Distinguished Speakers Seminar in London, U.K. on July 1, 2016. 1 Introduction I thank the Australian Business Economists for the kind invitation to be with you today, and I would like to say g’day to you all. I started coming to Australia about 30 years ago with my husband, who grew up in Canberra. I have to admit, I have not yet acquired a taste for Vegemite – my tastes run more toward lamingtons and Anzac biscuits – but Australians are so welcoming that it is always a pleasure to be Down Under. As an economist and policymaker, I appreciate hearing the perspectives of market and business economists. Just as the different views expressed by my colleagues around the monetary policy table help to inform my own policy views, the insights of economists like you help to shape my own economic outlook. The chance to hear perspectives from this side of the Pacific is particularly welcome at this time because we live in a global economy. Today, I will focus my remarks on the U.S. economy and monetary policy. To help put the discussion into context, I will start with a brief overview of the Federal Reserve System. I should note that the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Federal Reserve Structure and Governance The Federal Reserve System, established by Congress in 1913, is a decentralized central bank. It is independent within the government but not independent from the government. The structure is one of balance. Congress designed the Federal Reserve System to alleviate concerns that it would become dominated by financial interests in New York or political interests in Washington. The design includes representation from the rest of the nation, balancing public-sector and private-sector interests, and Wall Street and Main Street concerns. The Federal Reserve System has 12 regional Reserve Banks and a seven-member Board of Governors in Washington that oversees those Banks. The governors, who serve the public, are appointed by the 2 president of the United States and confirmed by the Senate, the upper house of Congress. Governors serve staggered 14-year terms, which span several terms of the president and members of Congress. The length of the term is intended to insulate the governors from short-term political influence and allows them to take a longer-run perspective when setting monetary and financial regulatory policy. The chairman and vice chairman of the Board of Governors are chosen by the president and confirmed by the Senate from among the sitting governors for four-year terms. They can be reappointed until their terms as governors expire. The 12 Reserve Banks also operate in the public interest. They are distributed around the country in locations that were the centers of economic activity back when the Fed was established.1 Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors who are chosen in a nonpolitical process. Three directors represent banks and six are nonbankers who represent business, agricultural, industrial, and public interests in the Districts they serve. The nonbank directors are responsible for choosing the Bank’s president, who is subject to approval by the Fed’s Board of Governors. This structure may seem pretty complicated, but it actually works quite well. Before the Fed was established, there were two earlier attempts at central banks in the U.S. Each lasted only 20 years. In contrast, the Federal Reserve recently marked its 100th anniversary. The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, was established in 1934 and is the body within the Federal Reserve System responsible for setting monetary policy. The FOMC holds eight regularly scheduled meetings a year in Washington. This 12-member Committee is made up of the seven members of the Board of Governors, the president of the New York Fed, and four other Reserve Bank presidents who serve on a rotating basis. As president of the Cleveland Fed, I vote every other year, as does the 1Some Reserve Banks also have Branches. For example, the Cleveland Fed has a Branch in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and a Branch in Cincinnati, Ohio. Each Branch of a Reserve Bank has a board of directors of between three and seven members. 3 Chicago Fed president. The other presidents vote every third year. I note, though, that presidents who happen not to be voting members at the moment still participate in FOMC meetings. Thus, by design, the discussions at our meetings contain a mosaic of economic information and analysis from all parts of the country. This information helps inform our setting of national monetary policy in pursuit of the goals given to us by the U.S. Congress. These monetary policy goals, often called the Fed’s dual mandate, are price stability and maximum employment. The Economic Outlook Our last FOMC meeting was held in mid-June and our next meeting will be two weeks from now. As is always the case, during this intermeeting period, Fed policymakers are evaluating economic developments and assessing the outlook. Of course, the anticipated consequences of the recent decision by U.K. voters to exit the European Union will need to be part of that assessment. This is a developing story, and how it plays out will ultimately determine its implications for the global economy and monetary policy. For the U.S. economy, while the risks and uncertainty surrounding the outlook have increased in the wake of the U.K. vote, FOMC members will be taking the time up to our July meeting to continue to evaluate whether conditions in the aftermath of the decision and other economic and financial developments will necessitate a material change in the modal outlook. In thinking about the economic outlook, I try to stay focused on underlying fundamentals because they determine the outlook for the economy over the medium run, the time horizon over which monetary policy can affect the economy. In my view, the underlying fundamentals supporting the U.S. economic expansion remain sound. These include accommodative monetary policy, household balance sheets that have improved greatly since the recession, continued progress in the labor market, a more resilient banking system, and low oil prices. There are risks around all forecasts, but my modal forecast has been that over the next two years the U.S. economy will continue to expand at a pace slightly above its longer- run trend, which I estimate to be about 2 percent; that the unemployment rate will remain slightly under 4 its longer-run level, which I estimate to be about 5 percent; and that inflation will continue to gradually return to the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target. Of course, even in the best of times, without the increased uncertainty of our current situation, there is some variation in growth and other economic indicators over time. The trick is to extract the signal about where the economy is headed from economic and financial market information that can often be quite noisy. Economic growth We’ve seen this kind of variability in the quarterly measures of U.S. GDP growth. Growth in the first quarter of the year slowed, although less so than originally estimated. Incoming information suggests that we are seeing a rebound of growth in the second quarter. This is very similar to the pattern we saw in 2014 and 2015. Consumer spending, which makes up about two-thirds of output in the U.S., has accelerated in recent months. The continued improvement in household balance sheets, growth in personal income, low borrowing rates, and relatively low oil prices have all buoyed consumer spending. In the U.S., the drop in gasoline prices by almost $1 per gallon between 2014 and 2015 saved the average household about $700. Although gasoline prices have moved up in the past couple of months, the U.S. Energy Information Administration now forecasts that the average price of gasoline will be down again this year, resulting in another $200 in cost savings for the average household. Some of those savings have been spent. For example, we’ve seen high levels of auto sales for the past two years. Some households likely saved part of the windfall instead of spending it, or used it to pay down debt. Either way, stronger household balance sheets will help support future consumption spending. The U.S. housing sector has been gradually recovering for some time. In the aftermath of the housing crash, house prices in the U.S. began rising again in mid-2011, and for the past two years, they have been increasing at a 5 to 6 percent annual rate. At the aggregate level, homeowners lost an unprecedented $7 trillion in real estate equity during the housing crash, but the increases in house prices have allowed homeowners to recover nearly all of that. Sales of existing homes, which make up the bulk of home sales 5 in the U.S., are now back near the levels seen before the housing bubble run-up in the early to mid-2000s. I am using the pre-bubble level as my benchmark because we shouldn’t want to see the housing market return to bubble proportions. Other parts of the housing sector haven’t yet fully recovered. Construction and sales of new homes have been rising at a gradual pace, but they are not back up to their pre-bubble levels. Starts remain below the levels consistent with projections of household formation over the longer run, and in some markets, the supply of housing hasn’t kept up with demand. In addition, the type of housing being built has shifted. Over the past five years, increases in multifamily housing starts have significantly outpaced increases in single-family starts. This may reflect a shift in preferences toward more urban living, but it likely also reflects the desire on the part of some people who lived through the crisis to rent rather than own. Mortgage rates are low but households are being careful in not taking on more mortgage debt than they can handle, and banks are lending to those with good credit quality. My assessment of conditions is that the recovery in housing should continue at a moderate pace. In contrast to housing, business fixed investment remains weak. While the sharp drop in oil prices since mid-2014 benefited consumers and many businesses, firms in the drilling and mining sector, their suppliers, and regions whose economies depend on the energy sector have been hurt. We have seen the effects in parts of the Cleveland Fed District where steel production has been down and firms tied to energy have had to cut jobs and reduce investment. But even outside of the energy sector, business investment has been soft despite generally accommodative financial conditions. Manufacturers have been investing but mainly to maintain current operations rather than to expand. Part of the softness in investment reflects weakness in demand outside of the U.S., which has hurt U.S. exports. Indeed, firms exposed to U.S. trade have had to operate in a very challenging environment. The nominal value of the U.S. dollar has appreciated about 19 percent on a broad trade-weighted basis since mid-2014. This has placed a significant drag on manufacturing output and export growth. But the slowdown in the rate of appreciation in recent months was starting to diminish the drag on growth from net exports. 6 Of course, global growth, commodity price changes, and currency fluctuations are not necessarily independent events. For example, a portion of the more than 50 percent decline in oil prices since mid- 2014 likely reflects expectations of weaker growth in China and other countries, although supply factors have likely played a greater role. The appreciation of the U.S. dollar since mid-2014 has reflected expectations that real growth in the U.S. will continue to be stronger than growth abroad, as well as projected real interest rate differentials between the U.S. and other economies. We have to be careful not to think of these shocks as independent events and merely sum their effects. We live in an interconnected global economy. Changes in prices and currency values are one way economies reach a new equilibrium after a shock. While I would expect investment to begin to pick up as overall economic growth expands, the weakness in investment and the associated slow pace of productivity growth pose a risk for the longer-run growth of the U.S. economy. Structural productivity growth is a key determinant of the longer-run growth of output and increases in living standards. And investment in capital, including human capital, is a key determinant of productivity growth. In the U.S., labor productivity growth has risen at only a half of a percent annual rate over the past five years. Part of this weakness is cyclical: weak investment during the recession and early part of the expansion contributed to slow productivity growth over this five-year period. But the weakness in investment and the slow productivity growth have persisted in the U.S. and in several other countries. Productivity growth is very difficult to forecast, so the softness may reverse itself, or it may be longer lasting and reflect a structural issue. If it’s the latter, then the longer-run growth rate of the U.S. economy may be lower than the 2 percent growth I’ve been assuming. As this overview suggests, some parts of the U.S. economy have fared better than others. But overall, economic growth has proven to be resilient and at a pace slightly above trend. The pace has been sufficient to generate significant progress in labor markets. 7 Labor markets Since the trough in early 2010, the U.S. labor market has added more than 14 million jobs, which is about 10 percent of employment, and the unemployment rate has fallen more than 5 percentage points from its peak of 10 percent in late 2009. Over the past two years, there have also been significant improvements in other gauges of the under-utilization of labor, such as measures tracking the number of part-time workers who would rather work full-time and the number of people who have only been looking for work sporadically or have been discouraged from looking at all because they don’t think they will find a job. Increasingly, we are hearing from businesses that they are having trouble finding qualified workers. Early on, such reports were concentrated in high-skilled occupations but now they are expanding to include lower-skilled jobs in a broader set of industries. There has been some month-to-month variation in recent employment reports for the U.S. Payroll growth slowed considerably in May, raising the question of whether we were at the start of a reversal from the considerable progress that’s been made in labor markets, or whether the weak reading was the type of transitory change we typically see during expansions. Hiring rebounded in June, alleviating that concern. Based on my read of the available data, I believe the U.S. labor market remains sound and that we’ll continue to see further improvements in the job market, although the pace of improvement will necessarily slow given the progress that’s already been made. It’s important to put monthly jobs reports into context. One thing we have learned is that we shouldn’t take too much signal from one or two monthly reports. Payroll growth has slowed several times during this expansion, only to pick up again. In addition, we should expect to see some slowdown in the pace of job growth as the economy nears full employment. Over the past three months U.S. firms added an average of 147,000 jobs per month. That pace exceeds the 75,000 to 120,000 per month range of trend employment growth estimates from various 8 models that take into account the aging of the population and other demographic factors affecting labor force participation. So it is enough to put further downward pressure on the unemployment rate. Other incoming data remain consistent with an improving labor market. Claims for unemployment insurance are low. The rates of job openings and hiring are high. The quit rate is also high, suggesting that workers are confident enough to be looking for better jobs. The unemployment rate is low, and while the labor force participation rate has varied from month to month, averaging through the recent variability we see that the level of the participation rate is consistent with estimates of its longer-run downward trend. Another positive is that there are signs in the data and from anecdotal reports that wages may be accelerating. All of this suggests to me that labor market progress will continue. At the same time, I do not want to underestimate the difficulty that many people have had finding work during the recession and slow recovery and that many continue to have, or the persistent differences in the employment situation faced by different demographic groups in the U.S. The deep recession and slow recovery have exposed and exacerbated longer-run workforce development issues affecting U.S. labor markets. Technological advances and globalization are changing the nature of available jobs and the skill sets needed to perform those jobs. I believe that government programs and private-public partnerships, including educational assistance, retraining programs, and apprenticeships, can be effective in addressing these long-run labor force challenges and should be brought to bear. On the other hand, I do not believe that monetary policy would be effective in addressing these longer-run problems. So from the standpoint of what monetary policy can do, I believe the economy is basically at maximum employment, one part of the Fed’s dual mandate. Inflation The other part of the Fed’s dual mandate is price stability. Inflation has been running below the Fed’s 9 goal of 2 percent for quite some time. Low inflation partly reflects the effects of earlier declines in the price of oil and other commodities, which began in mid-2014, as well as the appreciation of the dollar, which has held down the prices of nonpetroleum imports into the U.S.2 The most recent inflation data have been encouraging and in accord with the pattern anticipated by the FOMC. Inflation measures have gradually risen as the effects of previous declines in oil prices and dollar appreciation have begun to fade. Headline PCE and CPI inflation, as measured by the year-over-year changes in the underlying indices, have moved up from the very low levels recorded last year and have been stable around 1 percent in recent months. The core inflation measures, which omit food and energy prices because they tend to be volatile, have also been moving up and are above the headline numbers. Another gauge of underlying inflation, the Cleveland Fed’s median CPI inflation rate, rose to over 2.5 percent in May, its highest level in over seven years.3 Stable inflation expectations are an important component of inflation dynamics. Even in the face of sizable declines in energy prices, inflation expectations have been relatively stable in my view. At this point I expect them to remain reasonably well anchored, but I am monitoring readings carefully. There are various measures of inflation expectations. Survey-based measures have tended to be more stable than those based on market data. Inflation compensation, as distinct from expectations, is the difference in yields between nominal U.S. Treasury securities and Treasury inflation-protected securities. Inflation compensation has fallen by more than the survey measures of expectations, but various models suggest that the movement more likely reflects changes in liquidity premia and inflation risk premia rather than 2 According to dynamic simulations of the Federal Reserve Board staff’s SIGMA model, a 10 percent rise in the real value of the dollar affects core inflation via import prices fairly quickly, resulting in a drop of about 0.5 percent in core inflation a year after the shock, which partially reverses over the subsequent year. A shock to the value of the dollar also tends to reduce GDP with a lag, and the model indicates that this would put additional downward pressure on inflation. See Chart 5 in Stanley Fischer, “U.S. Inflation Developments,” remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 29, 2015. 3 The Cleveland Fed’s median CPI inflation rate is available at https://clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and- data/median-cpi.aspx. 10 changes in inflation expectations. Over a period of heightened market volatility and safe-haven flows into U.S. Treasury securities, I take less of a signal about inflation expectations from the market-based measure of inflation compensation than from the survey measures. The Cleveland Fed’s model of inflation expectations provides somewhat of a compromise by incorporating survey measures, as well as market data on nominal Treasury yields and inflation swaps. Its measure of 5-year inflation, 5 years from now has been stable, at about 1.9 percent, in recent months.4 Given these readings on inflation and inflation expectations, so long as the real side of the economy continues to perform as expected, I anticipate that inflation will continue to gradually move back to our goal of 2 percent over the next couple of years. Monetary Policy In setting monetary policy, the FOMC assesses both realized and expected progress on our statutory longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment. That assessment encompasses a wide range of economic information – the official economic statistical releases and financial market indicators, as well as the information FOMC participants garner by speaking with contacts in our regions. At its June meeting, the FOMC decided to maintain the target range of the federal funds rate at ¼ to ½ percent. The FOMC indicated that with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, it anticipates further improvements in the economy. This was reflected in the Summary of Economic Projections also released at the June meeting. The median projection among the FOMC participants shows growth at about 2 percent over the next three years, consistent with the median estimate of longer- run trend growth; the unemployment rate coming down a bit from current levels and remaining under the 4 The Cleveland Fed’s inflation expectations measure is available at https://clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators- and-data/inflation-expectations.aspx. 11 median longer-run estimate of 4.8 percent through 2018; and inflation gradually moving up to 2 percent by the end of 2018. In June, the FOMC also indicated that economic developments will likely warrant only gradual increases in the fed funds rate. Of course, the timing of those rate increases and the overall slope of that gradual path will depend on how the economy, the economic outlook, and the risks evolve. Indeed, in the June projections, the median fed funds rate path of appropriate policy was somewhat shallower than in the last set of projections in March – partly reflecting somewhat slower growth projected for this year, and partly reflecting a lower estimate of the fed funds rate over the longer run. I supported the decision not to change rates in June. My support did not reflect a fundamental change to my outlook. The progress being made on our policy goals and the outlook suggest that a gradual upward path of interest rates continued to be appropriate. A gradual path means that monetary policy will remain accommodative for some time to come, providing support to the economy and insurance against downside risks. As I said, I believe that the progress in labor markets has been good and will continue, and I view the inflation data as supportive of a gradual return to target. Now, some might argue that in an abundance of caution, we should wait for clarity on these issues, and I agree that there are risks to acting too soon. But there are also risks to forestalling rate increases for too long when we are continuing to make cumulative progress on our policy goals. Waiting too long increases risks to financial stability and raises the chance that we would have to move more aggressively in the future, which poses its own set of risks to the outlook. I believe waiting too long also jeopardizes our future ability to use the nontraditional monetary policy tools that the Fed developed to deal with the effects of the global financial crisis and deep recession. If we fail to gracefully navigate back toward a more normal policy stance at the appropriate time, then I believe there is a non-negligible chance that these tools will essentially be off the table because the public will have deemed them as ultimately ineffective. This is a risk to the outlook 12 should we ever find ourselves in a situation of needing such tools in the future. Of course, such a risk is hard to measure and is not one we typically consider. But we live in atypical times, and we need to take the whole set of risks into account when assessing appropriate policy. So why, then, did I think it appropriate not to raise rates in June? The reason was timing. There was considerable uncertainty about the outcome of the upcoming U.K. referendum on membership in the European Union. The vote was being held a week after the June FOMC meeting. It was clear there was going to be volatility in financial markets surrounding the vote. If the vote favored exit, there was the potential of disruption in markets. Given that I do not think U.S. monetary policy is behind the curve yet, I saw little cost in waiting to take the next step. After the U.K. Referendum It is an understatement to say that market volatility increased on the outcome of the U.K. referendum. We are now in a world of heightened economic and political uncertainty, and I expect we will be living with uncertainty for a while as the U.K. and Europe establish the terms of their new relationship. When a shock like this hits financial markets, the first task of central bankers is to ensure that there is sufficient liquidity and funding to allow markets to continue to function in an orderly way in the midst of extreme volatility, and to assure the public that we are prepared to act as necessary. The Bank of England, the finance ministers and central bank governors of the G7 countries, and several other individual central banks, including the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Federal Reserve, put out statements indicating that they stand ready to use established liquidity tools to support market functioning.5 Central banks are monitoring the situation for possible contagion across financial 5 See the following statements released on June 24, 2016: Statement from the Bank of England; Statement from the Governor of the Bank of England Following the E.U. Referendum Result; Statement of G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors; ECB is Closely Monitoring Financial Markets; Statement by Minister Aso and Governor 13 markets. The considerable efforts undertaken by policymakers in response to the global financial crisis to increase the resiliency of the financial system, including higher capital and liquidity requirements, mean that financial institutions are now in considerably better shape to withstand short-run volatility while continuing to extend credit to households and businesses. Despite the volatility, markets have generally been functioning in an orderly manner. Investors have been moving funds to safe-haven assets, which has led to lower yields on U.S. Treasuries and appreciation of the U.S. dollar and Japanese yen against the U.K. pound. Reflecting concerns about where U.K. property values may settle, some commercial real estate funds in the U.K. have suspended redemptions. Central banks are continuing to monitor financial market developments closely. Ultimately, global economies will adjust to the new trading and labor relationships negotiated between the U.K. and Europe. Economists continue to evaluate what the magnitude of the effects on the global economy will be. This will depend on how the situation evolves, so the evaluation will take some time to fully develop. In the U.S., in determining whether a material change in our medium-run economic outlook is needed, monetary policymakers are assessing the consequences of the U.K. referendum in the context of other economic and financial developments. While the U.K. represents about 4 percent of world output and global trade, London is one of the major financial centers of the world. About 4 percent of U.S. exports go to the U.K., which is a relatively small share, but the financial ties between our two countries are larger. Barring any major disruption in financial and banking markets, one of the main mechanisms through which the exit decision could affect the U.S. economy is through dollar appreciation, which, depending on its persistence and magnitude, could dampen U.S. export growth and cause a delay in the return of inflation to 2 percent. Slower growth outside of the U.S. would also lower demand for Kuroda on the U.K.’s Decision to Leave the E.U.; and The Federal Reserve is Carefully Monitoring Developments in Global Financial Markets. 14 U.S. exports. But it is important to remember that exports make up only about 12 percent of U.S. output; so whatever the reduction in export growth, it would mean a smaller reduction in overall GDP growth. Heightened and persistent uncertainty is another factor that can affect the economy. When the exit decision was announced, investors moved away from risk assets. Higher credit spreads and lower equity prices, coupled with continued uncertainty, could put firms and households in a wait-and-see mode, reducing economic activity for a time. Bank of England Governor Mark Carney has highlighted the dampening effect uncertainty could have on economic performance in the U.K. and steps have been taken there to ease credit conditions. These include reducing the countercyclical capital requirements for banks and encouraging banks to continue lending to households and businesses.6 As I said, it is too soon to judge the full magnitude of such effects. However, despite the uncertainty, between now and our meeting later this month, FOMC policymakers will continue to evaluate the full set of economic and financial developments to judge whether the medium-run U.S. economic outlook has been meaningfully affected and whether that changes our assessment of appropriate U.S. monetary policy going forward. Monetary policymakers cannot let the lack of economic clarity distract us from our important mission. We must continue to use the best available models, analysis, and judgment to assess the situation. As an FOMC member, I will remain focused on and committed to setting monetary policy to promote the Federal Reserve’s longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment for the benefit of the public. 6 See, Mark Carney, “Uncertainty, the Economy and Policy,” Bank of England, June 30, 2016; Mark Carney, “Financial Stability Report Press Conference, Opening Remarks by the Governor,” July 5, 2016; and “Joint Statement from the Chancellor of the Exchequer, George Osborne, and Main British Banks and Building Society on Maintaining Support for Households and Businesses,” July 5, 2016.

Helping People and Communities Affected by Regional Economic Transitions Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2016 Kentucky Summit on Philanthropy Economic Transition: Leading Through Philanthropy The Kentucky Philanthropy Initiative Lexington, Kentucky September 1, 2016 1 Introduction I thank the Kentucky Philanthropy Initiative (KPI) for inviting me to be with you today, and for the great partnership KPI has forged with the Cleveland Fed as we work together to understand and find solutions to the economic challenges facing this region. I appreciate this opportunity not only to enjoy the beautiful bluegrass scenery but also to gather firsthand information about economic conditions in this part of the country. Yesterday I observed an electrical/fiber optic lineman training program at Hazard Community and Technical College and met with representatives of the Eastern Kentucky Concentrated Employment Program, the Foundation for Appalachian Kentucky, the Housing Development Alliance, and the Mountain Association for Community Economic Development. These were very productive discussions. Eastern Kentucky is part of the Fourth Federal Reserve District, which also includes the state of Ohio, western Pennsylvania, and the northern panhandle of West Virginia. That’s a pretty diverse region, encompassing larger cities, small towns, and rural areas, with a mix of different industries and occupations. The Federal Reserve System, established by Congress more than 100 years ago, was designed in a way to ensure that the Fed’s decisions about monetary policy take into account this very diversity. We recognize that our policy decisions affect Main Streets and communities all across the country. As the president of a Federal Reserve Bank, I make it a point to bring the economic information we have garnered from business, consumer, and labor contacts throughout the District to meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee. That’s the body within the Fed that sets monetary policy. The insightful regional perspectives that our contacts provide, along with economic and financial data and analysis, all play an important part in the Fed’s setting of national monetary policy in pursuit of our statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. While most people associate the Federal Reserve with monetary policy, the Fed has had an interest in community development issues for quite a long time. In 1981, the Fed created its Community Affairs function to provide technical training and support to depository institutions to bolster their compliance 2 with the Community Reinvestment Act, a law that promotes equitable access to credit for all individuals and neighborhoods. From this targeted beginning, the Federal Reserve’s work in the area of community development has evolved and expanded, much as the nature of community development in general has changed over time. As people in this room know, access to credit is but one factor – albeit an important one – in determining the economic vitality of households and neighborhoods. Today, the Fed’s community development function is active in research and outreach concerning housing markets, workforce development, education, health, and small business lending, among other issues. While the focus may have changed over time, one thing that hasn’t changed is the Federal Reserve’s commitment to helping to identify effective policies and best practices for promoting economic progress in low- and moderate-income communities. The Cleveland Fed very much values the relationships we have built with key philanthropic, government, and other organizations working on programs aimed at improving the economic outcomes of people in eastern Kentucky. Those relationships were instrumental in informing our analysis of some of the community development efforts I’ll discuss today. I want you to know that the Cleveland Fed’s work is just part of the initiatives taking place at the 12 Federal Reserve Banks across the country. For example, the Minneapolis Fed has established a Center for Indian Country Development to forge partnerships between the Fed and other organizations to study business, housing, and educational issues affecting Native American communities. The Dallas Fed’s Colonia project is examining infrastructure, housing, and economic opportunity efforts in the neighborhoods along the U.S.- Mexico border. And the St. Louis Fed’s Delta Communities Initiative is working with distressed communities across the Arkansas and Mississippi Delta regions. There are many other examples, but today I will focus on approaches and programs that are helping to make a difference in regions like eastern Kentucky, regions that are undergoing significant economic 3 transitions. Before I continue, let me note that the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Eastern Kentucky in Transition Eastern Kentucky, comprising 31 counties, has been facing economic challenges for some time. In 1964, President Lyndon Johnson knelt on the front porch of a Martin County family’s cabin as part of his administration’s “War on Poverty” tour. A photograph of that meeting became an icon in the country’s effort to eradicate poverty.1 As discussed in two recent Cleveland Fed articles, while some progress has been made, the challenges remain substantial.2 In the 1960s, about 60 percent of families in eastern Kentucky lived below the poverty line. Today that percentage has fallen to around 25 percent, but that is still about twice as high as the national average and 9 percentage points higher than the rest of Kentucky. In fiscal year 2016, the Appalachian Regional Commission has designated 26 of the 31 counties in eastern Kentucky as distressed.3 The sources of eastern Kentucky’s difficulties are familiar to all of you. Over the past decade or so, eastern Kentucky has lost more than 13,000 jobs; about half of those were jobs in coal mining. The decline in employment has affected the regional economy in a number of ways. Coal miners earn nearly double the average annual income in eastern Kentucky: about $73,000 per year compared to $36,000 per year. So the loss of those jobs has meant a sizable drop in local spending power. In addition, tax revenues derived from the coal industry have fallen sharply as the level of coal production has fallen. For 1 The photograph was reproduced in the Cleveland Fed’s 2006 Annual Report essay (see Mark Schweitzer and Peter Rupert, “Understanding the Persistence of Poverty”) and in a joint report profiling 16 high-poverty communities, including Martin County, Kentucky, issued by the Federal Reserve and the Brookings Institution (see “The Enduring Challenge of Concentrated Poverty in America,” A Joint Project of the Community Affairs Offices of the Federal Reserve System and the Metropolitan Policy Program at the Brookings Institution, October 2008). 2 Matt Klesta documents economic trends in eastern Kentucky in “Eastern Kentucky: A Region in Flux,” Forefront, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, March 2, 2016, and “Comings and Goings in Eastern Kentucky,” Forefront, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, August 1, 2016. 3 See ARC-Designated Distressed Counties, Fiscal Year 2016. 4 example, the coal severance tax in Kentucky has dropped 40 percent in just the past three years. The weakened economy has exacerbated some social issues in the region. Eastern Kentucky has experienced the pain of the country’s opioid epidemic. According to data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, over the period 2000 to 2014, the age-adjusted death rate from drug overdoses more than doubled, with opioids being the main driver of these deaths.4 According to this sad metric, in 2014, Kentucky’s death rate from this cause was the fourth highest among the 50 states. The economic challenges in eastern Kentucky are also reflected in population trends. While the rest of Kentucky has gained population since 1980, population in eastern Kentucky has been fairly flat and has even begun to decline over the past five years as the coal industry has contracted. Deaths are now outpacing births, and net migration in eastern Kentucky has shifted from an inflow of around 1,300 people a year on average from 1995 to 2011 to an outflow of about 1,100 people a year on average since then.5 Factors Supporting Regional Transformation Eastern Kentucky is not alone in facing economic challenges, many of which arise from the transformation being driven by technological change and globalization. In the Fourth Federal Reserve District, regions that have been dependent on one particular industry like heavy manufacturing or oil have fared less well over time than those that have been able to diversify their industrial bases and adapt to the changing economy. Research and analysis by Federal Reserve staff and others have identified a number of specific factors that support regional economic transitions. The three I will discuss today are: leadership and collaboration, a skilled workforce, and infrastructure. 4 See Rose A. Rudd, Noah Aleshire, Jon E. Zibbell, and R. Matthew Gladden, “Increases in Drug and Opioid Overdose Deaths – United States, 2000-2014,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 64, pp. 1378-1382 (January 1, 2016). 5 These are Internal Revenue Service Migration data. See the August 1, 2016 article by Klesta referenced earlier. 5 Leadership and Collaboration Effective leadership can make a big difference in how regional economies navigate transitions. The Boston Fed examined small and mid-sized cities that lost manufacturing employment and found that “resurgent cities,” meaning those that successfully reinvigorated their economies, exhibited a high degree of leadership and collaboration among key institutions and individuals, including nonprofits, private citizens, corporations, and government.6 But the researchers also found that to have an effect on economic outcomes, leadership and collaboration must be part of long-lasting campaigns. There are no shortcuts or easy fixes. Fortunately, we are seeing some encouraging signs of leadership and collaboration in eastern Kentucky. This summit is a great example of a broad cross-section of funders coming together to support economic transitions. The Kentucky Philanthropy Initiative is aligned with the Appalachia Funders Network and the Appalachian Regional Commission, both of which are active partners of the Cleveland Fed, as well as the Richmond and Atlanta Feds, whose Districts encompass parts of central Appalachia. In fact, Federal Reserve staff members participate in four workgroups operated by the Appalachia Funders Network related to health, food systems, strengthening community capacity, and energy and natural resources. Our staff members are actively engaged with our regional partners to aid in data analysis when possible and to foster leadership connections and information sharing. Leadership and collaboration also affect the success of employers in recruiting newly trained workers into their industries. Cleveland Fed analysts undertook case studies of five sector-based initiatives across the 6 “Reinvigorating Springfield’s Economy: Lessons from Resurgent Cities,” Public Policy Discussion Paper No. 09- 6, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 1, 2009. 6 Fourth District.7 These sectors were health care in western Pennsylvania, information technology (IT) in northeastern Ohio, advanced manufacturing in central Ohio, marine mechanics in northwestern Ohio, and coal mining in eastern Kentucky. Four of these five initiatives provide direct training to workers, while the IT initiative is focused on increasing and enhancing the pipeline of IT talent through deep employer engagement with educational institutions at all levels. The analysts found that successful programs involve employers who are actively and substantively engaged: they provide advice on curricula, directly interact with students, and tend to come from the highest ranks of their organizations so that they are free to speak on behalf of the employers. The case studies also showed that relationships and trust among employers and partners are important drivers of success. Trust is necessary because, in many cases, the employers are competitors; sustained relationships among the many partners are important because they give the initiatives time to evolve and grow. Many of you are probably familiar with an initiative called Shaping Our Appalachian Region, or SOAR. This effort bears many of the leadership and collaboration qualities that are critical to supporting economic transitions.8 Since its inception in 2013, SOAR has embarked on building a set of working committees that allow individuals and institutions to join together to steer the course of economic revitalization in the region. The leadership and collaboration displayed by SOAR are straight out of the resurgent cities’ playbook: the leaders involved in SOAR recognize that it is in their own best interest to support economic rebirth and that collaboration is essential because the process of economic transition is necessarily complex. By providing an easy-to-access venue for eastern Kentucky’s organizations, businesses, civic leaders, and private citizens to come together and plan for a stronger economic future, SOAR also provides the essential foundation to effect change. One concrete example of success is the new associate’s degree program in broadband technology at Big Sandy Community and Technical 7 “Addressing Employment Needs through Sector Partnerships: Case Studies from across the Federal Reserve’s Fourth District,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, August 15, 2016. 8 See http://www.soar-ky.org/ for more information. 7 College. This is the first such program in Kentucky and only the third in the country. According to the college’s president, the program came about in large part because of the coordinated work of SOAR, Kentucky public officials, and One East Kentucky, a nine-county regional organization comprising private businesses and local chambers of commerce.9 A Skilled Workforce One of the areas SOAR is targeting is workforce development, and wisely so. Just as investments in physical capital, such as plants, equipment, and software, can make businesses more productive, so can investments in human capital – educational and training programs – that allow people to become and remain productive members of the modern labor force. When it comes to the economic well-being of entire regions, many studies have documented the importance of investments in human capital. For example, Cleveland Fed researchers found that over a 75-year period, education levels were consistently one of the most reliable indicators for each state’s per capita income growth10 and that counties with higher levels of high school graduates tend to have lower poverty rates and higher levels of labor force participation.11 A study by a Philadelphia Fed researcher found that resilient regions, that is, regions that have been able to avoid persistent declines in population over the long run, tend to have a more educated population and a more diverse industry mix.12 9 See “Board of Regents Approves Broadband Technology Degree Program at BSCTC ,” Big Sandy News and Events, March 11, 2016. The Kentucky Community and Technical College Board of Regent s approved this new program in March 2016. The program will be divided into three tracks: broadband technician, broadband telecommunications equipment installer, and broadband design and applications. 10 “Altered States: A Perspective on 75 Years of State Income Growth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2005 Annual Report. 11 Mark Schweitzer and Peter Rupert, “Understanding the Persistence of Poverty,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2006 Annual Report. 12 Jeffrey Lin, “Regional Resilience,” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper No. 13-1, December 17, 2012. 8 The benefits of investing in human capital are also evident at the individual level. For individuals, better education is correlated with lower levels of unemployment and higher wages. For example, at the national level, the current unemployment rate for those with a college degree is 2.5 percent, compared to 5.0 percent for those with a high school diploma, and 6.3 percent for those who didn’t graduate from high school. The difference in wages between those with a college degree and those without, the so-called skill premium, has widened substantially over time, more than doubling since the 1970s. And over a lifetime, in present value terms, a college graduate can expect to earn nearly twice as much as a high school graduate.13 Most studies have tended to focus on the benefits of a college education because that’s where the data are more readily available. But other approaches to workforce development are also needed. Technological change and globalization have been changing the nature of the jobs available in the U.S. Those workers who have been displaced from their current occupations, for example, coal miners and assembly line workers, often need to retrain for the modern economy. Apprenticeships, certificate programs, and on- the-job training can all potentially play an important role in getting people back into productive jobs. The Registered Apprenticeship program is administered by the Employment and Training Administration’s Office of Apprenticeship within the U.S. Department of Labor, in conjunction with State Apprenticeship Agencies. The apprenticeship programs offer structured on-the-job training combined with related technical instruction tailored to industry needs in a variety of occupations, including electricians, plumbers, truck drivers, and child care workers. One study of the program covering 10 states, including Kentucky, found that the program has been highly effective in generating 13 Kartik Athreya and Janice Eberly, “The College Premium, College Noncompletion, and Human Capital Investment,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 13 -02R, February 2015. 9 higher incomes for participants in a cost-effective way.14 In the ninth year after enrollment, the average person who had participated in the program was earning almost $6,000 more in annual salary than similar nonparticipants, and the difference in lifetime earnings amounted to about $98,000. These differences were even greater for those who completed the apprenticeship programs. For Kentucky, data limitations precluded looking at earnings in the ninth year after enrollment, but in the sixth year after enrollment, the average participant in Kentucky was earning over $5,700 more per year than the average nonparticipant. The study also concluded that the estimated social benefits of the program exceeded the social costs.15 In sum, the study’s evidence suggested that effective apprenticeships not only lead to higher earnings, but also help people stay employed longer. While it is important to help people already in the labor force transition to other occupations in high demand, it is also important to start training people still in school so that they can develop the skills for the jobs of the future and to make sure that those providing that education and training understand what the jobs in demand will be. The Allegheny Conference on Community Development commissioned an in-depth analysis of the supply and demand for labor in the Pittsburgh region over the next decade.16 The resulting report made a number of recommendations to help prepare employers, current and future workers, educators, and civic leaders for the coming changes. One initiative would create a digital career awareness hub for students and teachers in kindergarten through high school to better match curriculum to 14 Mathematica Policy Research, “An Effectiveness Assessment and Cost-Benefit Analysis of Registered Apprenticeship (RA) in 10 States,” Final Report July 25, 2012. The 10 states included in the study were Flo rida, Georgia, Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Missouri, New Jersey, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and Texas. 15 The potential benefits considered included the increased productivity of a worker trained through the program and their reduced use of government support programs, including unemployment insurance, welfare, and food stamps. The costs included the costs of administering the program at the federal and state levels, as well as the costs of community colleges providing supportive technical training. Under a baseline scenario, the study estimated that over the career of an apprentice, the estimated social benefits would exceed the costs by about $124,000. Under more conservative assumptions, the study estimated these net social benefits at about $49,000. See Mathematica Policy Research, 2012. 16 “Inflection Point: Supply, Demand and the Future of Work in the Pittsburgh Region,” report prepared by Burning Glass Technologies and the Council for Adult and Experiential Learning with Allegheny Conference on Community Development, May 2016. 10 the skill sets in demand in the future. Another would create a digital jobs database to make it easier to match those with particular skills to employers currently needing those skills. A further recommendation is to focus resources on high-growth “opportunity occupations,” positions that pay higher than the median wage but don’t require a bachelor’s degree. This diverse group of occupations includes certain jobs in health care, transportation, and bookkeeping. Research by the Federal Reserve suggests that even in opportunity occupations, employers are demanding higher levels of skills than they did in the past, so aligning skill development with these types of jobs will need to be a priority.17 And it’s important to note that not all the necessary skills are technical ones. The Cleveland Fed’s case studies of sector-based training programs that I mentioned earlier found that even if a jobseeker meets the technical skill requirements for a position, lacking the necessary “soft skills” can be a significant barrier to employment. By their very nature, soft skills, such as the ability to work in teams and effective communication, are difficult to measure, but studies are now examining the role of characteristics like persistence and other personality traits as they relate to labor market outcomes.18 The ACT WorkKeys test attempts to measure foundational and “soft skills,” and Kentucky is using it as a metric to help evaluate whether a community has the infrastructure and workforce sought by employers. Among Kentucky’s most successful retraining efforts is the Hiring Our Miners Everyday, or H.O.M.E., program. Housed within the Eastern Kentucky Concentrated Employment Program , H.O.M.E. is funded by an emergency grant from the U.S. Department of Labor and, as its name implies, helps miners and their families affected by the decline in the coal industry. H.O.M.E. appreciates that displaced miners are far from unskilled; rather they need the opportunity to hone their skills for different industries. For 17 “Identifying Opportunity Occupations in the Nation’s Largest Metropolitan Economies ,” Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta, September 2015. 18 Paul Tough discusses some of the research in How Children Succeed: Grit, Curiosity, and the Hidden Power of Character, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt: New York, 2012. 11 example, the H.O.M.E. program puts out-of-work miners through a course to prepare them for work as electrical utility linemen, a job that not only pays well, but also provides much-needed fiber optic lines to rural areas. As a result of this program, eastern Kentucky may be able to keep a share of its skilled workforce in the region, thereby helping the local economy to grow. H.O.M.E. is also an example of community leadership and collaboration in action, as it brings together a wide range of entities and interlocking relationships, from the Kentucky Chamber of Commerce to Hazard Community and Technical College. An important next step will be for the partners to undertake a focused evaluation of the program so that we can all learn which specific strategies work and why they work, and which strategies are less effective and therefore less deserving of continued investment. Infrastructure The final factor I’ll discuss today that’s been found to help in revitalizing distressed communities is investment in infrastructure. In fact, infrastructure is a critical component of economies of all sizes. The Appalachian Development Highway System, started in 1965, is a key piece of eastern Kentucky’s infrastructure. This system includes 3,000-plus miles of highways across 13 states and was designed for the express purpose of linking otherwise isolated and distressed areas of Appalachia to the Interstate Highway System. Several studies have documented that economic activity is higher in places connected by the highway.19 Of course, in 2016, the regional infrastructure needs of vibrant businesses and households have expanded to include not only the physical highway but also the digital highway. Broadband internet access has become a necessity in our connected world. A recent report issued by Cornell University found that nonmetropolitan counties that have had a high rate of broadband adoption have also experienced higher 19 Some of these studies are summarized in “Appalachian Development Highway System Economic Analysis Study: Synthesis of Findings to Date,” a study prepared for the Appalachian Regional Commission by the Economic Development Research Group, Inc., May 2016. 12 growth in median household income and lower rates of job loss than similarly situated counties that have had low broadband adoption.20 A 2013 federal government report on broadband access and adoption found that adoption rates vary by household income levels: fewer than half of households with incomes below $25,000 a year use broadband at home, compared with over 90 percent of households with annual incomes exceeding $100,000.21 There is also wide disparity in broadband access, especially access to high-speed broadband, between rural and urban areas, putting the growth prospects of rural areas at a disadvantage. Eastern Kentucky stands to benefit from KentuckyWired, a statewide effort to bring broadband access to underserved areas in the state. I note that the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) provides a significant opportunity to boost programs like this aimed at closing the digital divide. Recent revisions to the CRA rules recognize that a reliable communications infrastructure, such as broadband internet service, can help to revitalize or stabilize underserved nonmetropolitan, middle-income areas. So depository institutions will now receive credit for investing in this infrastructure for the purposes of meeting the CRA requirement of serving the needs of low- and moderate-income communities.22 Conclusion Let me conclude by noting that the economy has made significant strides in coming back from the Great Recession. The unemployment rates in both the nation and in eastern Kentucky are down about 5 percentage points since their respective peaks during the recession. Accommodative monetary policy has provided important support to the economy on this cyclical journey, helping to promote improving labor 20 Brian Whitacre, Roberto Gallardo, and Sharon Strover, “Broadband’s Contribution to Economic Health in Rural Areas,” Issue Number 64, Research and Policy Brief Series, Community and Regional Development Institute, Department of Development Sociology, Cornell University, February 2015. 21 See “Four Years of Broadband Growth,” Office of Science and Technology Policy and the National Economic Council, The White House, Washington, D.C., June 2013. 22 See page 485111, “Community Reinvestment Act; Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment; Guidance,” Federal Register, vol. 81, no. 142, Monday, July 25, 2016, Rules and Regulations. 13 markets. But we need to recognize that the labor market outcomes for people in eastern Kentucky are below the national average and there continue to be longer-run challenges in regions like eastern Kentucky that are undergoing economic transformation. Technological advances and globalization are changing the nature of available jobs and the skill sets needed to perform those jobs. To raise our shared standard of living and to make us more competitive in the global economy, the U.S. needs to ensure that people can enter and remain productive members of the transforming economy. You may have heard that, last week, I and several other Federal Reserve System leaders met with representatives from the Center for Popular Democracy’s Fed Up Campaign in a public forum held before the Fed’s annual symposium in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. It was a productive exchange of views about how to solve some of the labor market challenges still afflicting certain communities and demographic groups. Like the Fed Up Campaign, I believe these are important challenges that the country needs to address, but unlike the Fed Up Campaign, I do not believe that at this point in the business cycle, the current very low level of interest rates is an effective solution to these longer-run issues. But the good news is that the programs I discussed today and many of the other efforts underway can make a real difference to the people and communities in transition. To be sure, these programs are but a small part of the overall strategy needed to support economic transitions. Laying the foundation for sustained economic growth is neither a quick nor an easy task. It involves many different players working together with perseverance. I commend this audience for undertaking this effort. As members of the Kentucky Philanthropy Initiative and related charities, you provide leadership and foster collaboration, key ingredients to the revitalization and resiliency of our regions. Like the KPI, the Federal Reserve takes seriously its role as a convener. Bringing together people to share their different perspectives and experiences can ultimately lead to more effective economic policies. I have spoken many times about how the diversity of views expressed around the FOMC table helps the Fed make better monetary policy. I believe the same is true for public policies aimed at addressing the 14 challenges faced in community development. KPI performs an invaluable service by pulling together people and groups to support grant making and to promote public-private partnerships targeting the region’s persistent challenges. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland looks forward to our continued collaboration with you in those efforts.
