Trends and Transitory Shocks By Eric S. Rosengren September 27, 2017 New York, NY Money Marketeers of New York University Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Speaking in New York, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said that underlying trends suggest "an economy that risks pushing past what is sustainable, raising the probability of higher asset prices, or inflation well above the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target." "Steps lowering the probability of such an outcome seem advisable – in other words, seem like insurance worth taking out at this time," he said. "As a result, it is my view that regular and gradual removal of monetary accommodation seems appropriate." Noting that the weakness in inflation readings appears to be transitory, Rosengren said "the declines in the unemployment rate below the level most see as sustainable seem likely to be more long-lasting." "Discerning the underlying trends in unemployment and inflation – looking through transitory effects – is likely to be quite difficult in coming months," Rosengren said, citing the impact of recent hurricanes on economic data. In addition, Rosengren noted that the Federal Reserve's dual mandate indicators – employment and inflation – are sending somewhat conflicting signals of late: labor markets have continued to improve, yet inflation has slipped down a notch this year. Asking how policymakers might resolve the conflicting signals when "the central bank's dual mandate is 'dueling,'" Rosengren explored the forecasts of both central bankers and private forecasters. Both suggest that by the end of next year, inflation is expected to be close to target, while the unemployment rate will continue to fall – and as a result, will move further below most estimates of a sustainable unemployment rate. "This outcome poses risks – specifically that an overheated economy will lead to price or asset-price inflation, risking the sustainability of the recovery," Rosengren said. Rosengren noted that low inflation readings are viewed as transitory by both FOMC participants and private-sector forecasters. In contrast, Rosengren noted that most forecasters see the recent low readings for unemployment as persistent , and they envision additional declines on average. "While such forecasts are still of course subject to errors – possibly even significant ones – I believe policymakers should not overreact to low current inflation readings that are widely expected to be temporary," he said. "In my view, appropriate risk mitigation would argue for continued gradual removal of monetary accommodation, even though we are currently below the inflation target." Rosengren was speaking to the Money Marketeers of New York University. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)

Estimating Key Economic Variables: The Policy Implications By Eric S. Rosengren October 7, 2017 Montreal, Canada William S. Vickrey Distinguished Address, International Atlantic Economic Conference International Atlantic Economic Society Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Acknowledging that "every economic recovery has its own unique puzzles," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston President Eric Rosengren explored two from the most recent recovery: first, the difficulty central banks in many developed economies have had achieving their inflation objectives even as employment has rebounded; and second, the relatively slow rate of economic growth experienced in the U.S., despite unusually low interest rates. One possible explanation for the first puzzle, the difficulties in achieving inflation objectives, could be that the "natural rate" of unemployment – the unemployment rate that is consistent with an inflation rate at its target value – may have fallen. "A lower natural rate of unemployment in the economy might explain why lower actual levels of unemployment are not driving up wages and prices as quickly as some have expected," Rosengren said. But he cautioned, long-term economic trends are the main source of variation in the natural rate, and such changes are unlikely to occur quickly or in unexpected ways over relatively short time periods. Rosengren noted that a common explanation for the second puzzle – the slow rate of economic growth in the U.S. despite unusually low interest rates – has been a fall in the equilibrium interest rate (the interest rate that in the long run is consistent with stable inflation and full employment). "The rapid decline in estimates of the equilibrium interest rate should also be viewed cautiously," he said, citing the imprecision in estimation – and given how much estimates have varied over a relatively short time period. "History shows that policymakers tend to place too much weight on short-term fluctuations in their real-time estimates of long-run concepts." While it is important that monetary policy be "data dependent," Rosengren said, it is equally important that it not be "too sensitive" to incoming data – especially when estimating important underlying economic concepts like the natural rate of unemployment and the equilibrium interest rate. Acknowledging that underlying economic relationships can and do change, Rosengren said one should not be too quick to assume that relationships are unhinged as a result of near-term variations. This is of more than academic interest. "Too much sensitivity to incoming data can cause monetary policy to be too easy in expansions and too slow to respond to recessions." Specifically, in Rosengren's view, maintaining negative real short-term rates once we have achieved full employment risks the potential of an eventual overheating of the economy. Prudent risk management, he said, would argue for the continued gradual removal of monetary policy accommodation in order to minimize the risk of outcomes that might prematurely shorten the current economic recovery. Rosengren was speaking at the 84th International Atlantic Economic Conference in Montreal, hosted by the International Atlantic Economic Society. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)

Making Monetary Policy: Rules, Benchmarks, Guidelines, and Discretion By Eric S. Rosengren October 13, 2017 Boston, MA Economic Conference Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share On Friday, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren weighed in on a longstanding debate: Should monetary policymakers adhere to a rules–based approach, as recent legislation would suggest? Or should they be able to determine how best to achieve the outcomes mandated by Congress (maximum sustainable employment and stable prices)? "The resolution of the 'rules vs. discretion' debate will have significant consequences," said Rosengren, opening a conference on the subject and exploring the positive aspects of policy rules, as well as some drawbacks. Rosengren said that rules provide important benchmarks, allowing policymakers to compare potential policies to historical norms. He noted that rules could make inherently complex policies more understandable, could aid in communicating those policies, and could make policy more consistent over time despite changing personnel. Rosengren said that policy rules like those described in research by conference presenter John Taylor, have the advantage of being firmly tied to the ultimate goals that Congress has set for the Federal Reserve. "I view policy rules tied to the central bank's mandate as extremely useful benchmarks." Fed policymakers regularly refer to a variety of policy rules, said Rosengren—but not one rule alone, as different policy rules can give very different policy prescriptions. In Rosengren's view, legislating the use of simple policy rules would be "quite counterproductive." Picking the wrong rule can entail significant costs: an ineffective or inappropriate rule could produce distinctly sub-optimal results for the economy. And simple interest rate rules, he said, "do not capture the full range of policy instruments available to the central bank," such as the expansion and change in the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. Rosengren also said that concerns about financial stability are reflected in FOMC actions, but not modeled in simple rules. "A legislated policy rule that is rigid could lead to large policy mistakes," Rosengren concluded. "From my perspective, policy effectiveness will be better served by a more robust formulation of monetary policy that draws on a diverse set of guidelines and benchmarks—which is the exercise Fed policymakers conduct every six weeks for actual FOMC meetings." Rosengren was speaking at the Boston Fed's 61st Economic Conference , "Are Rules Made to be Broken? Discretion and Monetary Policy." collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords monetary policy

Following a Balanced Approach By Eric S. Rosengren November 15, 2017 Boston, MA Northeastern University Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share In remarks Wednesday, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren summed up the current “dilemma” for monetary policymakers: inflation remains below target, which might suggest more patience before tightening monetary conditions – but unemployment is below the level most policymakers think will be sustainable, which would suggest less accommodative policy. Balancing these somewhat conflicting factors involves studying the magnitude of deviations, as well as how long the deviations are expected to persist. Rosengren’s view is that “a gradual increase in interest rates is the balanced approach to reaching both of the Federal Reserve’s mandates in the next several years.” He said it is “quite likely that unemployment will fall below 4 percent, which is likely to increase pressures on inflation and asset prices.” Rosengren’s estimate of the natural rate of unemployment, 4.7 percent, means that the current 4.1 percent unemployment rate is 0.6 percentage points below “what I view as the sustainable rate.” “In my view, that suggests the need to continue to gradually remove monetary policy accommodation, which is quite consistent with market expectations of another increase in December.” Exploring the data, Rosengren said that while the so-called “misses” in the mandate are of relatively similar magnitudes currently, most forecasts expect the inflation miss to be temporary, but the unemployment miss to be more persistent. Rosengren acknowledged the argument that inflation dynamics are changing, but said globalization and technology changes do not seem as compelling explanations for recent inflation misses as temporary factors and a change in the inflation-unemployment relationship described by the Phillips Curve. He sees “a gradual rise toward the 2 percent target in the coming quarters.” Exploring other labor market indicators beyond the widely reported unemployment rate, Rosengren said the data seem “consistent with labor markets being quite tight” – not characterized by slack that could suggesting unemployment is not actually below its sustainable rate. Rosengren was speaking at the Economic Policy Forum Fall 2017, hosted by the Department of Economics at Northeastern University. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)
