1 Prospects for Growth and Labor Markets October 9, 2014 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Biltmore Estate, Asheville Regional Forum Asheville, North Carolina It’s a pleasure to speak with you today. My colleagues and I have spent the last day and a half learning more about economic developments in the Asheville region. Trips like these are very helpful to us at the Richmond Fed. As we sift through reams of economic data to try to make sense of what’s happening in our economy, it’s exceptionally important to complement that information with what we hear from the members of our community. It gives us a sense of why things are happening and what people expect for the future, which is vital to our understanding of where the national economy is heading. I will be talking today about the national economic picture. 1 I’ll talk about why economic growth strikes many observers as disappointing. I’ll spend some time on labor market conditions in particular, since they’ve been a special focus of attention for many. Finally, I’ll wrap up with a few remarks about prospects for monetary policy. Before I begin, though, I need to note that the views expressed are my own and do not represent the official views of the Federal Reserve System. To make sense of the most recent information on economic activity, it helps to start with a look at longer-run trends. We are now in the sixth year of expansion following the Great Recession, and most observers have been surprised and disappointed by the slow pace of that expansion. Since the recession ended in June 2009, real GDP ― our broadest measure of overall economic activity ― has grown at an average annual rate of 2.2 percent. In contrast, in the 60 years before the recession, real GDP grew at an average annual rate of 3.5 percent. That lengthy period of rapid growth gave us a strong sense that normal growth is at least 3 percent and anything less is a cause for concern. And after the recession ended, that sense has led many forecasters, myself included, to predict repeatedly that growth was about to shift to a more robust pace. That just hasn’t happened; we’ve seen short-lived surges in growth, only to see growth subside for the following couple of quarters. For example, real GDP surged over the second half of last year only to falter at the beginning of this year. This experience has led me to conclude that a sustained increase in growth to something over 3 percent in the near future is unlikely. Given what we know, after more than five years of this expansion, it strikes me as more likely that growth will continue to average somewhere between 2 and 2 ½ percent. Let me explain why. It is useful to start by thinking of the growth in real GDP as the sum of two components: growth in employment and growth in real GDP per employee, which is a measure of productivity growth. When you calculate these two components, you find that both growth rates peaked 2 several decades ago and had slowed considerably even before the Great Recession began. Since the recession ended in the second quarter of 2009, both growth rates have been relatively low. Going forward, is it likely that either employment or productivity will accelerate significantly? Let’s look at employment first. Employment growth from the 1970s through the 1990s averaged close to 2 percent per year due to high population growth and rising labor force participation, mainly attributable to women entering the labor force. But even before the Great Recession, population growth and labor force participation had started to decline, resulting in lower employment growth. And the aging of the baby boomer generation means that a larger fraction of the workforce is older and thus less likely to look for work. So for the next few years, a relatively slow rate of employment growth would not be surprising. Turning to productivity, growth in output per worker averaged slightly above a 3 percent annual rate in the 1950s, fell sharply in the 1970s, rebounded somewhat in the 1990s and has fallen substantially since then. The longer-run productivity outlook is a subject of active debate. 2 Professor Robert J. Gordon of Northwestern University has argued that several distinct “headwinds,” such as stagnating educational attainment and growing government debt, are likely to limit the growth of productivity for at least the next several decades. 3 In his view, the tremendous productivity gains of the last two centuries have largely reflected the dissemination of just a few extraordinary innovations, such as electricity and internal combustion engines, and he sees no signs of any breakthroughs of similar magnitude. Taking the other side, Professor Joel Mokyr, also at Northwestern University, is more optimistic.4 He notes that economic innovations are notoriously hard to predict, and that science and technology are moving in heretofore unimagined directions — directions that are very difficult to measure using our standard frameworks. He foresees substantial improvements in our standard of living, even if it is some time before those improvements are reflected in our national income accounts. My own view leans to the more hopeful end of the spectrum. I do believe that the economics profession has only a limited quantitative understanding of the process by which new ideas emerge, diffuse and are adopted. So it’s hard for me to rule out the notion that a good-sized pool of innovations lies ahead for us to uncover and deploy. Perhaps the more critical question is whether we are well positioned to do so or whether recent policy shifts may have dampened the incentive to implement innovations. For purposes of projecting economic conditions over the next several years, I think the safest bet is that near-term productivity growth will closely resemble the recent past, growing at around 1 percent per year. In short, neither the employment component nor the productivity component suggests that real GDP is likely to accelerate significantly in the near future. As a complement to this perspective, let’s take a look at things from the spending side of the ledger. Consumer spending, which accounts for 70 percent of GDP, is a good place to start. Since the end of the recession, consumer spending has grown at an average annual rate of 2.2 percent, the same as real GDP. Year to date, consumer spending has also increased at a 2.2 percent annual rate. Since this is fairly well aligned with the trend in real disposable income, there are good reasons to doubt a sudden surge in consumer spending. U.S. households appear to remain mindful of the unexpectedly dramatic losses in income and wealth experienced during the 3 Great Recession, and they’ve been cautious about expanding spending as a result. I expect that caution to continue. Some observers continue to forecast rapid growth in residential construction expenditures. Since the end of the recession, residential investment has risen at a solid 5.6 percent annual rate. Still, that leaves important measures of housing activity well below levels seen before the housing boom. So far this year, the annual rate of new single-family housing starts has been barely half of the 1.3 million units built annually, on average, between 1995 and 2007. With home construction running so far below traditional benchmarks, it would seem natural to expect an enormous pent- up demand to lead to a surge in new construction. That hasn’t happened yet, and one can see good reasons why not. Since the recession, we all have a greater appreciation for the risks associated with the boom/bust cycle in housing activity, and this is bound to curb households’ enthusiasm for making highly leveraged investments in single-family homes. Moreover, housing-related credit is not available as widely or on as generous terms as during the boom. These factors, along with households’ general post-recession cautiousness, seem likely to continue the shift toward multifamily rental housing. So while overall residential investment should continue to grow at a solid pace, one shouldn’t expect to see the single-family market return to pre-recession norms very soon. I won’t subject you to an encyclopedic tour of the other categories of aggregate spending; suffice it to say that I don’t see signs of accelerating economic activity there either. And so my outlook is for real GDP to continue to grow in a 2 to 2 ½ percent range. Growth in that range represents a step down from what was typical in the last half of the 20th century and thus might provide a less effervescent experience for businesses and consumers. Nonetheless, given the challenges we face, we should take some satisfaction in the good economic progress it represents. For example, if growth continues through the end of next year, as virtually all economic forecasters are projecting, this will become the fourth longest expansion since World War II. And if productivity growth comes in at, say, 1 ¼ percent, our average standard of living would double in the space of 55 years, which looks good in comparison with most periods in our recorded history. Over the last five years, growth in overall activity at about the pace that I am projecting has resulted in substantial improvement in labor market conditions. Since the end of the recession, we have added 8.5 million net new jobs, according to the survey of employers. That pace of job growth was rapid enough to bring the unemployment rate from 10 percent in October 2009 to 5.9 percent in September. 5 Some economists have argued that the decline in the unemployment rate overstates the improvement in labor market conditions. They point out the large number of workers who say they want to work but do not satisfy the official definition of unemployed because they are not actively looking for work. These “marginally attached” workers, many of whom have given up searching for work because they are discouraged about job prospects, represent an additional degree of labor underutilization beyond that captured by the standard unemployment rate. 6 In addition, there are many people who are working part time but would prefer full-time employment and who therefore also represent additional underutilization. This has led some 4 economists to prefer to focus on a broader measure of labor market underutilization called U-6, which in addition to the unemployed includes people who are marginally attached to the labor force and who are working part time for economic reasons. The U-6 rate is of course higher than the standard unemployment rate, and it remains elevated. This has been a fertile area for economic research, particularly for Federal Reserve economists, including some at the Richmond Fed. In recent years, economists have been able to learn a lot from some very large datasets on the transitions of individual workers between employment and unemployment, and into and out of the labor force. These insights have complemented earlier work focused more on the “stocks” of workers in various categories each month. I would like to highlight some work by Richmond Fed economists Andreas Hornstein and Marianna Kudlyak and Professor Fabian Lange of McGill University. In a recent paper they authored with Tim Sablik of the Richmond Fed, they have developed a new and intuitively appealing approach to estimating the extent of labor underutilization. 7 Their method is based on the observation that people who are not employed differ in the likelihood of making the transition to employment from one month to the next. For example, based on data from 1994 to 2013, a retiree had a 1.4 percent likelihood of becoming employed. In contrast, a person who had been unemployed for less than half a year ― that is, one of the “short-term unemployed” ― had a 28 percent chance of becoming employed. They find that workers who want a job but don’t meet the criteria for being unemployed do have a good chance of being drawn into employment in any given month. The probability for this group is 13 percent ― lower than for the short-term unemployed but not as low as for retirees. Their measure of labor market underutilization takes these differences into account. They construct what they call a Non-Employment Index by taking each category of persons who are not working and weighting them by their propensities to become employed. This provides a unified framework for viewing the non-employed population that addresses many of the objections that have been raised to the conventional unemployment rate. They also take an improved approach to incorporating part-time workers by taking into account that the underutilization of a person working 20 hours per week is less than the underutilization of a person working zero hours. Movements in their Non-Employment Index over time closely track movements in the conventional unemployment rate. In the latest episode, both rose sharply in the recession and have declined since, but both indexes remain above the levels seen just prior to the recession. An important finding of theirs is that the relation between the Non-Employment Index and the unemployment rate seems to have remained stable over time. In particular, the Non-Employment Index is about where it should be based on past episodes when the standard unemployment rate was about 5.9 percent. This research supports the conclusion that the standard unemployment rate by itself is still a reliable indicator of the degree of labor underutilization. There is more underutilization than captured by the unemployment rate, but there always is, and there seems to be no more now than is typical when the unemployment rate is where it is now. 5 I’d like to conclude with some thoughts on inflation and monetary policy. My remarks on inflation can be short because inflation has been fairly well behaved. Over the last 20 years, the Fed’s preferred estimate of the price level, the price index for personal consumption expenditure, has risen at an average annual rate of 1.9 percent. For reference, the Fed’s stated inflation goal is 2 percent. Over shorter intervals there have been swings in inflation around that 2 percent rate. Last year, for example, inflation was only 1.2 percent, which was notably below target and raised the possibility of persistent, excessive disinflation in the minds of some observers. This year, however, prices have risen at a 1.6 percent annual rate through the first eight months. I expect inflation to continue to gradually converge to the Fed’s 2 percent target. Thankfully, there are no signs that business and consumer expectations for future inflation have drifted away from 2 percent. Of course, monetary policy must ensure that we never see such a drift in expectations materialize, for if it does, it will have been too late. Speaking of monetary policy, at the end of 2008 the Fed lowered its target for the federal funds rate to near zero. Since then, it has purchased large quantities of longer-term Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities (MBS) backed by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, the mortgage companies now under government conservatorship. As a result, the Fed’s balance sheet has risen from about $900 billion in 2007 to around $4.4 trillion today. Barring unforeseen circumstances, the Federal Open Market Committee is widely expected to announce the end of the asset purchase program at the conclusion of its next meeting on October 29. At its last meeting, the FOMC released a statement summarizing its current thinking on the ways in which it would normalize the stance of monetary policy and its security holdings in the years ahead. 8 The discussions that led to the statement were part of prudent planning and do not imply that normalization will necessarily begin soon. The basic plan is to normalize monetary policy by first raising interest rates, while leaving asset holdings unchanged. The primary instrument for moving the federal funds rate into the Committee’s target range will be the interest rate that the Fed pays on excess reserve holdings at commercial banks. Currently this is 25 basis points, and the federal funds rate trades within the zero-to-25-basis-point target range. At some point after the initial increase in the funds rate target range, Committee participants believe they will stop reinvesting principal repayments from the Fed’s securities holdings, which would result in a gradual and predictable decline in the size of its portfolio. I support the planned approach to conducting interest rate policy when the time comes to raise rates. I also support the Committee’s statement that the Fed will in due course hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively, and that it will hold primarily Treasury securities, thereby minimizing the effect of Federal Reserve holdings on the allocation of credit across sectors of the economy. I could not support, however, the Committee’s planned approach to moving the Fed’s balance sheet toward its normal state. In particular, the statement says that the Committee currently does not anticipate selling agency mortgage-backed securities. I believe this approach unnecessarily prolongs our interference in the allocation of credit. The Fed’s MBS holdings may put downward pressure on mortgage rates, compared to holding an equivalent amount of Treasury securities. If 6 so, then other borrowers would likely face higher interest rates. While this would favor home mortgage borrowers, it tilts the playing field against borrowers in other economic sectors, such as businesses and renters. I believe that selling assets, particularly mortgage-backed securities, should be an active component of the normalization process in order to reduce the Fed’s role in credit allocation as rapidly as possible. The desire to avoid this type of credit allocation is a long-standing principle in the conduct of U.S. monetary policy. 9 It was reaffirmed in a joint statement with the Treasury on March 23, 2009, that states, “Actions taken by the Federal Reserve should also aim to improve financial or credit conditions broadly, not to allocate credit to narrowly-defined sectors or classes of borrowers.” 10 I fully agree with that statement. Tilting the flow of credit to favored borrowers at the expense of others is inappropriate and unnecessary to the conduct of monetary policy. I may be something of a stickler for principle in this regard, but that’s because I view the extraordinary independence of modern central banks like the Fed as a unique privilege. It has proven essential for conducting monetary policy with a longer-run focus and maintaining monetary stability. Central bank independence will be precarious, however, without clear boundaries around the use of independent balance sheets for credit market intervention. 1 I would like to thank Roy Webb, Andreas Hornstein, Jessie Romero and Alex Wolman for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 John A. Weinberg, “Down But Not Out,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Econ Focus, Fourth Quarter 2013, p. 52. 3 Robert J. Gordon, “The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 19895, February 2014. 4 Joel Mokyr, “What Today’s Economic Doomsayers Are Missing,” Wall Street Journal online, updated August 8, 2014. 5 The unemployment rate in this section refers to the U-3 measure published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 6 Workers are counted as unemployed if they are available for work and have made specific efforts to find employment during the four weeks prior to being surveyed. Marginally attached workers are available for work and have looked for a job sometime within the past 12 months but not during the four weeks prior to being surveyed. 7 Andreas Hornstein, Marianna Kudlyak, Fabian Lange, and Tim Sablik, “Does the Unemployment Rate Really Overstate Labor Market Recovery?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief no. 14-06, June 2014. 8 Federal Open Market Committee, “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” September 17, 2014. 9 See Renee Haltom and Rob Sharp, “The First Time the Fed Bought GSE Debt,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief no. 14-04, April 2014; and the Federal Open Market Committee’s Guidelines for the Conduct of System Open Market Operations in Federal-Agency Issues. 10 Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve, “The Role of the Federal Reserve in Preserving Financial and Monetary Stability,” March 23, 2009.

1 Rethinking the Unthinkable: Bankruptcy for Large Financial Institutions October 10, 2014 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond National Conference of Bankruptcy Judges Annual Meeting Chicago, Illinois Thank you for that introduction. It’s a pleasure to be here before such an esteemed audience of bankruptcy professionals. You might be wondering why a central banker, the head of a regional Federal Reserve Bank, is interested in bankruptcy — particularly s ince distressed banks and other financial firms have for decades been handled outside the Bankruptcy Code, through discretionary processes that at times involve government-funded protection of depositors and other creditors. But in fact, that is precisely the source of my interest: I have come to believe that such discretionary actions played a critical role in the financial crisis of 2007-08. Expectations of such interventions distorted the incentives faced by these institutions and their counterparties and led to excessively fragile financial structures prior to the crisis. And as the crisis unfolded, multiple discretionary interventions destabilized market expectations and added unnecessary turbulence. I will argue that if we want to prevent similar financial crises in the future, and truly solve the problem of institutions that seem “too big to fail,” we must realign the incentives of financial market participants. Regulatory constraints on risk-taking, while useful, will not suffice. Using the Bankruptcy Code rather than discretionary governmental interventions to address large financial institution failures is essential to that task. Many observers are surprisingly resistant to the notion that bankruptcy is a viable option for large financial institutions. But far from being unthinkable, bankruptcy can and should be workable. We are already moving toward that goal through the creation of “living wills” for the largest firms, although a tremendous amount of work remains before we can be confident that regulators will turn to bankruptcy rather than bailout. Before I discuss that work and its vital importance, let me note that the views expressed are my own and not necessarily the views of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. 1 The Value of Bankruptcy This audience should be quite familiar with the advantages of the bankruptcy system. Perhaps the most obvious is that a collective proceeding can mitigate the common-pool problems that arise if individual creditors rush to pursue individual remedies.2 Judicial oversight of liquidation or ongoing management of the bankrupt enterprise can prevent wasteful dissipation of value and enhance total creditor returns. In addition, a rules-based system, with safeguards for the treatment of creditors, can provide relatively consistent and predictable outcomes and enable creditors to forecast likely payouts based on their contractual positions and the total value of the firm. 2 Of course, this audience should also be familiar with those occasions when reality strays from the ideal. For example, bankruptcy proceedings can be quite costly, in some cases materially reducing the net value of the estate. And the ability of some creditors to hold up proceedings can lead to departures from the predictability of absolute priority. Nonetheless, despite pockets of uncertainty for creditors and debate about particular features of the code, such as those explored in the American Bankruptcy Institute’s study of potential reforms to Chapter 11, the bankruptcy process is one of the best tools we have for effectively reconciling the (ex post) conflicting incentives of creditors and debtors. The usual presumption in modern economies is that competitive forces drive parties toward financial arrangements that are relatively efficient, given the rules of the system they face, in the sense that they would be hard to improve upon without making some parties worse off. The bankruptcy system reinforces this beneficial feature of competitive markets, since the deadweight costs are borne exclusively by the firm’s creditors and other stakeholders. The result is a collective interest, ex ante, in striking an appropriate balance between the probability of bankruptcy, with its associated burdens, and the opportunity cost of measures designed to reduce the likelihood of bankruptcy. In particular, there is a collective interest in avoiding ex-ante contractual provisions that would make the firm excessively vulnerable to financial distress. These features of bankruptcy would seem to make it especially valuable in the financial sector, where firms have a plethora of creditors and where the decentralized pursuit of individual remedies ― that is, runs ― can damage a firm’s value, even its ability to continue as a going concern. So why don’t we use a judicial, rules-based system for resolving distressed financial firms? The Origins of “Too Big To Fail” The answer to that question, if I may be blunt, is politics. For much of our history, the U.S. banking system has been highly fragmented due to state laws restricting branching and competition. As a result, the 27,000-plus banks that were operating at the founding of the Federal Reserve 100 years ago were unable to diversify risks across regions or head off bank runs by moving funds between branches. Federal deposit insurance was enacted as part of the Glass- Steagall Act in 1933 in reaction to the waves of bank failures of the late 1920s and early 1930s. 3 At the time, this provision was highly controversial; many policymakers, including President Roosevelt and Sen. Carter Glass, were wary of the inherent risk-taking incentives and mindful of the many failed state deposit insurance schemes. But the unit banking system was popular with politically influential populist and agrarian groups, and these forces successfully lobbied instead for a system of government-provided deposit insurance that would preserve the viability of small local banks by protecting their depositors. 4 Over time, government protection spread beyond insured bank depositors. Beginning in the early 1970s, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the Federal Reserve began intervening in ways that protected uninsured creditors of large financial firms. Penn Central, Bank of the Commonwealth, Franklin National Bank and Continental Illinois, among others, all benefited from government support. 5 In some cases the FDIC provided funds to arrange mergers that allowed uninsured depositors to avoid losses. In other cases the Fed lent on terms that were 3 unavailable in the open market. In some cases Fed lending allowed uninsured creditors to withdraw funds while closure was delayed, increasing the loss to the FDIC. These interventions created widespread expectations of government support if a large financial institution were to become troubled. These expectations dampened incentives to contain risk- taking, thus encouraging higher leverage and more reliance on short-term funding. These expectations, along with the relaxation of constraints on consolidation, promoted financial firms of greater size, complexity and interconnectedness, making bankruptcy seem even more impractical. And so we had the beginnings of a vicious cycle: Successive generations of policymakers felt compelled to handle financial firm failures outside of bankruptcy, which further eroded financial firms’ incentives to structure their affairs in a way that facilitated an orderly bankruptcy. The result was more risky behavior predicated on ad hoc rescues rather than on clearly defined resolution processes. We came into 2007, then, with two mutually reinforcing conditions firmly entrenched. First, investors felt protected by an implicit government commitment of support for large financial institutions in distress. Second, policymakers felt forced to confirm those expectations because they believed failing to rescue creditors would cause a disruptive adjustment of expectations regarding support for other entities. The result was excessive reliance on the kind of risky short- term funding that led to financial market turbulence, followed by government responses that I believe exacerbated the problem, such as the Fed’s early emergency lending programs and funding for the purchase of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan. 6 When Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy in September 2008, it could have been an opportunity to establish a new precedent against bailouts. But instead, within 48 hours, AIG had received an emergency loan from the New York Fed — in creasing the policy uncertainty faced by an already-uncertain market. Seven years later, the crisis is behind us, but the expectations that sowed it are alive and well, despite policymakers’ attempts to address them. The question for us now is: What will it take to dismantle those expectations? The Orderly Liquidation Authority The chief legislative response to the crisis was the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, which purports to end “too big to fail” once and for all. The Act includes an array of provisions aimed at reducing the probability of financial distress in the first place. Dodd-Frank provides for enhanced supervision of large financial firms via stronger capital and liquidity requirements, periodic stress-testing, counterparty credit limits and risk-management requirements, among other measures. Beefing up such ex-ante constraints on risk-taking is important and essential, but it's not infallible. Innovative new opportunities for risk-taking will always emerge as financial markets and economies evolve, and it is asking too much to expect front-line supervisors to forever substitute for well-aligned incentives. Moreover, stronger restraints on risk-taking increase the incentive for market participants to find a way to operate beyond the scope of regulation. Expanding regulation to chase down fragility wherever it appears is not a promising strategy. Dodd-Frank also created a new mechanism to resolve large financial firms that become distressed in spite of enhanced supervision. Title II of the Act established the Orderly 4 Liquidation Authority, or OLA, which gives the FDIC the ability, with the agreement of other financial regulators, to take a firm into receivership. Title II also grants the FDIC a line of credit from the U.S. Treasury to make payments to creditors of the failed firm or to guarantee the liabilities of the failed firm. The funds are to be repaid from recoveries on the assets of the firm or, if those are insufficient, from assessments against the largest, most complex financial companies.7 While the Title II resolution mechanism borrows many elements from the Bankruptcy Code, in my view it retains many of the critical flaws in ad hoc pre-crisis practices. First, while the FDIC must pay creditors at least what they would be estimated to receive in a traditional bankruptcy liquidation proceeding, the Act gives the FDIC the discretion to pay some creditors more than they would obtain in bankruptcy.8 This creates additional uncertainty for creditors about their returns and potentially allows funds to be channeled to favored creditor classes. Second, the ability to inject funds borrowed from the Treasury allows the FDIC to immediately pay off creditors whose claims would otherwise be subject to bankruptcy proceedings. This might be viewed as analogous to debtor-in-possession financing in a traditional Chapter 11 reorganization. Unlike in Chapter 11, however, such government-funded DIP financing would not be subject to the market test applicable to private sector provision and so may be subsidized. In addition, it is not subject to the important checks and balances of the bankruptcy process to ensure that it enhances the ongoing value of the enterprise to creditors. Moreover, using government funds still tilts incentives toward fragile short-term funding and dampens creditors’ incentives to monitor risk-taking, in a replay of the vicious cycle I described a few moments ago. Thus, the Act recreates the same dynamic we saw before and during the crisis: If OLA support for the creditors of financially distressed institutions is widely anticipated or assumed, the FDIC will likely feel forced to provide that support to avoid the turbulence caused by disappointed expectations. Over the past two years, the FDIC has articulated a strategy for implementing Title II — known as the “single point of entry”— that is likely to enhance expectations of government support. 9 This strategy focuses intervention on the holding company. If regulators determine that a financial institution should be resolved under Title II, the FDIC would be appointed receiver of the top-tier parent company, while the subsidiaries remain open and operating. The FDIC would then set up a bridge company into which it would transfer certain assets from the receivership, primarily the parent’s investments and equity interests in subsidiaries. The FDIC envisions eventually transferring ownership of the bridge company to the private sector. The expectation is that the parent company shareholders would be wiped out, and the claims of parent company creditors would be converted into equity and debt in the new entity. There are other important details of the FDIC’s single point of entry strategy that I will skip over in the interests of time, but one observation deserves mention. 10 Unlike the FDIC’s guarantee programs of 2008 and 2009, when the corporation guaranteed the newly issued senior debt of all FDIC-insured institutions, single point of entry might be described as a “bail in” rather than a bailout. That’s because the primary source of equity capital for the new holding company comes from the unsecured holders of the parent company’s debt. Still, it seems regrettable to have to 5 identify one class of creditors that is eligible for losses, with the presumption being that all others receive support, rather than the usual approach of providing explicit government guarantees, such as deposit insurance, to some creditors and presuming that all others are at risk. Broad protection for so many subsidiary creditors seems likely to weaken market discipline and exacerbate the too-big-to-fail dynamic that led to the crisis. A Better Strategy: Living Wills Another provision of the Dodd-Frank Act, however, provides a much more promising strategy for ending “too big to fail.” Section 165(d) in Title I requires large and complex financial institutions to create resolution plans, also known as "living wills." 11 These are detailed plans that explain how a financial institution could be wound down under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code without threatening the rest of the financial system or requiring government assistance. Under the Dodd-Frank Act, large banks and other systemically important firms are required to submit these plans on an annual basis for review by the Fed and the FDIC. Resolution planning provides a structured approach for understanding what's likely to happen in the event that a large financial firm should fail. In contrast, in past crises policymakers found themselves with little or no preparatory work to draw on. In fact, resolution planning has proven valuable already by giving firms a better and more detailed understanding of their own legal structures, and many have used the process to reorganize themselves and eliminate unneeded legal entities. Resolution planning wisely does not take the current operating profile of large financial firms as given; the current characteristics of these firms evolved in response to the precedents set by regulators avoiding the use of bankruptcy. The Dodd-Frank Act provides that if the Federal Reserve and the FDIC jointly determine that a plan would not credibly facilitate an orderly resolution under the Bankruptcy Code, the firm is required to submit a revised plan to address identified deficiencies. If the Fed and the FDIC jointly determine that the revised plan does not remedy identified deficiencies, they can require more capital, increase liquidity requirements or restrict the growth, activities or operations of the firm. They can even require firms to make divestitures. On August 5, the Fed and the FDIC announced the completion of reviews of the second round of resolution plans submitted in 2013 by the 11 banks that make up the first group of filers. These firms submitted their original plans in 2012. 12 In a joint announcement, the agencies noted the banks had made some significant improvements from their first submissions.13 But the agencies also outlined areas where substantial further work remains. One shortcoming, to quote the announcement, is “the failure to make, or even to identify, the kinds of changes in firm structure and practices that would be necessary to enhance the prospects for orderly resolution.” In other words, these firms are still far too complex to be feasibly resolved under the Bankruptcy Code, and so they have been directed to establish a “rational and less complex legal structure.” One aspect of structural complexity is the existence of substantial operations that cross multiple legal and regulatory jurisdictions, thus potentially requiring interaction with multiple regulators. 6 One useful approach to this problem may be to enhance separability by making an institution’s operations in a given jurisdiction more self-contained and self-supporting. In the event of distress, regulators would then be able to resolve operations in a single jurisdiction with fewer complications and without relying on cross-border cooperation among regulators. Documenting and limiting dependence on services or funding from other affiliated companies within the organization can minimize disruptions in the event of a bankruptcy filing. Making cross-border operations more separable certainly could be costly in “normal times,” but that cost is just another manifestation of the subsidy inherent in “too big to fail.” Another concern raised by the Fed and the FDIC is how these firms would assure the continuity of critical operations and core business lines. In a typical reorganization, a failing company might obtain DIP financing to fund continuing operations. Because complex financial institutions have typically been quite reliant on short-term funding, their DIP financing needs are potentially quite large relative to historic precedents for privately provided DIP funding. But financial firms have reduced their potential financing needs substantially since the crisis by building up their liquid asset buffers and shedding illiquid assets. Further reductions in dependence on short-term funding may be needed to ensure that DIP financing plans are credible. Note, however, that reliance on government sources for DIP financing, such as borrowing from the Fed’s discount window, would conflict with the obvious purpose of the statute. Government funding, unless identical terms are available from the private sector, represents a subsidy that distorts returns and encourages excessive risk-taking. Expectations of such support are what gave rise to the vulnerabilities that induce government support in a crisis. Including such support in resolution plans is incompatible with ending “too big to fail.” Certainly, the needed alterations to the structure and operations of large financial firms will be unpopular with those firms since they are likely to involve reductions in reliance on short-term funding and the adoption of more easily severable subsidiary structures. But I believe the changes that could result from living wills are feasible without sacrificing the inherent benefits large financial firms provide to the economy. The credibility of living wills would be compromised, in my view, by continuing to depend on government backstops in order to avoid needed changes. In addition to requiring financial firms to adapt their operations to the Bankruptcy Code, we should also look for ways to better adapt the Bankruptcy Code to financial firms. One proposed reform seeks to vest the firm’s losses solely in the parent company, similar to the single-point-of- entry strategy I described earlier. Because it protects the creditors of the subsidiaries, however, this strategy might not be the most effective means to restore market discipline. Other work has highlighted the fact that many short-term financing instruments and derivatives are exempt from bankruptcy's automatic stay. This safe harbor treatment arguably over-encourages the use of such instruments and thereby enhances the growth and fragility of shadow banking. Some have proposed limiting this exemption as well as adding a new chapter to the Bankruptcy Code specifically adapted to large financial firms.14 These reform proposals strike me as compelling and worthy of serious consideration. Achieving Credibility 7 Resolution planning for large, complex financial firms is difficult, painstaking work — but it is also vitally important to breaking the mutually reinforcing expectations of government support. Regulator acceptance of credible resolution plans will imply a commitment to use them in cases of financial distress. Explicit regulatory statements to that effect would be constructive, as would much greater public visibility into the details of the plans, so investors can judge credibility for themselves and assess how their claims would be treated. The joint Fed-FDIC announcement on August 5 stated that the agencies would be working with the firms to “explore ways to enhance public transparency of future plan submissions.” If we do the hard work to make the plans credible, and if regulators and policymakers commit publicly to using them, I believe we will begin to see a healthy realignment of private sector expectations regarding the likelihood of government intervention and a concomitant improvement in the incentives facing financial firms and their investors. Of course, that realignment may not be complete until commitment is demonstrated by actually letting a big financial firm file for bankruptcy. I also believe, however, that as long as regulators retain the discretion to intervene with government funding, the credibility of resolution plans will be at risk. Seemingly urgent short- run considerations will threaten to overshadow the value of establishing and preserving a record of precedents that keep market expectations well-anchored. This is a particular danger for central banks, whose independent balance sheets place their fiscal actions beyond the scope of the legislative appropriations process. 15 Credible commitment to orderly unassisted resolutions thus may require eliminating the power of governmental entities to provide ad hoc rescues. This would mean repealing the Federal Reserve's remaining emergency lending powers and further restraining the Fed’s ability to lend to failing institutions. And once robust and credible resolution plans are in place, we would be able to responsibly wind down the FDIC's Orderly Liquidation Authority and related financing mechanisms. Conclusion This afternoon, I have discussed several valuable aspects of the bankruptcy process, including its ability to provide relatively consistent and predictable outcomes and to address the common-pool problems that arise when a firm has multiple creditors. In addition, bankruptcy promotes a collective interest in limiting risky financial arrangements. For these reasons, bankruptcy would seem to be especially advantageous for financial firms. Yet regulators have repeatedly chosen to handle distressed firms outside the bankruptcy process, which has led to a buildup of expectations of government support when large financial firms become troubled. These expectations, in my view, were a major contributing factor to the financial crisis. In my view, living wills offer us the only realistic path to dismantling those expectations and ending “too big to fail.” While they have not received as much attention as other regulatory and legislative responses to the crisis, they may be the most critical, and I applaud the hard work that is being done to make them credible. It will be a long journey, and we should expect resistance to the changes that will be required. But the costliness of those changes is a measure of the subsidies inherent in the bailout-dependent too-big-to-fail regime, a regime that is unworkable, 8 unsustainable and unfair. The health and stability of our financial system depends on rethinking the once-unthinkable possibility of bankruptcy for large financial firms. 1 I am grateful to Jessie Romero, Kartik Athreya and John Walter for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 Thomas H. Jackson, Logic and the Limits of Bankruptcy Law, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986. 3 More information about the banking panics and the Glass-Steagall Act is available at federalreservehistory.org. 4 Charles W. Calomiris and Stephen H. Haber, Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises and Scarce Credit, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2014. 5 For more on these episodes, see Irving H. Sprague, Bailout: An Insider’s Account of Bank Failures and Rescues, Washington D.C.: Beard Books, 1986; Mark Carlson and David C. Wheelock, “The Lender of Last Resort: Lessons from the Fed’s First 100 Years,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper Series no. 2012-056B, February 2013 (revised); and “The Failure of Continental Illinois” at federalreservehistory.org. 6 Renee Haltom and Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Should the Fed Have a Financial Stability Mandate? Lessons from the Fed’s First 100 Years,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 2013 Annual Report, May 2014. 7 For a review of the OLA and a comparison to bankruptcy, see Sabrina R. Pellerin and John R. Walter, “Orderly Liquidation Authority as an Alternative to Bankruptcy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, First Quarter 2012, vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 1-31. 8 The FDIC has the discretion to treat certain similarly situated creditors differently if it decides that unequal treatment is necessary to maximize the value of a failed firm’s assets or asset sales or to continue essential operations of the receivership or bridge firm. Creditors must receive at least their estimated payout from a liquidation under the Bankruptcy Code, but the FDIC can, by majority vote of its Board of Directors, pay certain short-term creditors more than their estimated payout. 9 The FDIC developed this approach in conjunction with the Bank of England and is currently reviewing comments received during a public comment period that ended on March 20, 2014. 10 For more detail, see Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Bank of England, “Resolving Globally Active, Systemically Important, Financial Institutions,” December 10, 2012; and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, “Resolution of Systemically Important Financial Institutions: The Single Point of Entry Strategy,” Federal Register, December 18, 2013, vol. 78, no 243, pp. 76614-76624. 11 This includes banks with more than $50 billion in assets or nonbank financial companies designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council. 12 The first wave includes Bank of America, Bank of New York Mellon, Barclays, Citigroup, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase, Morgan Stanley, State Street Corp. and UBS. An additional 117 banks filed their initial resolution plans in 2013, with revised plans due December 31, 2014. 13 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, “Agencies Provide Feedback on Second Round Resolution Plans of ‘First-Wave’ Filers,” August 5, 2014. 14 For example, see Thomas H. Jackson and David A. Skeel Jr., “Dynamic Resolution of Large Financial Institutions,” University of Pennsylvania Law School Faculty Scholarship no. 453, October 2012; Mark J. Roe, “Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law of Committee on the Judiciary,” United States House of Representatives Hearing on the Bankruptcy Code and Financial Institution Insolvencies, December 3, 2013; Mark J. Roe, “The Derivatives Market’s Payment Priorities as a Financial Crisis Accelerator,” Stanford Law Review, March 2011, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 539-590; and Kenneth E. Scott and John B. Taylor, eds., Bankruptcy Not Bailout: A Special Chapter 14, Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press, 2012. 15 Marvin Goodfriend, “The Elusive Promise of Independent Central Banking,” Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies, November 2012, vol. 30, pp. 39-54.

1 Committing to Financial Stability November 5, 2014 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond George Washington University Center for Law, Economics and Finance Washington, D.C. Thank you very much for inviting me to speak with you. The title of today’s conference poses a question of vital importance to the future health and stability of our financial system: Have we ended the era of institutions that are deemed “too big to fail”? Unfortunately, I do not believe that we have. Despite myriad legislative and regulatory responses to the crisis, such as the Dodd- Frank Act of 2010 and the Third Basel Accord reached in 2011, we have so far failed to address a fundamental problem at the heart of the financial crisis of 2007-08. That problem, as I will discuss in more detail, is that market participants have come to expect government support when large financial institutions become distressed. Expectations of such interventions distorted the incentives faced by these institutions and their counterparties and led to excessively fragile financial structures prior to the crisis. Capital ratios were low, and firms were vulnerable to the loss of wholesale funding. As the crisis unfolded, multiple discretionary interventions reinforced expectations of government support and further blunted incentives to prepare for potential turmoil. Continued ambiguity about the scope of future support destabilized market expectations and added unnecessary volatility. Strengthening regulatory restraints on risk-taking and improving the quantity and quality of capital positions are important measures to reduce the likelihood of distress. By themselves, though, they are likely to be insufficient. I will argue that if we want to prevent similar financial crises in the future, and truly solve the problem of institutions that seem too big to fail, we must realign the incentives of financial market participants. That requires a credible commitment on the part of policymakers and regulators to end their reliance on government backstops. Before I discuss how we can achieve that commitment, I should note that the views expressed are my own and not necessarily the views of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. 1 The Nature of “Too Big to Fail” To begin, let’s be clear about the problem are we trying to solve. The perception that some institutions are too big to fail results from two mutually reinforcing conditions that seriously distort the incentives of financial market participants to monitor and control risk. First, creditors of some financial institutions feel protected by an implicit government commitment of support should the institution become financially troubled. Second, policymakers often feel compelled to provide support to certain financial institutions to insulate creditors from losses. 2 The way the second condition reinforces the first should be fairly clear. Instances of government intervention reinforce creditors' expectations of support and thereby dampen incentives to contain risk-taking. This promotes financial firms of greater size, complexity and interconnectedness, and it also encourages greater leverage and more reliance on short-term funding. In my view, excessive fragility is not an inherent feature of modern financial market arrangements. Instead, financial instability should be seen as a consequence of the moral hazard effect of official intervention. Creditor expectations of support, in turn, often compel policymakers to intervene in the event of distress, since disappointing those expectations by withholding support could provoke a sudden, turbulent readjustment of investor beliefs regarding support for other similarly situated firms. At such times, concern about exacerbating moral hazard takes a back seat to the urgently felt need to stem the volatility that would result from disappointed expectations. Perceived guarantees thus encourage fragility, which induces interventions, which encourages further fragility. The ultimate result of this cycle is taxpayer-funded subsidies to financial firms that are widely viewed as deeply unfair. What we have is a fundamental flaw in the relationship between government and the financial sector resulting from the inability or unwillingness to find a way to forgo intervention in crises. And the impact of this flaw is growing. At the end of 1999, the government safety net — including both the implicit support I just outlined and explicit support provided by programs such as deposit insurance and pension guarantees — covered 45 percent of financial sector liabilities, according to Richmond Fed researchers. By the end of 2011, that number had grown to 57 percent, about the same size it was at the end of 2009, despite the many new regulations we have put in place since the crisis. 2 How Did We Get Here? We have arrived at this point, if I may be blunt, because of politics. Between 1929 and 1933, more than one-third of the nation’s roughly 25,000 banks failed; entire states declared bank holidays and a nationwide bank holiday was declared in March 1933.3 The banking system was highly fragmented at that time due to laws restricting branching and competition, which meant that banks were unable to diversify risks across regions or head off bank runs by moving funds between branches. One popular account of the wave of bank failures holds that the crisis was caused by self-fulfilling depositor panic: Fearing failure, people rushed to withdraw their funds, thus ensuring that failure occurred. But modern scholarship has concluded that the crisis was in fact the result of fundamental shocks to the solvency of the banking system. 4 These shocks were then exacerbated by the fragmented banking system.5 The legislative response to the failures, however, was the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, which among other provisions established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 6 Deposit insurance was highly controversial; many policymakers, including President Roosevelt and Sen. Carter Glass, an architect of the Federal Reserve System, were wary of the inherent risk-taking incentives and mindful of many failed state deposit insurance schemes. But the unit banking system was popular with politically influential populist and agrarian groups, and these forces 3 successfully lobbied instead for a system of government-provided deposit insurance that would preserve the viability of small local banks by protecting their depositors.7 Over time, government protection spread beyond insured bank depositors. Beginning in the early 1970s, the FDIC and the Federal Reserve began intervening in ways that protected uninsured creditors of large financial firms. Penn Central, Bank of the Commonwealth, Franklin National Bank and Continental Illinois, among others, all benefited from government support. 8 In some cases, the FDIC provided funds to arrange mergers that allowed uninsured depositors to avoid losses. In other cases, the Fed lent on terms that were unavailable in the open market. Fed lending also sometimes allowed uninsured creditors to withdraw funds while closure was delayed, increasing the loss to the FDIC. I’m sure this audience is familiar with dramatic events of 2007–08, but I would like to highlight some key moments in the narrative. In 2007, estimates of the losses likely to be experienced on subprime mortgages rose significantly. This caused investors to revise their assessments of financial entities deemed likely to be exposed to those losses, most notably certain off-balance- sheet funding vehicles. As a consequence, the credit terms available to these entities deteriorated. The risk premia on their obligations in wholesale funding markets rose, and the maturity of the obligations they were able to issue was sharply reduced. In August 2007, the Federal Open Market Committee took its first step in response to the tumult in financial markets by lowering the interest rate charged on discount window loans to banks and encouraging banks to borrow. Then in December 2007, in response to rising interest rates in interbank lending markets, the Fed launched the Term Auction Facility to provide term loans to depository institutions. The guiding principle behind these actions, and others that followed, was that credit markets were malfunctioning and the remedy was additional central bank lending. In fact, steps were taken to reduce the perceived stigma of borrowing from the Fed and to encourage banks to access the discount window. 9 Arguably, however, market participants inferred that the Fed was standing by, again ready to rescue the creditors of financial institutions that showed signs of distress — which actually occurred the following spring when the New York Fed helped finance the purchase of Bear Stearns by JPMorgan. These actions are likely to have reduced the incentives of other large financial firms, such as Lehman Brothers, to strengthen their positions by raising additional equity or reducing their reliance on short-term funding. Capital markets were clearly open for the large financial institutions prior to the middle of 2008, as demonstrated by the equity issuance that did occur. But not enough new capital was raised; apparently the costliness of shareholder dilution made it more attractive for large financial firms to rely instead on the implied backstop of government support. Policymakers were aware that their actions might exacerbate moral hazard. And certainly, we can all understand a bias against inaction when faced with an unknown, but potentially grave, outcome. But the distortion in banks’ risk-taking incentives was viewed as a long-run issue to trade off against the immediate value of cushioning an imminent blow to financial market functioning. Because financial crises are relatively infrequent, it was thought, the incentive 4 distortion would only affect outcomes in the relatively distant future, leaving sufficient time for policymakers to contain moral hazard effects through tougher regulation. But the crisis we have just been through tells a different story. It wasn’t only some distant future crisis that was affected by the precedents being set; it was the next chapter in the current crisis. Each new move to expand institutions’ use of Fed lending also had the effect of increasing expectations of official support in the months ahead. The idea that public sector backstops are necessary is often motivated more broadly by theoretical models based on “multiple equilibria” or market segmentation in which outcomes are inherently unstable or suboptimal in the absence of government support. 10 I have not found these models terribly persuasive as accounts of the financial market phenomena that we grappled with at various points during the crisis, because the critical frictions on which these theories are based seem at odds with observations. 11 More broadly, the thesis that financial market instability is inherent, rather than induced by poor policies, must confront the fact that instances of instability are quite unevenly distributed across different countries and different regulatory regimes. 12 If financial fragility were an inherent feature of financial markets, financial panics would be ubiquitous, but that’s not what we see. The Regulatory Response Let me turn now to how policymakers responded once the immediate crisis had passed. In the United States the chief legislative response was the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, which purports to end too big to fail once and for all. The Act provides for enhanced supervision of large financial firms via stronger capital and liquidity requirements, periodic stress-testing, counterparty credit limits and risk-management requirements, among other measures. U.S. banking regulators also have adopted most of the increased capital requirements recommended in the Basel III international regulatory framework. Greater capital buffer requirements and measures to beef up ex-ante constraints on risk-taking are important, but they’re not infallible. New opportunities for risk-taking will always emerge as financial markets and economies evolve, and it is asking too much to expect front-line supervisors to forever substitute for well-aligned incentives. Moreover, stronger restraints on risk-taking increase the incentive for market participants to find a way to operate outside the regulated sector. This regulatory bypass gives rise to what’s come to be called “shadow banking” — a topic we will be hearing more about this afternoon. Shadow banking arrangements played a major role in the financial crisis; paradoxically, some of these arrangements were the result of past financial regulations intended to prevent crises. Expanding regulation to chase down fragility wherever it appears is not a promising strategy. The Dodd-Frank Act also created a new mechanism to resolve large financial firms that become distressed in spite of enhanced supervision. Title II of the Act established the Orderly Liquidation Authority, or OLA, which gives the FDIC the ability, with the agreement of other financial regulators, to take a firm into receivership. The FDIC also is able to borrow funds from the U.S. Treasury to make payments to creditors of the failed firm or to guarantee the liabilities 5 of the failed firm. The funds are to be repaid from recoveries on the assets of the firm or from assessments against the largest, most complex financial companies. While the FDIC must pay creditors at least what they would have received in a liquidation of the firm, the Act does give the FDIC broad discretion to pay some creditors more than bankruptcy would allow. Moreover, the ability to inject funds borrowed from the Treasury allows the FDIC to immediately pay off creditors whose claims would otherwise be subject to bankruptcy proceedings. Short-term creditors are likely to believe they will benefit from the FDIC’s discretion, causing them to pay insufficient attention to risk and to invest in fragile funding arrangements. If expectations of support for the creditors of financially distressed institutions are widespread, regulators will likely feel forced to provide support to these short-term creditors to avoid the turbulence of disappointing expectations. Rather than ending “too big to fail,” this would replicate the two mutually reinforcing expectations that define it. The Path Forward Achieving financial stability requires, in my view, two new mutually reinforcing conditions. The first is that creditors do not expect government support in the event of financial distress. If we can achieve that, private sector financial firms and their creditors will have an incentive to avoid fragile financing arrangements and to limit risk-taking, thereby reducing the pressure for government intervention. We could avoid relying solely on the vigilance of supervisors and instead make more use of the discipline of competitive forces. The second necessary condition is that policymakers actually do allow financial firms to fail without government support. If we can make unassisted failures manageable, then policymakers could credibly commit to forgoing rescues, thereby improving private sector incentives. So how do we make unassisted failures manageable? I believe we must rethink the notion that bankruptcy is not a viable option for large financial firms. 13 Bankruptcy offers many advantages, the most obvious being that a collective proceeding can mitigate the common-pool problems that arise if individual creditors rush to pursue individual remedies.14 In addition, the deadweight costs of bankruptcy are borne exclusively by the firm’s creditors and other stakeholders. The result is a collective interest, ex ante, in striking an appropriate balance between the probability of bankruptcy, with its associated burdens, and the opportunity cost of measures designed to reduce the likelihood of bankruptcy. In particular, there is interest in avoiding ex-ante contractual provisions that would make the firm excessively vulnerable to financial distress. These features of bankruptcy would seem to make it especially valuable in the financial sector, where firms have a plethora of creditors and where the decentralized pursuit of individual remedies ― that is, runs ― can damage a firm’s value, even its ability to continue as a going concern. The Dodd-Frank Act lays out a path toward making bankruptcy workable for large financial institutions. The Act requires these institutions to create resolution plans, also known as “living wills.” These are detailed plans that explain how a financial institution could be wound down under U.S. bankruptcy laws without threatening the rest of the financial system or requiring government assistance. The plans explain how to disentangle the many different legal entities — sometimes numbering in the thousands — that make up a large financial firm. Under the Dodd- 6 Frank Act, large banks and other “systemically important” firms are required to submit these plans on an annual basis for review by the Fed and the FDIC. Resolution planning provides a structured approach for understanding what’s likely to happen in the event a large financial firm fails. In contrast, in past crises policymakers found themselves with little or no preparatory work to draw on. In fact, the process has already proven valuable by giving firms a better and more detailed understanding of their legal structure, and many have used the process to reorganize themselves and eliminate unneeded legal entities. Resolution planning wisely does not take the current operating profile of large financial firms as given; the current characteristics of these firms evolved in response to the precedents set by regulators avoiding the use of bankruptcy. The Dodd-Frank Act provides that if the Federal Reserve and the FDIC jointly determine that a plan would not credibly facilitate an orderly resolution under the Bankruptcy Code, the firm is required to submit a revised plan to address identified deficiencies. If the Fed and the FDIC jointly determine that the revised plan does not remedy identified deficiencies, they can require more capital, increase liquidity requirements or restrict the growth, activities or operations of the firm. They can even require firms to make divestitures. On August 5, the Fed and the FDIC announced the completion of reviews of the second round of resolution plans submitted in 2013 by the 11 banks that make up the first group of filers. These firms submitted their original plans in 2012. 15 In a joint announcement, the agencies noted the banks had made some significant improvements from their first submissions.16 But the agencies also outlined several shortcomings, including, to quote the announcement, “the failure to make, or even to identify, the kinds of changes in firm structure and practices that would be necessary to enhance the prospects for orderly resolution.” Clearly, substantial work remains to be done. The needed alterations to the structure and operations of large financial firms will be unpopular since they are likely to involve reductions in reliance on short-term funding and the adoption of more easily severable subsidiary structures. But I believe the changes that could result from living wills are feasible without sacrificing the inherent benefits large financial firms provide to the economy. The credibility of living wills would be compromised, in my view, by continuing to depend on government backstops in order to avoid needed changes. In addition to requiring financial firms to adapt their operations to the Bankruptcy Code, we should also look for ways to better adapt the Bankruptcy Code to financial firms. One proposed reform seeks to vest the firm’s losses solely in the parent company. Because it protects the creditors of the subsidiaries, however, this strategy might not be the most effective means to restore market discipline. Other work has highlighted the fact that many short-term financing instruments and derivatives are exempt from bankruptcy's automatic stay. This safe harbor treatment arguably over-encourages the use of such instruments and thereby enhances the growth and fragility of shadow banking. Some have proposed limiting this exemption as well as adding a new chapter to the Bankruptcy Code specifically adapted to large financial firms. 17 These reform proposals strike me as compelling and worthy of serious consideration. 7 A final step may be required before financial stability can be assured. Market participants must have well-anchored expectations that government-funded rescues will not be forthcoming. Ideally, policymakers would act in a manner that is consistent with those expectations. But in turbulent times, as we’ve seen, it may be tempting to put seemingly urgent short-run considerations ahead of the goal of establishing and preserving a record of precedents that keep market expectations well anchored. This is a particular danger for central banks, whose independent balance sheets place their fiscal actions beyond the scope of the legislative appropriations process.18 Credible commitment to orderly unassisted resolutions thus may require eliminating the government’s ability to provide ad hoc rescues. This would mean repealing the Federal Reserve’s remaining emergency lending powers and further restraining the Fed’s ability to lend to failing institutions. And once robust and credible resolution plans are in place, we would be able to responsibly wind down the FDIC’s Orderly Liquidation Authority and related financing mechanisms. Conclusion Today, I have shared with you what I view as a fundamental problem that gives rise to institutions deemed “too big to fail.” That problem is market participants’ expectations that government support will be forthcoming if a large financial institution becomes distressed and, at the same time, policymakers’ beliefs that they must fulfill those expectations. The result is a serious misalignment of incentives and excessive reliance on risky short-term funding. In short, government backstops induce rather than preserve financial stability. To dismantle these expectations, we must make resolution via the Bankruptcy Code a viable option for large complex financial institutions. That means doing the hard work of making living wills credible, and it means policymakers and regulators must commit to using them. This is a daunting task. But I find the alternative dismaying — the specter of an ever -increasing share of the financial sector effectively guaranteed by taxpayers. That outcome is not in the best interest of our country. I believe we owe it to our citizens to do whatever work it takes to create a stable and resilient financial system. 1 I would like to thank Jessie Romero for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 The Richmond Fed’s estimates of the size of the safety net are available online. 3 Kris James Mitchener, “Bank Supervision, Regulation, and Instability During the Great Depression,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 10475, May 2004. More information about the banking panics, the bank holiday of 1933 and the Emergency Banking Act of 1933 is available at federalreservehistory.org. 4 Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, A Monetary History of the United States , Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1963. As Friedman and Schwartz noted, monetary policy, not bank failures, was the primary cause of the severe economic contraction: “If [failures] had occurred to precisely the same extent without producing a drastic decline in the stock of money, they would have been notable but not crucial. If they had not occurred, but a correspondingly sharp decline had been produced in the stock of money by some other means, the contraction would have been at least equally severe and probably even more so” (p. 357). 5 See Charles Calomiris, “Banking Crises and the Rules of the Game,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 15403, October 2009; and Mitchener (2004). 6 More information about the banking panics and the Glass-Steagall Act is available at federalreservehistory.org. 7 Charles W. Calomiris and Stephen H. Haber, Fragile by Design: The Political Origins of Banking Crises and Scarce Credit, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2014. For more on the debate about deposit insurance, see Mark D. Flood, “The Great Deposit Insurance Debate,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, July/August 1992, vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 51-77. 8 8 For more on these episodes, see Irving H. Sprague, Bailout: An Insider’s Account of Bank Failures and Rescues, Washington, D.C.: Beard Books, 1986; Mark Carlson and David C. Wheelock, “The Lender of Last Resort: Lessons from the Fed’s First 100 Years,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper Series no. 2012-056B, February 2013 (revised); and “The Failure of Continental Illinois” at federalreservehistory.org. 9 For example, see Eric Dash, “4 Major Banks Tap Fed for Financing,” New York Times, August 23, 2007. For more on stigma, see Humberto M. Ennis and John A. Weinberg, “Over-the-counter loans, adverse selection, and stigma in the interbank market,” Review of Economic Dynamics, October 2013, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 601-616. 10 For example, see Douglas W. Diamond and Philip H. Dybvig, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy, June 1983, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 401-419; and Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2011, vol. 25, no. 1, pp 29-48. 11 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Economics After the Crisis: Models, Markets, and Implications for Policy,” Speech at the Center for Advanced Study in Economic Efficiency, Arizona State University, Tempe, Ariz., February 21, 2014. 12 Calomiris and Haber (2014); and Michael D. Bordo, Angela Redish and Hugh Rockoff, “A Comparison of the Stability and Efficiency of the Canadian and American Banking Systems, 1870 -1925,” Financial History Review, April 1996, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 49-68. 13 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Rethinking the Unthinkable: Bankruptcy for Large Financial Institutions,” Speech at the National Conference of Bankruptcy Judges Annual Conference, Chicago, Ill., October 10, 2014. 14 Thomas H. Jackson, Logic and the Limits of Bankruptcy Law, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986. 15 The first wave includes Bank of America, Bank of New York Mellon, Barclays, Citigroup, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan Chase, Morgan Stanley, State Street Corp. and UBS. An additional 117 banks filed their initial resolution plans in 2013, with revised plans due December 31, 2014. 16 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, “Agencies Provide Feedback on Second Round Resolution Plans of ‘First-Wave’ Filers,” August 5, 2014. 17 For example, see Thomas H. Jackson and David A. Skeel Jr., “Dynamic Resolution of Large Financial Institutions,” University of Pennsylvania Law School Faculty Scholarship no. 453, October 2012; Mark J. Roe, “Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Regulatory Reform, Commercial and Antitrust Law of Committee on the Judiciary,” United States House of Representatives Hearing on the Bankruptcy Code and Financial Institution Insolvencies, December 3, 2013; Mark J. Roe, “The Derivatives Market’s Payment Priorities as a Financial Crisis Accelerator,” Stanford Law Review, March 2011, vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 539-590; and Kenneth E. Scott and John B. Taylor, eds., Bankruptcy Not Bailout: A Special Chapter 14, Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press, 2012. 18 Marvin Goodfriend, “The Elusive Promise of Independent Central Banking,” Monetary and Economic Studies, Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, November 2012, vol. 30, pp. 39-54.
