Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the DNB-Riksbank Macroprudential Conference Series, Amsterdam, Netherlands Share It is often said that real estate is at the center of almost every financial crisis. That is not quite accurate, for financial crises can, and do, occur without a real estate crisis. But it is true that there is a strong link between financial crises and difficulties in the real estate sector. 1 In their research about financial crises, Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff document that the six major historical episodes of banking crises in advanced economies since the 1970s were all associated with a housing bust. 2 Plus, the drop in house prices in a bust is often bigger following credit-fueled housing booms, and recessions associated with housing busts are two to three times more severe than other recessions. 3 And, perhaps most significantly, real estate was at the center of the most recent crisis. In addition to its role in financial stability, or instability, housing is also a sector that draws on and faces heavy government intervention, even in economies that generally rely on market mechanisms. Coming out of the financial crisis, many jurisdictions are undergoing housing finance reforms, and enacting policies to prevent the next crisis. Today I would like to focus on where we now stand on the role of housing and real estate in financial crises, and what we should be doing about that situation. We shall discuss primarily the situation in the United States, and to a much lesser extent, that in other countries. Housing and Government Why are governments involved in housing markets? Housing is a basic human need, and politically important‑‑and rightly so. Using a once-popular term, housing is a merit good ‑‑it can be produced by the private sector, but its benefit to society is deemed by many great enough that governments strive to make it widely available. 4 As such, over the course of time, governments have supported homebuilding and in most countries have also encouraged homeownership. 5 Governments are involved in housing in a myriad of ways. One way is through incentives for homeownership. In many countries, including the United States, taxpayers can deduct interest paid on home mortgages, and various initiatives by state and local authorities support lower-income homebuyers. France and Germany created government-subsidized home-purchase savings accounts. And Canada allows early withdrawal from government-provided retirement pension funds for home purchases. 6 And‑‑as we all know‑‑governments are also involved in housing finance. They guarantee credit to consumers through housing agencies such as the U.S. Federal Housing Administration or the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation. 7 The Canadian government also guarantees mortgages on banks' books. And at various points in time, jurisdictions have explicitly or implicitly backstopped various intermediaries critical to the mortgage market. Government intervention in the United States has also addressed the problem of the fundamental illiquidity of mortgages. Going back 100 years, before the Great Depression, the U.S. mortgage system relied on small institutions with local deposit bases and lending markets. In the face of widespread runs at the start of the Great Depression, banks holding large portfolios of illiquid home loans had to close, exacerbating the contraction. In response, the Congress established housing agencies as part of the New Deal to facilitate housing market liquidity by providing a way for banks to mutually insure and sell mortgages. 8 In time, the housing agencies, augmented by post-World War II efforts to increase homeownership, grew and became the familiar government-sponsored enterprises, or GSEs: Fannie, Freddie, and the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs). The GSEs bought mortgages from both bank and nonbank mortgage originators, and in turn, the GSEs bundled these loans and securitized them; these mortgage-backed securities were then sold to investors. The resulting deep securitized market supported mortgage liquidity and led to broader homeownership. 9 Costs of Mortgage Credit While the benefits to society from homeownership could suggest a case for government involvement in securitization and other measures to expand mortgage credit availability, these benefits are not without costs. A rapid increase in mortgage credit, especially when it is accompanied by a rise in house prices, can threaten the resilience of the financial system. One particularly problematic policy is government guarantees of mortgage-related assets. Pre-crisis, U.S. agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were viewed by investors as having an implicit government guarantee, despite the GSEs' representations to the contrary. Because of the perceived guarantee, investors did not fully internalize the consequence of defaults, and so risk was mispriced in the agency MBS market. This mispricing can be notable, and is attributable not only to the improved liquidity, but also to implicit government guarantees. 10 Taken together, the government guarantee and resulting lower mortgage rates likely boosted both mortgage credit extended and the rise in house prices in the run-up to the crisis. Another factor boosting credit availability and house price appreciation before the crisis was extensive securitization. 11 In the United States, securitization through both public and private entities weakened the housing finance system by contributing to lax lending standards, rendering the mid-2000 house price bust more severe. 12 Although the causes are somewhat obscure, it does seem that securitization weakened the link between the mortgage loan and the lender, resulting in risks that were not sufficiently calculated or internalized by institutions along the intermediation chain. For example, even without government involvement, in Spain, securitization grew rapidly in the early 2000s and accounted for about 45 percent of mortgage loans in 2007. 13 Observers suggest that Spain's broad securitization practices led to lax lending standards and financial instability. 14 Yet, as the Irish experience suggests, housing finance systems are vulnerable even if they do not rely on securitization. Although securitization in Ireland amounted to only about 10 percent of outstanding mortgages in 2007, lax lending standards and light regulatory oversight contributed to the housing boom and bust in Ireland. 15 Macroprudential Policies To summarize, murky government guarantees, lax lending terms, and securitization were some of the key factors that made the housing crisis so severe. Since then, to damp the house price-credit cycle that can lead to a housing crisis, countries worldwide have worked to create or expand existing macroprudential policies that would, in principle, limit credit growth and the rate of house price appreciation. 16 Most macroprudential policies focus on borrowers . Loan-to-value (LTV) and debt-to-income (DTI) ratio limits aim to prevent borrowers from taking on excessive debt. The limits can also be adjusted in response to conditions in housing markets; for example, the Financial Policy Committee of the Bank of England has the authority to tighten LTV or DTI limits when threats to financial stability emerge from the U.K. housing market. Stricter LTV or DTI limits find some measure of success. One study conducted across 119 countries from 2000 to 2013 suggests that lower LTV limits lead to slower credit growth. 17 In addition, evidence from a range of studies suggests that decreases in the LTV ratio lead to a slowing of the rate of house price appreciation. 18 However, some other research suggests that the effectiveness of LTV limits is not significant or somewhat temporary. 19 Other macroprudential policies focus on lenders . First and foremost, tightening bank capital regulation enhances loss-absorbing capacity, strengthening financial system resilience. In addition, bank capital requirements for mortgages that increase when house prices rise may be used to lean against mortgage credit growth and house price appreciation. 20 These policies are intended to make bank mortgage lending more expensive, leading borrowers to reduce their demand for credit, which tends to push house prices down. Estimates of the effects of such changes vary widely: After consideration of a range of estimates from the literature, an increase of 50 percentage points in the risk weights on mortgages would result in a house price decrease from as low as 0.6 percent to as high as 4.0 percent. 21 These policies are more effective if borrowers are fairly sensitive to a rise in interest rates and if migration of intermediation outside the banking sector to nonbanks is limited. Of course, regulatory reforms and in some countries, macroprudential policies‑‑are still being implemented, and analysis is currently under way to monitor the effects. So far, research suggests that macroprudential tightening is associated with slower bank credit growth, slower housing credit growth, and less house price appreciation. Borrower, lender, and securitization-focused macroprudential policies are likely all useful in strengthening financial stability. Loan Modification in a Crisis Even though macroprudential policies reduce the incidence and severity of housing related crises, they may still occur. When house prices drop, households with mortgages may find themselves underwater, with the amount of their loan in excess of their home's current price. As Atif Mian and Amir Sufi have pointed out, this deterioration in household balance sheets can lead to a substantial drop in consumption and employment. 22 Extensive mortgage foreclosures--that is, undertaking the legal process to evict borrowers and repossess the house and then selling the house--as a response to household distress can exacerbate the downturn by imposing substantial dead-weight costs and, as properties are sold, causing house prices to fall further. 23 Modifying loans rather than foreclosing on them, including measures such as reducing the principal balance of a loan or changing the loan terms, can allow borrowers to stay in their homes. In addition, it can substantially reduce the dead-weight costs of foreclosure. Yet in some countries, institutional or legal frictions impeded desired mortgage modifications during the recent crisis. And in many cases, governments stepped in to solve the problem. For example, U.S. mortgage loans that had been securitized into private-label MBS relied on the servicers of the loans to perform the modification. However, operational and legal procedures for servicers to do so were limited, and, as a result, foreclosure, rather than modification, was commonly used in the early stages of the crisis. In 2008, new U.S. government policies were introduced to address the lack of modifications. These policies helped in three ways. First, they standardized protocols for modification, which provided servicers of private-label securities some sense of common practice. Second, they provided financial incentives to servicers for modifying loans. Third, they established key criteria for judging whether modifications were sustainable or not, particularly limits on mortgage payments as a percentage of household income. This last policy was to ensure that borrowers could actually repay the modified loans, which prompted lenders to agree more readily to the modification policies in the first place. Ireland and Spain also aimed to restructure nonperforming loans. Again, government involvement was necessary to push these initiatives forward. In Ireland, mortgage arrears continued to accumulate until the introduction of the Mortgage Arrears Resolution Targets scheme in 2013, and in Spain, about 10 percent of mortgages were restructured by 2014, following government initiatives to protect vulnerable households. 24 Public initiatives promoting socially desirable mortgage modifications in times of crises tend to be accompanied by explicit public fund support even though government guarantees may be absent in normal times. What Has Been Done? What Needs to Be Done? With the recent crisis fresh in mind, a number of countries have taken steps to strengthen the resilience of their housing finance systems. Many of the most egregious practices that emerged during the lending boom in the United States‑‑such as no- or low-documentation loans or negatively amortizing mortgages‑‑have been severely limited. Other jurisdictions are taking actions as well. Canadian authorities withdrew government insurance backing on non-amortizing lines of credit secured by homes. The United States and the European Union required issuers of securities to retain some of the credit risk in them to better align incentives among participants (although in the United States, MBS issued by Fannie and Freddie are currently exempt from this requirement). And post-crisis, many countries are more actively pursuing macroprudential policies, particularly those targeted at the housing sector. 25 New Zealand, Norway, and Denmark instituted tighter LTV limits or guidelines for areas that had overheating housing markets. Globally, the introduction of new capital and liquidity regulations has increased the resilience of the banking system. But memories fade. Fannie, Freddie, and the Federal Housing Administration are now the dominant providers of mortgage funding, and the FHLBs have expanded their balance sheets notably. House prices are now high and rising in several countries, perhaps as a result of extended periods of low interest rates. What should be done as we move ahead? First, macroprudential policies can help reduce the incidence and severity of housing crises. While some policies focus on the cost of mortgage credit, others attempt directly to restrict households' ability to borrow. Each policy has its own merits and working out their respective advantages is important. Second, government involvement can promote the social benefits of homeownership, but those benefits come at a cost, both directly, for example through the beneficial tax treatment of homeownership, and indirectly through government assumption of risk. To that extent, government support, where present, should be explicit rather than implicit, and the costs should be balanced against the benefits, including greater liquidity in housing finance engendered through a uniform, guaranteed instrument. Third, a capital regime that takes the possibility of severe stress seriously is important to calm markets and restart the normal process of intermediation should a crisis materialize. A well-capitalized banking system is a necessary condition for stability in bank-based financial systems as well as those with large nonbank sectors. This necessity points to the importance of having resilient banking systems and also stress testing the system against scenarios with sharp declines in house prices. Fourth, rules and expectations for mortgage modifications and foreclosure should be clear and workable. Past experience suggests that both lenders and borrowers benefit substantially from avoiding costly foreclosures. Housing-sector reforms should consider polices that promote efficient modifications in systemic crises. In the United States, as around the world, much has been done. The core of the financial system is much stronger, the worst lending practices have been curtailed, much progress has been made in processes to reduce unnecessary foreclosures, and the actions associated with the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 created some improvement over the previous ambiguity surrounding the status of government support for Fannie and Freddie. But there is more to be done, and much improvement to be preserved and built on, for the world as we know it cannot afford another pair of crises of the magnitude of the Great Recession and the Global Financial Crisis. References Aaronson, Daniel (2000). "A Note on the Benefits of Homeownership," Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 47 (May), pp. 356-69. Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino (2012). "Credit Supply and House Prices: Evidence from Mortgage Market Segmentation," NBER Working Paper Series 17832. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Akinci, Ozge, and Jane Olmstead-Rumsey (forthcoming). "How Effective Are Macroprudential Policies? An Empirical Investigation," Journal of Financial Intermediation . Andritzky, Jochen R. (2014). " Resolving Residential Mortgage Distress: Time to Modify? (PDF) " IMF Working Paper WP/14/226. Washington: IMF, December. Baker, Malcolm, and Jeffrey Wurgler (2013). "Do Strict Capital Requirements Raise the Cost of Capital? Banking Regulation and the Low Risk Anomaly," NBER Working Paper Series 19018. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Campbell, John Y. (2013). "Mortgage Market Design," Review of Finance , vol. 17 (January), pp. 1-33. Campbell, John Y., Stefano Giglio, and Parag Pathak (2011). "Forced Sales and House Prices," American Economic Review , vol. 101 (August), pp. 2108-31. Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (2017). " Loans Administration and Direct Lending ," webpage, CMHC. Carbó-Valverde, Santiago, David Marques-Ibanez, and Francisco Rodríguez-Fernández (2012). "Securitization, Risk-Transferring, and Financial Instability: The Case of Spain," Journal of International Money and Finance , vol. 31 (February), pp. 80-101. Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Luc Laeven (2017). "The Use and Effectiveness of Macroprudential Policies: New Evidence," Journal of Financial Stability , vol. 28 (February), pp. 203-24. Claessens, Stijn, M. Ayhan Kose, and Marco E. Terrones (2009). "What Happens during Recessions, Crunches, and Busts?" Economic Policy, vol. 24 (October), pp. 653-700. Connor, Gregory, Thomas Flavin, and Brian O'Kelly (2012). "The U.S. and Irish Credit Crises: Their Distinctive Differences and Common Features," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 31 (February), pp. 60-79. Crowe, Christopher, Deniz Igan, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, and Pau Rabanal (2011). " Policies for Macrofinancial Stability: Options to Deal with Real Estate Booms ," IMF Staff Discussion Notes 11/02. Washington: IMF, March 1. DeMarzo, Peter M. (2005). "The Pooling and Tranching of Securities: A Model of Informed Intermediation," Review of Financial Studies, vol. 18 (Spring), pp. 1-35. DiPasquale, Denise, and Edward L. Glaeser (1999). "Incentives and Social Capital: Are Homeowners Better Citizens?" Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 45 (March), pp. 354-84. Duca, John V., John Muellbauer, and Anthony Murphy (2012). " Credit Standards and the Bubble in U.S. House Prices: New Econometric Evidence (PDF) ," in Property Markets and Financial Stability, BIS Papers 64. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, March, pp. 83-89. Glaeser, Edward L., Joshua D. Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko (2010). "Can Cheap Credit Explain the Housing Boom?" NBER Working Paper Series 16230. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Hanson, Samuel G., Anil K. Kashyap, and Jeremy C. Stein (2011). "A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 3-28. International Monetary Fund (2011). " Housing Finance and Financial Stability--Back to Basics? " in Global Financial Stability Report . Washington: IMF, April. -------- (2014). " Israel: Selected Issues (PDF) ," IMF Country Report 14/48. Washington: IMF, February. Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig (2010). "Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 125 (February), pp. 307-62. Kuttner, Kenneth N., and Ilhyock Shim (2016). "Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies," Journal of Financial Stability, vol. 26 (October), pp. 31-44. Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010). Assessing the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements (PDF) (final report). Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, December. Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi (2013). "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 128 (November), pp. 1687-1726. Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi (2014). "What Explains the 2007-2009 Drop in Employment?" Econometrica, vol. 82 (November), pp. 2197-2223. Mian, Atif, Amir Sufi, and Francesco Trebbi (2015). "Foreclosures, House Prices, and the Real Economy," Journal of Finance, vol. 70 (December), pp. 2587-2634. Musgrave, R.A. (1987). "Merit Goods [dictionary entry]," in J. Eatwell, M. Milgate, and P. Newman, eds., The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , vol. 3. London: Macmillan, pp. 452-53. Nadauld, Taylor D., and Shane M. Sherlund (2013). "The Impact of Securitization on the Expansion of Subprime Credit," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 107 (February), pp. 454-76. Passmore, Wayne, Shane M. Sherlund, and Gillian Burgess (2005). "The Effect of Housing Government-Sponsored Enterprises on Mortgage Rates," Real Estate Economics, vol. 33 (September), pp. 427-63. Rappoport, David E. (2016). " Do Mortgage Subsidies Help or Hurt Borrowers? (PDF) " Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-081. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). "The Aftermath of Financial Crises," American Economic Review , vol. 99 (May), pp. 466-72. Rohe, William M., and Mark Lindblad (2013). " Reexamining the Social Benefits of Homeownership after the Housing Crisis ," working paper. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Joint Center for Housing Studies, August. Sherlund, Shane M. (2008). " The Jumbo-Conforming Spread: A Semiparametric Approach (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-01. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2009). " Housing Finance in the Euro Area (PDF) ," Occasional Paper Series 101. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, March. Van den Heuvel, Skander J. (2008). "The Welfare Cost of Bank Capital Requirements," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 55 (March), pp. 298-320. 1. I am grateful to Elizabeth Klee, Andreas Lehnert, Mary Tian, and Alexandros Vardoulakis of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). Return to text 3. See Claessens, Kose, and Terrones (2009). Cerutti, Dagher, and Dell'Arricia (2015) find that the probability of a credit and house price boom being followed within three years by a recession is between 59 and 67 percent, depending on the precise definition of a boom episode. Return to text 4. The concept of a merit good is defined in Musgrave (1987). Research suggests that homeownership is correlated with higher educational attainment (Aaronson 2000), community involvement (DiPasquale and Glaeser, 1999) and lower crime incidence (Rohe and Lindblad, 2013). Return to text 5. An exception to the rule is Germany, where most government policies focus on subsidizing renting, not homeownership. See Campbell (2013). Return to text 6. See the International Monetary Fund's April 2011 Global Financial Stability Report, table 3.5, p.126. Return to text 7. See Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation (2017). Return to text 8. The National Housing Act of 1934 established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC). Return to text 9. "Broader" relative to other countries; see IMF (2011). Return to text 10. See Passmore, Sherlund, and Burgess (2005) and Sherlund (2008). Return to text 11. See Nadauld and Sherlund (2013) and DeMarzo (2005). Return to text 12. See Keys and others (2010) and Nadauld and Sherlund (2013). Return to text 13. Out of that 45 percent, 30 percent was "true sale" securitization. See Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2009). Return to text 14. See Carbó-Valverde, Marques-Ibanez, and Rodríguez-Fernández (2012). Return to text 15. See Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2009) and Connor, Flavin, and O'Kelly (2012). Return to text 16. See Akinci and Olmstead-Rumsey (forthcoming). Return to text 17. See Cerutti, Claessens, and Laeven (2017). Return to text 18. See Crowe and others (2011); Duca, Muellbauer, and Murphy (2012); and Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010). Return to text 19. See Kuttner and Shim (2016) and International Monetary Fund (2014). Return to text 20. For example, in 2016, the Norges Bank used house price appreciation as a criterion for raising its countercyclical capital buffer. Return to text 21. Based on a range of estimates for banks' cost of capital and for the elasticity of house prices with respect to interest rates. See Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010); Baker and Wurgler (2013); Hanson, Kashyap, and Stein (2011); and Van den Heuvel (2008) for a range of estimates for banks' cost of capital. See Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2012); Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010); and Rappoport (2016) for a range of estimates for the elasticity of house prices with respect to interest rates. Return to text 22. See Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013) and Mian and Sufi (2014). Return to text 23. See Mian, Sufi, and Trebbi (2015) and Campbell, Giglio, and Pathak (2011). Return to text 24. See Andritzky (2014). Return to text 25. See Akinci and Olmstead-Rumsey (forthcoming). Return to text Last Update: June 20, 2017 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the IMF Workshop on Financial Surveillance and Communication: Best Practices from Latin America, the Caribbean, and Advanced Economies, Washington, D.C. Share In the years since the start of the global financial crisis, an enormous amount of effort has gone into ensuring that we have a robust financial system that promotes responsible risk taking and an efficient allocation of resources. But despite these efforts, financial stability cannot be taken for granted, for financial decisions that benefit the people who make them can create systemic risk and harm society as a whole. Further, the phenomenon familiar from macroeconomics‑‑and for that matter from life‑‑of decisions that result in short-run happiness and long-run grief is visible also in the area of financial stability. For example, excessive leverage and reliance on short-term funding, which may reward risk takers whose bets pay off, may also increase the risk of fire sales and contagion, creating a fragile financial situation. The disruption in credit intermediation that typically accompanies such episodes can have lasting negative consequences for the real economy and welfare‑‑some of which we are still seeing today. The Federal Reserve's financial stability responsibilities therefore strongly complement its dual-mandate objectives of achieving price stability and full employment. Today I will review the monitoring framework we have implemented at the Federal Reserve, before providing an assessment of current U.S. financial stability conditions. I will conclude by arguing that while significant progress has been made in recent years toward making the financial system more stable and resilient, we should not ever be complacent. 1 We still lack sufficient information to understand some parts of the shadow banking system, and risks sometimes evolve outside the scope of prudential regulation, with potentially negative implications for financial stability. And sometimes we fail to understand the situation in which we find the financial system and the economy. Framework for Monitoring Financial Stability Participants in today's workshops have grappled with the question of what is the best framework to monitor financial stability. One approach is to focus on trends in, and interactions among, financial vulnerabilities across financial institutions, markets, and instruments. Another approach is to track the resilience of institutions , either broad categories or individual systemically important institutions. Good monitoring frameworks combine elements of both. Let me start with the vulnerabilities-focused approach, as developed by Tobias Adrian, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang. 2 That approach defines financial vulnerabilities as a collection of factors that may amplify financial shocks and, when elevated, have the potential to generate systemic risk. The focus is on vulnerabilities rather than shocks, because the timing of shocks, such as sudden drops in asset prices, are inherently hard to predict. Vulnerabilities, in contrast, tend to build up over time, and policies can be designed to help contain these vulnerabilities, reducing the likelihood of systemic events. Some financial vulnerabilities are cyclical in nature, rising and falling over time, while others are structural, stemming from longer-term forces shaping the nature of credit intermediation. Informed by academic research, some of it in-house, we at the Federal Reserve focus on four broad cyclical vulnerabilities: (1) financial-sector leverage, (2) nonfinancial-sector borrowing, (3) liquidity and maturity transformation, and (4) asset valuation pressures. 3 Briefly, leverage, across a range of institutions, is a key amplifier of solvency shocks, leading to a greater chance of a credit crunch or fire sale. Liquidity and maturity mismatches can generate run risk, leading to fire sales and contagion. Finally, elevated valuation pressures, especially when combined with high leverage, can lead to excessive credit growth. When asset prices are appreciating rapidly and expected to continue to do so, borrowers and lenders are more willing to accept higher degrees of risk and leverage. Using a range of indicators, we assess these cyclical vulnerabilities relative to past experience. That is, we evaluate where the current levels of these indicators stand compared with their historical values, to identify whether they point to a low, average, or high level of vulnerabilities. While we try to rely on quantitative indicators, in the end, this evaluation requires some degree of judgment. We also closely monitor potential structural vulnerabilities, such as funding models and institutions that provide critical plumbing services to the system. Because these structural vulnerabilities are less amenable to traditional quantitative monitoring, their identification and assessment follow a less formal process. I will leave that discussion to another time. As mentioned, complementary to the vulnerabilities-oriented approach is an approach that focuses on institutions. If the financial system is overleveraged, that vulnerability has to be evident at particular institutions. An institutions-oriented framework can help us keep track of sector- or institution-specific structural vulnerabilities that may be masked by our overall assessment and provides additional ways to understand how distress at a particular institution or class of institutions may spill over to the wider financial system. Regardless of whether we are looking at vulnerabilities or institutions, a key feature of this monitoring framework is its forward-looking nature. For example, evidence suggests that periods of elevated risk appetite are frequently accompanied by a rise in leverage at financial intermediaries. 4 This evidence implies that elevated asset valuation pressures today may be indicative of rising vulnerabilities tomorrow. 5 Of course, while a framework provides a disciplined way to evaluate financial stability, we constantly evaluate the framework so that we can identify new risks and vulnerabilities, which may arise as the financial system evolves--for example, in response to market-driven innovation or regulatory reform. Federal Reserve staff research helps us understand and evaluate the evolving, dynamic financial system. Before turning to the assessment of the current state of U.S. financial stability, let me discuss how we communicate our views on this matter. The Federal Reserve, unlike many other central banks, does not publish a financial stability report. The United States already has two congressionally mandated financial stability reports, one authored by the independent Office of Financial Research and a separate report published by the Financial Stability Oversight Council that represents the views of the range of financial regulators, including the Federal Reserve. Additional views of Federal Reserve officials can be reflected in a range of other venues, including, notably, the Board's semiannual Monetary Policy Report, the Board's annual report, and speeches, such as this one. Current Assessment That was the framework, now for the current assessment: In the interest of time, my main focus will be on the four cyclical vulnerabilities--leverage, borrowing by households and non-financial firms, liquidity and maturity transformation, and asset valuations--but I will also briefly touch on the most salient structural vulnerabilities. To summarize the assessment, overall, a range of indicators point to vulnerability that is moderate when compared with past periods: Leverage in the financial sector is at historically low levels, and, following the reforms of money market mutual fund regulations by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) last fall, vulnerabilities associated with liquidity and maturity transformation appear to have decreased. However, the increase in prices of risky assets in most asset markets over the past six months points to a notable uptick in risk appetites, although this shift has not yet led to a pickup in the pace of borrowing or a sizable rise in leverage at financial institutions. Leverage To start with, leverage: Regulatory capital at large banks is now at multidecade highs. The largest banks have already met their fully phased-in capital requirements, including the conservation buffer and the capital surcharge for the global systemically important banks. Also, the largest banks have been able to meet the post-stress capital requirements in the past couple of stress-test exercises run by the Federal Reserve. Measures of earnings strength, such as the return on assets, continue to approach pre-crisis levels at most banks, although with interest rates being so low, the return on assets might be expected to have declined relative to their pre-crisis levels--and that fact is also a cause for concern. Borrowing by households and businesses In the private nonfinancial sector, which includes corporations and households, total debt remains well below its long-run trend, largely driven by subdued borrowing among households. However, the corporate business sector appears to be notably leveraged, with the current aggregate corporate-sector leverage standing near 20-year highs. Some studies, including one by the International Monetary Fund in this April's Global Financial Stability Report , have recently highlighted this vulnerability, so let me briefly offer my perspective. 6 Despite the elevated levels of corporate borrowing, recent developments show signs of improvement. Leverage has declined slightly since its peak a year ago, and firms with high debt growth appear relatively healthy. Interest expenses relative to earnings also declined of late and are below their median value since 2001. Furthermore, the fraction of corporate debt due within one year relative to total debt stands at historically low levels. Thus, positive shocks to interest rates may adversely affect the ability of some firms to service debt, but this risk may have only limited system-wide effects. Nonetheless, elevated leverage leaves the corporate sector vulnerable to other shocks, such as earnings shocks. In the household sector, new borrowing is driven mostly by borrowers with higher credit scores, and the amount of debt that borrowers have relative to their incomes is falling, suggesting that the debt is more manageable. That said, two pockets in the household sector deserve scrutiny. Auto loan balances and delinquency rates are high for borrowers with lower credit scores, meaning that the riskiest borrowers are borrowing more and not paying it back as often. Of note, delinquencies on recently issued auto loans have also increased, indicating that underwriting standards in the auto loan industry may be deteriorating. Student loan balances keep rising, and delinquency rates on those loans are near historical highs. These strains within the household sector leave such borrowers vulnerable to adverse shocks and probably weigh on their spending. At first glance, one is tempted to say that the potential for this distress to adversely affect the financial system seems moderate, because both subprime auto loan and student loan borrowers account for a small share of other debt categories. But, on second thought, one should remember that pre-crisis subprime mortgage loans were dismissed as a stability risk because they accounted for only about 13 percent of household mortgages, and not take excessive confidence. 7 Liquidity and maturity transformation Similar to my assessment of leverage, I believe that the primary vulnerability associated with liquidity and maturity transformation--that of a self-fulfilling run--is relatively low. In recent years, banks have shifted away from more run-prone short-term wholesale sources of funds toward more stable sources such as core deposits. Large domestic banks have also significantly boosted their holdings of high-quality liquid assets, making them more resilient to funding stress. In the nonbanking sector, the SEC revised the regulations governing money market mutual funds, first adopted in 2014, with the aim of reducing the key structural vulnerabilities exposed by the massive and destabilizing run on the funds in late 2008. The second round of reforms went into full effect in October 2016; ahead of this date, $1.2 trillion flowed out of prime money funds--the more fragile funds that also provide direct funding to large banking institutions--toward government money funds, which are constrained to hold government-guaranteed assets. Those assets include repurchase agreements (or repos) with private banks backed by Treasury securities and the liabilities of government-sponsored enterprises, such as, notably, the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs). While the current configuration of money markets reveals a reduced financial stability risk compared with the situation prior to the recent reforms, this configuration may not yet represent the final equilibrium. It will be important to keep an eye on the growth of alternative investment vehicles that perform liquidity transformation in money markets. Of note, in part supported by increased demand from government-only money funds, the FHLB system has increased its issuance of shorter-maturity liabilities, which are more attractive to money funds. In turn, this development has led to an increase in the FHLB system's maturity transformation because its assets--loans to banks and insurance companies--have remained relatively long maturity. As a result, the FHLBs face an increased need to roll over maturing liabilities and thus greater vulnerability should they encounter liquidity pressures. I should note that the FHLBs' regulator, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (also known as the FA-FA) flagged this issue more than a year ago and is working with the FHLBs (the FLUBS) to address it. Asset valuations Let me conclude my assessment of current financial stability conditions with a discussion of asset valuation pressures. Prices of risky assets have increased in most major asset markets in recent months even as risk-free rates also rose. In equity markets, price-to-earnings ratios now stand in the top quintiles of their historical distributions, while corporate bond spreads are near their post-crisis lows. Prices of commercial real estate (CRE) have grown faster than rents for some time, and measures of the amount of operating income relative to the sale price of commercial properties--the capitalization rate--have reached historical lows, suggesting continued pressures in the CRE market despite some tightening in credit conditions. Valuation pressures in single-family residential real estate markets appear, at most, modest, with price-to-rent ratios only slightly higher than their long-run trend. The general rise in valuation pressures may be partly explained by a generally brighter economic outlook, but there are signs that risk appetite increased as well. For example, estimates of equity and bond risk premiums are at the lower end of their historical distributions, and, relative to some non-price-based measures of uncertainty, the implied volatility index VIX is particularly subdued. So far, the evidently high risk appetite has not lead to increased leverage across the financial system, but close monitoring is warranted. Conclusion Let me conclude by offering my view on where we stand in our effort to promote financial stability in the United States. There is no doubt the soundness and resilience of our financial system has improved since the 2007-09 crisis. We have a better capitalized and more liquid banking system, less run-prone money markets, and more robust resolution mechanisms for large financial institutions. However, it would be foolish to think we have eliminated all risks. For example, we still have limited insight into parts of the shadow banking system, and--as already mentioned--uncertainty remains about the final configuration of short-term funding markets in the wake of money funds reform. The U.S. financial system is inherently dynamic, with a range of institutions competing to offer a changing mix of financial products. New financial technologies promise great benefits but will no doubt carry novel risks. As a result, we monitor these vulnerabilities, and we are vigilant with respect to economic and financial developments across markets and institutions within the United States and around the world. And we know that complacency must be avoided. References Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2015). "Financial Stability Monitoring," Annual Review of Financial Economics , vol. 7 (December), pp. 357-95. Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun Song Shin (2010). "Liquidity and Leverage," Journal of Financial Intermediation , vol. 19 (July), pp. 418-37. Aikman, David, Michael Kiley, Seung Jung Lee, Michael G. Palumbo, and Missaka Warusawitharana (forthcoming). "Mapping Heat in the U.S. Financial System," Journal of Banking and Finance. Gerardi, Kristopher, Andreas Lehnert, Shane M. Sherlund, and Paul Willen (2008). " Making Sense of the Subprime Crisis (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 69-145. International Monetary Fund (2017). " Getting the Policy Mix Right ," in Global Financial Stability Report. Washington: IMF, April. 1. I am grateful to Chiara Scotti and Filip Zikes of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2015). Return to text 3. For example, see Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2015); Aikman and others (forthcoming); and the references therein. Return to text 4. See Adrian and Shin (2012). Return to text 5. See Aikman and others (forthcoming). Return to text 6. See International Monetary Fund (2017). Return to text 7. See Gerardi and others (2008). Return to text Last Update: June 27, 2017 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Washington Transformation? Politics, Policies, Prospects," a forum sponsored by the Summer Institute of Martha’s Vineyard Hebrew Center, Vineyard Haven, Massachusetts Share I want to talk tonight about labor productivity growth. Labor productivity is the amount of goods and services produced per hour spent on the job. Increases in labor productivity--again, that's the amount of goods and services produced per hour on the job--are a fundamental factor in determining how fast the economy grows, and how fast the average standard of living grows. And productivity growth can be influenced by government policy, about which I also want to say a few words. 1 Labor productivity growth varies a lot from year to year, but it is possible to discern longer historical periods with high or low productivity growth, as shown in figure 1 . For example, labor productivity rose at an average annual rate of 3-1/4 percent from 1948 to 1973, whereas in the period 1974 to 2016, the average growth rate of productivity was about 1.7 percent. That is to say that, with the important exception of the information technology (IT) boom beginning in the mid-1990s, the U.S. economy has been in a low-productivity growth period since 1974. The record for the past five years has been particularly dismal. How much does productivity growth matter? A great deal. The person who made that clear, in an article published in 1957, 60 years ago, Professor Robert Solow, is here tonight. That is a pleasure, an honor, a joy, and something of a difficulty for anyone wanting to talk about productivity and its growth in the presence of the master. The reason the rate of productivity growth matters so much is that it is a basic determinant of the rate of growth of average income per capita over long periods. 2 To understand that one needs to know only the trick of calculating how long it takes for a growing economy to double. A good rule of thumb for calculating the time it takes labor productivity (or anything else that is growing) to double can be calculated by dividing 70 by the growth rate. When labor productivity was growing at 3-1/4 percent per year--during the 25 years from 1948 to 1973--it took 22 years for labor productivity to double. Looking again at Figure 1, in the 42 years from 1974 to 2016, when labor productivity was growing on average at a rate of 1-3/4 percent, it would have taken approximately 41 years for labor productivity to double. There is a vast difference between the prospects facing the young in an economy where incomes per capita are doubling every 22 years and an economy in which incomes are on average doubling only every 41 years. Now, productivity statistics are imperfect in many respects--for example, capturing the value of the seemingly free apps we use on our smartphones is challenging. And many of us who live in the modern age cannot believe that the iPhone has not fundamentally changed our lives. It has certainly changed our lives to some extent, and there is likely some underestimation of productivity growth in the official data. But to figure out whether the current degree of data bias has reduced estimated growth, we have to ask not whether there is bias, but whether the bias has increased. To a first approximation, one could assume that the rate of bias is constant, and does not account for the estimated decline in productivity growth and that we should not dismiss the slowdown as an artifact of measurement difficulties 3 That is the conclusion most researchers reach, but the data issue is not settled. As Bob Solow famously said, just before the increase in productivity growth of 1996-2003, "the computer is everywhere except in the growth data." And there are serious researchers who have made serious arguments that we will soon be seeing more rapid growth in the productivity data. Factors determining productivity growth Clearly, a key question for economic forecasters, and even more so for U.S. citizens, and indeed for the entire global economy, is whether we should anticipate a return of the more rapid productivity gains experienced in the IT boom and for the quarter century after the end of World War II, or should instead resign ourselves to tepid economic growth in future years. And a central policy issue is whether government policies can help push the economy toward a higher-productivity regime. In this context, it is useful to think of labor productivity growth as coming from three sources, as shown in figure 2 . First, greater investment by firms in tangible equipment and structures, as well as "intangible" investments such as software and product designs, raise labor productivity. Second, improvements in labor quality, or the capabilities of the workforce, contribute as well--through education, training, and experience. Finally, innovations yield more or better output from the same inputs--the same capital and labor--such as the introduction of the assembly line and computer-aided product design. I will consider the role that policy may play through each of these channels. It is noteworthy that most of the recent drop in productivity is due to a lower contribution from innovation, although weaker investment has played a role as well. The contribution to labor productivity from labor quality has changed very little. Innovation Our prospects for further significant technological innovations are hotly debated. Some observers believe that we have exhausted the low-hanging fruit on the productivity tree and, in particular, that efficiency gains from the use of IT have run their course. 4 Other observers argue that we can reach fruit higher on the tree with each passing year. These observers believe that innovation yields better tools, such as 3-D printers and genetic sequencing equipment, which themselves enable further technological advances. 5 For what it is worth, I believe the early signs of self-driving cars, the emergence of disease treatments based on genetics, and the falling costs for conventional and alternative energy production suggest that we are continuing to innovate, both in IT as well as in other parts of the economy. One possibility is that we are in a productivity lull while firms reorganize to exploit the latest innovations; it took decades before the full benefits of the steam engine, electrification, and computers were seen. 6 One way to ensure the vigor of innovation is to support research and development (R&D), and here the recent record is mixed. As shown in figure 3 , R&D spending in the United States softened during the Great Recession. R&D funded by U.S. businesses has since recovered. However, government-funded R&D as a share of gross domestic product is at the lowest level in recent history. A great deal of the "R" in overall R&D is government funded and not tied to a specific commercial goal. The applied research built on this basic research ultimately yields productivity gains far into the future. 7 Consequently, the decline in government-funded R&D is disturbing. To raise productivity and economic well-being, firms must adopt innovations that emerge from R&D as quickly as possible. This adjustment may occur as start-ups introduce innovation to the market, as existing innovative firms expand, or as competing firms imitate the innovators. Recent research suggests that all three of these channels, which reflect the economic dynamism of businesses, have been operating sluggishly of late: New firms are not created as often as in the past, innovative firms are not hiring or investing as aggressively as they once did, and the diffusion of innovations is weak from frontier firms to trailing firms. 8 It is difficult to pinpoint specific policy actions that would address this decline in dynamism. Broadly speaking, however, government policymakers should carefully consider the effects of regulations and tax policy on the free flow of workers, capital, and ideas. Investment In recent years, the contribution to labor productivity growth from investment has declined. Business fixed investment rose roughly 2-1/2 percent per year, on average, from 2004 to 2016, compared with about 5 percent from 1996 to 2003. 9 Some bright spots do exist: Capital expenditure by leading IT companies--Google, Amazon, and the like--has soared since 2010, and investment in the energy sector has returned to life. Nevertheless, firms as a whole seem reluctant to invest. This cautious approach to investment may in part reflect uncertainty about the policy environment. By one measure, U.S. policy uncertainty was elevated for much of the recovery, subsided in 2013, and then rose again late last year, underpinned by uncertainty about policies associated with health care, regulation, taxes, and trade. 10 Reasonable people can disagree about the right way forward on each of those issues, but mitigating the damping effect of uncertainty by providing more clarity on the future direction of government policy is highly desirable--particularly if the direction of policy itself is desirable. Government investment can be an important source of productivity growth as well. For example, the interstate highway system is credited with boosting productivity in the 1950s and 1960s. 11 That highway system and many other federally supported roadways, waterways, and structures have been neglected in recent years. Indeed, real infrastructure spending (that is, adjusting for inflation) has fallen nearly 1 percent per year since 2005. 12 This area of government investment deserves more attention. Labor Quality Also important to raising labor productivity is investment in human capital--workers' knowledge and skills. Such investment is a particular issue because most forecasts anticipate that the long rise in educational attainment--both for college and high school--may soon come to an end. One area where policy may play a role is promoting educational access and readiness for groups for whom educational attainment is relatively low. Recent research has shown a substantial return to public investment in early childhood education for economically disadvantaged groups. Such programs increase high school graduation, promote income over the life cycle for both participants and their parents, and produce other socially beneficial outcomes, such as greater health. 13 At the other end of the education process, a college degree has long been considered a worthwhile investment, and thus our society should promote access to and readiness for college among a broad range of individuals--in particular through federal support for need-based financial aid. 14 Lastly, I will note that ultimately the return on the human capital embodied in our workforce is closely tied to public health. A rise in morbidity or fall in longevity in the U.S. population is not a concern only for humanitarian reasons. Workers too ill to perform at their potential represent lost productivity and welfare for society as a whole. Research has shown just such a trend among prime-age non-Hispanic Americans without a college degree. 15 More study is needed to determine what policies would help reverse this trend, and government funding could likely assist the effort. More broadly, programs to promote clean air and drinking water are examples of public health policies that bolster the health and longevity of the present and future workforce as a whole. Concluding remarks To conclude, we return to the basic question: How much does productivity growth matter? The basic answer: simple arithmetic says it matters a lot. If labor productivity grows an average of 2 percent per year, average living standards for our children's generation will be twice what we experienced. If labor productivity grows an average of 1 percent per year, the difference is dramatic: Living standards will take two generations to double. 16 But fortunately, when it comes to productivity, we are not simply consigned to luck or to fate. Governments can take sensible actions to promote more rapid productivity growth. Broadly speaking, government policy works best when it can address a need that the private sector neglects, including investment in basic research, infrastructure, early childhood education, schooling, and public health. Reasonable people can disagree about the right way forward, but if we as a society are to succeed, we need to follow policies that will support and advance productivity growth. That is easier said than done. But it can be done. References Andrews, Dan, Chiara Criscuolo, and Peter Gal (2015). Frontier firms, technology diffusion and public policy: Micro evidence from OECD countries, No. 2. OECD Publishing, 2015. Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2012). "Has Economic Policy Uncertainty Hampered the Recovery?" in Lee E. Ohanian, John B. Taylor, and Ian J. Wright, eds., Government Policies and the Delayed Economic Recovery. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press, pp. 39-56. Bosler, Canyon, Mary C. Daly, John G. Fernald, and Bart Hobijn (2016). "The Outlook for U.S. Labor-Quality Growth," NBER Working Paper Series 22555. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Brynjolfsson, Erik, and Lorin M. Hitt (2000). "Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational Transformation, and Business Performance," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14 (Fall), pp. 23-48. Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016). " Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem? (PDF) " Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 109-57. Byrne, David, Stephen Oliner, and Daniel Sichel (2017). "Prices of High-Tech Products, Mismeasurement, and Pace of Innovation," NBER Working Paper Series 23369. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. Case, Anne, and Angus Deaton (2017). " Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 1-63. Congressional Budget Office (2015). Public Spending on Transportation and Water Infrastructure, 1956 to 2014 . Washington: CBO, March. David, Paul A. (1990). "The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox," American Economic Review, vol. 80 (May), pp. 355-61. Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2016). "Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward," American Economic Review, vol. 106 (May), pp. 203-07. Dynarski, Susan, and Judith Scott-Clayton (2013). "Financial Aid Policy: Lessons from Research," NBER Working Paper Series 18710. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Elango, Sneha, Jorge Luis García, James J. Heckman, and Andrés Hojman (2015). "Early Childhood Education," NBER Working Paper Series 21766. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Fernald, John G. (1999). "Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and Productivity," American Economic Review, vol. 89 (June), pp. 619‑38. Fernald, John G. (2012). " A Quarterly, Utilization-Adjusted Series on Total Factor Productivity (PDF) ," Working Paper 2012-19. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, September (revised April, 2014). Fernald, John G. (2015). "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," NBER Macroeconomics Annual , vol. 29 (1), pp. 1-51. Fernald, John G., Robert E. Hall, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (2017). " The Disappointing Recovery of Output after 2009 (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 1-82. García, Jorge Luis, James J. Heckman, Duncan Ermini Leaf, and María José Prados (2017). "Quantifying the Life-Cycle Benefits of a Prototypical Early Childhood Program," NBER Working Paper Series 23479. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Gordon, Robert (2014). "The demise of US economic growth: Restatement, rebuttal, and reflections," NBER Working Paper Series 19895. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Mohnen, Pierre, and Bronwyn H. Hall (2013). "Innovation and Productivity: An Update," Eurasian Business Review, vol. 3 (Spring), pp. 47-65. Mokyr, Joel (2014). "Secular Stagnation? Not in Your Life," in Coen Teulings and Richard Baldwin, eds., Secular Stagnation: Facts, Causes, and Cures. London: CEPR Press, pp. 83-89. Pinto, Eugenio P., and Stacey Tevlin (2014). "Perspectives on the Recent Weakness in Investment," FEDS Notes, No. 2014-05-21. Solow, Robert M. (1957). "Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function," Review of Economics and Statistics , vol. 39 (August), pp. 312-20. United States. Bureau of the Census (1975). Historical statistics of the United States, colonial times to 1970 . Washington: US Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, September, . 1. I am grateful to David Byrne of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance. Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. One needs also to recognize that changes in either the average workweek or the employment to population ratio may damp or augment the effect of labor productivity on GDP per capita. Return to text 3. Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016) discuss known measurement challenges and conclude they cannot explain the deceleration of productivity. Return to text 4. Gordon (2014, p. 25) enumerates the inventions of the information age--the personal computer, the Internet, mobile phones, and so on--and notes that for innovation to continue at such a pace, "the achievements of the past 40 years set a hurdle that is dauntingly high." Return to text 5. Mokyr (2014, p. 83) considers advances in research methods and tools and concludes that "the indirect effects of science on productivity through the tools it provides scientific research may dwarf the direct effects in the long run." Return to text 6. David (1990) cautions that the effect of general-purpose technologies, such as electricity and electronic computing, can take decades to fully unfold. Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2000) consider the process followed by firms in leveraging innovations in IT equipment and emphasize the role of complementary investment in intangible assets like business reorganization. Return to text 7. Mohnen and Hall (2013) survey the empirical literature pointing to a link between R&D and productivity. Return to text 8. Decker and others (2016) highlight the decline in entrepreneurship and worker mobility; Andrews, Criscuolo, and Gal (2015) emphasizes that productivity for firms at the global frontier continues to advance rapidly even as global aggregate productivity growth has slowed. Return to text 9. Pinto and Tevlin (2014) note that in the context of a long-run growth model, a slow pace of investment is not surprising in light of the slow growth in effective labor inputs--which equals the sum of labor quality and total factor productivity growth. Fernald and others (2017) raise a related point--the ratio of capital to output has returned to its apparent long-run trend. That said, Byrne, Oliner, and Sichel (2017) argue that the recent rapid declines in the price of IT capital may presage an uptick in investment in response. Return to text 10. As discussed in Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012), the Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) index, available on the EPU website at www.policyuncertainty.com, is constructed from component measures for references to policy uncertainty in major newspapers, the number of tax code provisions set to expire in future years, and disagreement among economic forecasters. Return to text 11. See Fernald (1999). Return to text 12. Although the share of nominal public spending devoted to infrastructure in recent years has been similar to the share dating back to the 1980s, Congressional Budget Office (2015) notes that real spending has been held down by the relatively rapid increase in the price of inputs used for construction. Return to text 13. Research on the effect of early childhood education is surveyed in Elango and others (2015). Garcia and others (2017) consider the effect over the full life cycle of an early childhood program targeting disadvantaged families and estimate an internal rate of return of nearly 14 percent. Return to text 14. Dynarski and Scott-Clayton (2013) review the evidence that college enrollment rates are positively affected by student aid. Return to text 15. See Case and Deaton (2017). Return to text 16. To be precise, this illustrative calculation assumes that the average workweek and the employment-to-population ratio are unchanged. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: July 06, 2017 Back to Top

, an important and distinguishing feature of the current global economic environment. In the United States, the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds is near all-time lows, with the same being true in the euro area, the United Kingdom, and Japan ( figure 1 ). Yields have also declined in many emerging markets, with interest rates falling almost 400 basis points in Korea since the financial crisis and by a similar amount in Israel. As shown in figure 2 , the decline has been less apparent in Brazil and South Africa, though interest rates in both countries remain well below previous peaks. In this talk, I will address two questions: Why are interest rates so low? And why has the decline in interest rates been so widespread? 1 Global Real Interest Rates Have Declined Lower inflation explains a portion of the decline in nominal interest rates. Longer-term interest rates reflect market participants' expectations of future inflation as well as the expected path of real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rates. And while lower realized inflation and credible central back inflation targets have likely stabilized expected inflation at relatively low levels compared with much of the 20th century, inflation-adjusted yields have also notably decreased. The decline in interest rates also does not appear to be primarily an outcome of the economic cycle. Longer-term interest rates in the United States have remained low even as the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has increased the short-term federal funds rate by 100 basis points and as the unemployment rate has declined below the median of FOMC participants' assessments of its longer-run normal level. Rather, it appears as though much of the decline has occurred in the equilibrium level of the real interest rate--also known as the natural rate of interest or, alternatively, r*. Knut Wicksell, in his 1898 treatise Interest and Prices , wrote, "There is a certain level of the average rate of interest which is such that the general level of prices has no tendency to move either upwards or downwards." 2 In recent years, the coincidence of low inflation and low interest rates suggests that the natural rate of interest is likely very low today. Wicksell was clearly referring to the natural rate as the real interest rate when the economy is at full employment. The widely cited methodology of my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams, attempts to gauge the natural rate in the longer run after various shorter-term influences, including the business cycle, have played out. In a recent update of their analysis, they find that the natural rate of interest has declined about 150 basis points in the United States since the financial crisis and is currently about 50 basis points. We must remember, however, that r* is a function and not a constant, and its estimation is subject to a number of assumptions, the modification of which can lead to a wide range of estimates. 3 In an extension of this analysis, shown in figure 3 , Laubach, Williams, and Kathryn Holston, also a Federal Reserve colleague, show that the decline in the natural rate of interest is a common feature across a number of foreign economies. 4 The fall in equilibrium interest rates was most pronounced at the time of the financial crisis, but rates have shown little tendency to increase during the long recovery from the crisis. How Should We Think about the Decline in Equilibrium Interest Rates? An Investment and Savings Framework There are many factors that could be holding down interest rates, some of which could fade over time, including the effects of quantitative easing in the United States and abroad and a heightened demand for safe assets affecting yields on advanced-economy government securities. I will focus on some of the more enduring factors that could potentially lower the equilibrium interest for some time. In attempting to explain why real interest rates have fallen, a useful starting point is to think of the natural interest rate as the price that equilibrates the economy's supply of saving with the demand for investment in the long run, when the economy is at full employment. With this framework in mind, low interest rates reflect factors that increase saving, depress investment demand, or both. Focusing initially on the United States, I will look at three interrelated factors that are likely contributing to low interest rates: slower trend economic growth, an aging population and demographic developments, and relatively weak investment. I will then discuss global developments and spillovers between countries. But first I would like to interject a quick word on why we as policymakers might be concerned about low interest rates. I highlight three main worries. First, as John Maynard Keynes discussed in the concluding chapters of The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money , a low equilibrium interest rate increases the risks of falling into a liquidity trap, a situation where the nominal interest rate is stuck, by an effective lower bound, above the rate necessary to bring the economy back to potential. 5 Relatedly, but more broadly, low equilibrium interest rates are a key pillar of the secular stagnation hypothesis, which Larry Summers has carried forward during the past few years. 6 Second, a low natural rate could potentially hurt financial stability if it leads investors to reach for yield or hurts financial firms' profitability. And, third--and perhaps most troubling--a low equilibrium rate sends a powerful signal that the growth potential of the economy may be limited. 7 Slow trend growth One factor contributing to low equilibrium interest rates in the United States has been a slowdown in the pace of potential, or trend, growth. According to the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), real potential growth in the United States is currently around 1.5 percent, compared with a pace about double that, on average, in the two decades leading up to the financial crisis. A prime culprit in the growth slowdown has been the slow rate of labor productivity growth, which has increased only 1/2 percent, on average, over the past five years, compared with a 2 percent growth rate over the period from 1976 to 2005. 8 A declining rate of labor force growth has also worked to push down trend growth. The CBO is projecting that the potential labor force in the United States will grow at about 1/2 percent per year over the next decade, less than half the pace observed, on average, in the two decades before the financial crisis. Slower growth can both boost saving and depress investment. As households revise down their expectations for future income growth, they become less likely to borrow and more likely to save. Likewise, slower growth diminishes the number of business opportunities that can be profitably undertaken, weighing on investment demand. Demographics The aging of the population can work to lower the equilibrium interest rate beyond its effect on the size of the labor force and trend growth. As households near retirement, they tend to save more, anticipating having to run down their savings after they leave the labor force. Federal Reserve economists, in one study, estimate that higher saving by near-retirement households could be pushing down the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate relative to its level in the 1980s by as much as 75 basis points. 9 Investment Another factor weighing on equilibrium real interest rates has been the recent weakness of investment. What explains the tepid response of capital spending to historically low interest rates? As mentioned earlier, low productivity growth has certainly been a contributing factor, as firms see fewer profitable investment opportunities. But elevated uncertainty, both political and economic, has likely also played a role. For one, uncertainty about the outlook for government policy in health care, regulation, taxes, and trade can cause firms to delay projects until the policy environment clarifies. Firms also seem quite uncertain about the disruptive capacity of new technologies. Technological developments appear to be rapidly reshaping entire industries‑‑in retail, transportation, and communications. Elevated uncertainty about the continued viability of long-standing business models could be weighing on investment decisions. Relatedly, it is possible that as the economy evolves in response to new technologies, production is becoming less capital intensive than it was in earlier decades. 10 Another possible explanation for the weakness of investment in the United States has been a decrease in competition within industries, as evidenced by decreasing firm entry and exit rates as well as increased industry concentration. 11 Less competition allows firms to maintain high profits while lowering the pressure on them to increase production to maintain market share. In an earlier discussion, I attempted to quantify the effect that these factors--slow growth, demographics, and investment--might be having on the long-run equilibrium rate in the United States. 12 According to simulations from the Board's FRB/US model, the slowdown in growth appears likely to be the primary factor depressing the long-run equilibrium rate, although the contributions from demographics and weak investment demand were also sizable. Global Links: Why Has the Decline in Interest Rates Been So Widespread? Up until now, I have looked primarily at factors within the United States. However, as I have pointed out earlier, the decline in interest rates is a global phenomenon. Why has the decline in interest rates been so widespread? One important reason is that many of the same factors that have been driving down the equilibrium interest rate in the United States have operated with equal or even greater force in many foreign economies. The slowdown in labor productivity growth has been widespread across many countries. Likewise, the advanced economies and some emerging markets have experienced demographic shifts that are in some cases much more pronounced than in the United States, with the working-age population in some countries even declining over the past decade. Another explanation is that we live in an integrated global economy where economic developments in one country spill over into other countries via trade and capital flows as well as prices, including interest rates and exchange rates. 13 In the most general sense, these spillovers are captured in the pattern of current balances, shown in figure 4 . If we abstract from a somewhat sizable statistical discrepancy, the sum of global current accounts should be equal to zero, as, in the aggregate, one country's deficit must be matched by a surplus in some configuration of other countries--but it is not always apparent who is spilling over onto whom. Current Account Balances and Global Spillovers Prior to the financial crisis, it was widely speculated that foreign developments were depressing U.S. interest rates. Former Chairman Bernanke characterized the foreign forces acting on U.S. interest rates as the "global saving glut," with particular reference to emerging market economies that were running persistent current account surpluses, sometimes as a result of specific policy decisions regarding exchange rates, reserve accumulation, and fiscal policy. 14 The global saving glut was also a factor in the "Greenspan conundrum," or the observation that a series of Federal Reserve rate hikes over the period from 2004 to 2006 seemed to have little effect on longer-term interest rates in the United States. As shown in figure 5 , the deterioration of the U.S. deficit in the early 2000s was matched by growing surpluses in the emerging markets, particularly in emerging Asia and China as well as OPEC. The explosive growth of the U.S. current account deficit from 2001 to 2006, coincident with falling interest rates both in the United States and globally, supports the notion that higher foreign saving relative to foreign investment was likely holding down U.S. interest rates at the time. What can the distribution of global current accounts tell us about international spillovers in the post-crisis era? As shown in figure 6 , the most notable development has been the almost exact reversal of the expansion of the U.S. current account deficit observed during the time of the global saving glut. Has the global saving glut of the mid-2000s faded away? Falling interest rates over the period that the U.S. deficit narrowed suggest not. 15 If a shrinking supply of foreign saving, the reversal of the global saving glut, was behind the narrowing of the U.S. deficit, then the tendency would have been for equilibrium real interest rates to have increased. 16 Rather, falling equilibrium rates suggest that falling U.S. demand for foreign savings has precipitated the narrowing of the U.S. current account deficit. U.S. demand likely decreased for the reasons discussed earlier, including slowing growth, demographics, and weak investment demand. Does the marked narrowing of the U.S. current account deficit post-crisis suggest that the United States has been the primary source of downward pressure on global interest rates over the past decade? Certainly, if the United States had maintained its previous deficit, interest rates would likely be higher around the world. However, the financial crisis revealed that the U.S. capacity to absorb global savings at the pace observed prior to the crisis was unsustainable. 17 Rather, an alternative explanation would be that the sharp decline in global interest rates post-crisis reflects factors that were likely well in train before the financial crisis. The downward trend in interest rates would have been more pronounced earlier in the decade had not elevated, and ultimately unsustainable, borrowing in the United States slowed the decline in interest rates in the years immediately preceding the crisis. This narrative is consistent with empirical evidence that suggests that the slowdowns in global productivity growth and labor force growth, both key factors in the slowing pace of global growth and the downward pressure on interest rates, predate the global financial crisis. 18 It is notable in figure 6 that the euro area has also seen a sizable increase in its current account position post-crisis, suggesting that developments in Europe have also played a role in pushing down interest rates. The increase in the euro-area current account in part reflects sharp reversals in the current account deficits of Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Ireland--all countries that had witnessed large increases in their deficits during the global saving glut period prior to the crisis, in a pattern similar to that experienced by the United States. However, the euro-area increase also reflects increased surpluses in Germany and the Netherlands, countries that were already in considerable surplus during the pre-crisis period. What, If Anything, Can Be Done about Low Interest Rates? Given the potential risks around low interest rates I discussed earlier, including the impact on the effectiveness of monetary policy and financial stability concerns, what should policymakers do to address the problem? Monetary policy has a role to play. Transparent and sound monetary policy can boost confidence in the stability of the growth outlook, an outcome that can in turn alleviate precautionary demand for savings and encourage investment, pushing up the equilibrium interest rate. However, as I have said before--and Ben Bernanke before me--"Monetary policy is not a panacea." 19 Also, to repeat myself, policies to boost productivity growth and the longer-run potential of the economy are more likely to be found in effective fiscal and regulatory measures than in central bank actions. This statement is true not only in the United States, but also around the globe. But it is not to say that monetary policy is irrelevant to the growth rate of the economy. References Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). " The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit ," speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, April 14. -------- (2012). " U.S. Monetary Policy and International Implications ," speech delivered at "Challenges of the Global Financial System: Risks and Governance under Evolving Globalization," a High-Level Seminar sponsored by the Bank of Japan-International Monetary Fund, Tokyo, October 14. -------- (2015). " Why Are Interest Rates So Low, Part 3: The Global Savings Glut ," Ben Bernanke's Blog, April 1. Clarida, Richard H. (2017). "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination," NBER Working Paper Series 23562. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Döttling, Robin, Germán Gutiérrez, and Thomas Philippon (2017). " Is There an Investment Gap in Advanced Economies? If So, Why? (PDF) " paper presented at the Fourth Annual ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 27. Fernald, John G. (2015). "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A. Parker and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014 , vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 1-51. Fernald, John G., Robert E. Hall, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (2017). "The Disappointing Recovery of Output after 2009," NBER Working Paper Series 23543. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Fischer, Stanley (2016a). " Low Interest Rates ," speech delivered at the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, October 5. -------- (2016b). " Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Causes and Implications ," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17. Gagnon, Etienne, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016). " Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October. Gutiérrez, Germán, and Thomas Philippon (2017). "Declining Competition and Investment in the U.S.," NBER Working Paper Series 23583. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July. Hilsenrath, Jon, and Bob Davis (2016). "Tech Boom Creates Too Few Jobs," Wall Street Journal , October 13. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (forthcoming). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers, NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016 . Amsterdam: Journal of International Economics (Elsevier). Irwin, Neil (2017). "Rethinking Low Productivity," New York Times , July 26. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). " The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Keynes, John Maynard (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London: Macmillan. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest," Review of Economics and Statistics , vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70. Lewis, Kurt F., and Francisco Vazquez-Grande (2017). " Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: Alternative Specifications (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound," Business Economics , vol. 49 (April), pp. 65-73. -------- (2015). "Demand Side Secular Stagnation," American Economic Review , vol. 105 (May), pp. 60-65. -------- (2016). "The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It," Foreign Affairs , vol. 95 (March-April), pp. 2-9. Wicksell, Knut (1936). Interest and Prices (Geldzins und Güterpreise): A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of Money , trans. R.F. Kahn. London: Macmillan. 1. I am grateful to Joseph W. Gruber of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance. Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Wicksell's Interest and Prices , published in German in 1898 as Geldzins und Güterpreise by Gustav Fischer (Jena), was first published in English in 1936--see Wicksell (1936). Return to text 3. See Laubach and Williams (2003). See also Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016) and Johannsen and Mertens (2016). It is important to point out that r* is not an observable variable and that estimates generally reflect assumptions about how the economy works and should be modeled. As such, different methodologies or underlying economic models can come up with a wide range of estimates of r*. Lewis and Vazquez-Grande (2017) examine parameter uncertainty and alternative specifications in the estimation of the natural rate of interest. Under some specifications, they find an estimated r* at the end of 2016 of close to 2 percent, far higher than the about 0.5 percent reported by the methodology of Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming). Return to text 4. See Holston, Laubach, and Williams (forthcoming). Return to text 5. In chapter 23, p. 353, Keynes includes an interesting discussion of the "strange, unduly neglected prophet Silvio Gesell (1862-1930), whose work contains flashes of deep insight and who only just failed to reach down to the essence of the matter." He adds that Gesell was a successful German merchant in Buenos Aires. See Keynes (1936). Return to text 6. See Summers (2014, 2015, 2016). Return to text 7. See Fischer (2016a) for a fuller discussion of the risks associated with a low equilibrium interest rate. Return to text 8. See Irwin (2017) for an examination of an alternative pattern of causality, where slow growth--and, in particular, weak wage growth--has led to low productivity growth rather than vice versa. I should also remind the reader of Herbert Stein's observation that the difference between a growth rate of 1 percent and a growth rate of 2 percent is 100 percent. Return to text 9. See Gagnon, Johannsen, and Lopez-Salido (2016), figure 12, p. 45. Return to text 10. See Hilsenrath and Davis (2016). Return to text 11. See Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017) and Döttling, Gutiérrez, and Philippon (2017). Return to text 12. See Fischer (2016b). Return to text 13. See Clarida (2017) for a model-based discussion of global factors and neutral interest rates. Return to text 14. See Bernanke (2005). Return to text 15. While it is unsurprising that interest rates fell sharply during the recession that followed the financial crisis, it is less apparent that equilibrium rates should have fallen so sharply or remain so low almost a decade later following the cyclical recovery in the United States and many other countries. Return to text 16. See Bernanke (2015) for a discussion of the persistence of the global saving glut. Return to text 17. This is not to suggest that the global saving glut was the only factor leading to the financial crisis. Rather, excessive risk-taking on the part of U.S. households and financial firms, along with structural defects in the structure of regulation and failures in supervision on the part of government regulators, also played a role. Return to text 18. See Fernald (2015) and Fernald and others (2017). Return to text 19. See Bernanke (2012). Of course, there are no panaceas--except, I have been told by experts, aspirin, and perhaps also statins. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: August 21, 2017 Back to Top
