March 21, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Banking Standards Board, London, United Kingdom As prepared for delivery Thank you for your kind welcome. I am grateful to the Banking Standards Board for organizing this meeting. For several years, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and the Banking Standards Board have each worked to improve culture within the financial services industry in the world’s two most important financial centers. I would like to especially thank Sir Richard Lambert, Dame Colette Bowe, Alison Cottrell, and the members of their team—all of whom have traveled several times to New York to attend meetings and conferences on this issue of culture. I am very pleased to have the opportunity to reciprocate and to join you today in London. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 This morning, I would like to highlight three issues that are critical to improving culture within the financial services industry: First, defining and clarifying purpose, because clear goals are necessary if one is to assess performance; Second, measurement of how firms and the industry are performing; and Third, whether incentives encourage behaviors consistent with the goals one wishes to achieve. I will then conclude by offering some thoughts on why good culture is critical to success in financial services. Let us start with purpose because it is a prerequisite for the other two. Baroness Onora O’Neill, a member of the Banking Standards Board, was the keynote speaker at the New York Fed’s third culture conference, held in October 2016. Her message to the audience of senior bankers and regulators was a challenge to think about the purpose of their organizations. Namely, what are you for? 2 I believe the question “what are you for” can be a litmus test for a firm confronted with challenges. Let me give you just one example, from the Salz Review in 2013. Employees in the eight divisions of Barclays were asked to state their core values. Three of the eight divisions did not rank “customer service” as a core value. Two of these divisions were retail lines—UK retail banks and the Barclays credit card. The third was the firm’s African subsidiary, which also offered retail banking services. 3 My intent here is not to pick on Barclays. Indeed, the firm should be commended for first commissioning and then publishing the Salz Review—Sir David Walker set an example of leadership in his candor and transparency. Instead, my purpose is to make the point: If you cannot answer the question “what are you for,” or if your answers do not make sense in light of your business, then it is time to re-examine your purpose. For any bank, a statement of purpose should emphasize sustainable success, not short-run profit. This is because of the many important roles that banks play in the economy. They are critical intermediaries between savers and borrowers; they provide essential infrastructure; they support well-functioning financial markets; and they act as custodians of our wealth. These functions require long-term commitment. They should not be erratic or ephemeral. The economy needs a steady supply of competent, honest, and reliable banking services in order to function. That is why any bank should emphasize the long term over the short term. After purpose comes measurement. In the context of culture, however, calculating particular metrics is less important than the goals of such measurement. The first goal is to assess how you are doing compared to what you have set out to do. In other words, are you fulfilling your purpose? The second goal is to assess how you stack up against your peers. In both ways, measurement provides critical benchmarking, without which firms and the industry cannot assess whether they are making progress. Since the beginning of our work on culture, my colleagues and I have recognized that measurement is indispensable to improving bank culture. We have not been alone in this view. At the New York Fed’s first conference on cultural reform, in October 2014, Sir David Walker encouraged banking leaders to measure behavior within their firms in order to promote accountability. Pursuing this theme, several panelists addressed the use of measurement as a corporate governance tool. They argued that standardized metrics could help quantify the judgment and behavior of individual employees, making the behavioral components of annual performance reviews more objective. The same information could also aid a firm’s senior leaders in assessing the effectiveness of their communications about how the firm conducts its business. For my part, I encouraged the industry to collaborate on a common culture survey that could serve as a benchmark for behavior. I also agreed with Sir David that measurement and accountability should not be decoupled. 4 Last week, the BSB published the results of its industry-wide benchmarking survey on culture. This is a critical step forward in the industry’s effort to get better data on how firms are doing on cultural issues, to identify areas for improvement, and to demonstrate a public commitment to improvement. Several facets of the BSB’s report struck me as particularly significant. First, in addition to creating a benchmarking survey—which generated approximately 28,000 responses—the BSB conducted focus groups with junior employees and interviews with senior leaders to add depth to what the survey results indicated. That represents a significant investment of time by the BSB and those who participated in the qualitative review. That commitment is essential for understanding the context and meaning of responses within individual firms. Second, the survey asked respondents to agree or disagree with a number of statements. Those statements were direct and cut to the core of cultural issues in banking. Some of the standouts, in my view, included: “I believe senior leaders in my organization mean what they say.” “In my organization we are encouraged to follow the spirit of the rules (what they mean, not just the words).” “I see people in my organization turn a blind eye to inappropriate behavior.” “If I raised concerns about the way we work, I would be worried about the negative consequences for me.” 5 Third, the results suggest that the respondents did not pull their punches. Nearly 30 percent answered that they would be worried about negative consequences if they raised concerns at work. That shows, perhaps more than any other finding, that there is still a long way to go in creating a culture for long-term success in banking. In addition, approximately one quarter of employees did not affirmatively agree that their organization puts customers at the center of business decisions. That is also of concern if we want an industry that is sustainable over the long term. I encourage you to read the BSB’s report, if you haven’t already. And let me emphasize that the report is not intended as a cudgel or to assign blame. Rather, as I see it, the report gives the industry an opportunity to improve against a benchmark. Again, I want to acknowledge the BSB’s contribution and thank them for all their work. Now the burden shifts from the BSB to you, the industry. What will you do with these results? We all want to see progress on culture and behavior. How will you—both within firms and collectively—move the needle on culture and behavior over the next few years? I suggest that if you want next year’s results to be better than this year’s, you might start by focusing on incentives. As I have argued before, incentives shape behavior, and behavior drives culture. If you want a culture that will support your long-term business strategy, you need to align incentives with the behaviors that will sustain your business over the long haul. 6 Incentives—compensation and promotion, in particular—are powerful tools for communicating the conduct and culture you desire for your firm. Of course, the cultures of firms can and should vary. But, the culture of every bank should share a common theme: stewardship—a word that implies professional care, exercised year after year for the benefit of the firm and its stakeholders. A commitment to the long term must be at the core of banking. Incentives within a firm should support that goal, not undermine it. My emphasis on incentives is not new, but it bears repeating. Bad incentives were a key contributing factor in the financial crisis. In the United States, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission concluded that “Compensation systems—designed in an environment of cheap money, intense competition, and light regulation—too often rewarded the quick deal, the short-term gain—without proper consideration of long-term consequences.” 7 This theme applied to all levels of banking organizations. One notable example was mortgage brokers, who were paid based on the volume of loans they generated, not their quality. 8 The financial crisis came to a head in the fall of 2008. Fast forward eight years to the fall of 2016. Wells Fargo’s chairman and CEO resigned after regulators uncovered what appeared to be widespread fraud in the retail bank. Compensation, once again, seems to be at the center of a scandal. Neighborhood bankers were paid based on the volume of new accounts opened, apparently with utter disregard for whether customers wanted them or even knew about them. And, like mortgage brokers in the early 2000s, it appears that job security depended almost exclusively on meeting targets, regardless of how those targets were met. There was a serious mismatch between the values Wells Fargo espoused and the incentives that Wells Fargo employed. 9 Investigations into what happened at Wells Fargo are continuing, so I will wait before drawing more definitive conclusions. For now, though, it is sufficient to note the powerful role—for good or for bad—that incentives can play in an organization. I understand that making progress on culture is difficult. But, if you want the next round of metrics to look better than the last, use a powerful lever—use incentives. Today’s discussions—here at Mansion House and later at the Bank of England—are evidence that the issue of culture is important to the private and public sectors alike. We have to keep working on this. The public sector must continue to shine a spotlight on the issue, and the industry must continue to demonstrate that it is taking responsibility for its culture. And, culture cannot be a subject that only receives attention because bad conduct has occurred in the recent past. I am convinced that a good or ethical culture that is reflected in your firm’s strategy, decision-making processes, and products is also in your economic best interest, for a number of reasons: Good culture means fewer incidents of misconduct, which leads to lower internal monitoring costs. Good culture means that employees speak up so that problems get early attention and tend to stay small. Smaller problems lead to less reputational harm and damage to franchise value. And, habits of speaking up lead to better exchanges of ideas—a hallmark of successful organizations. Good culture means greater credibility with prosecutors and regulators—and fewer and lower fines. Good culture helps to attract and retain good talent. This creates a virtuous circle of higher performance and greater innovation, and less pressure to cut ethical corners to generate the returns necessary to stay in business. Good culture builds a strong organizational story that is a source of pride and that can be passed along through generations of employees. It is also attractive to clients. Good culture helps to rebuild public trust in finance, which could, in turn, lead to a lower burden imposed by regulation over time. Regulation and compliance are expensive substitutes for good stewardship. Good culture is, in short, a necessary condition for the long-term success of individual firms. Therefore, members of the industry must be good stewards and should seek to make progress on reforming culture in the near term. Thank you for your kind attention, and thank you again to the Banking Standards Board for inviting me to speak and to the Lord Mayor for hosting. I would be happy to answer your questions. 1 Sarah Bell, Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Thomas Noone, and Joseph Tracy assisted in the preparation of these remarks. 2 Onora O’Neill, What is Banking For? , Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Conference: Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue , Oct. 20, 2016. 3 Anthony Salz, Salz Review: An Independent Review of Barclays’ Business Practices 81 (Apr. 2013). 4 A summary of the New York Fed’s October 20, 2014, conference on reforming culture in the financial services industry is available at https://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/events/banking/2014/1020_2014 . 5 Annual Review 2016/2017: The 2016 Assessment & Evidence, Banking Standards Board, March 2017, available at http://www.bankingstandardsboard.org.uk/annual-review-2016-2017/assessment . 6 William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Culture Imperative—An Interbank Symposium , Jan. 11, 2017. 7 Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report xix (Jan. 2011). 8 Id. at 64. 9 In re Wells Fargo , Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Administrative Proceeding 2016-CFPB-0015 (Sept. 8, 2016) (Consent Order) ¶¶ 8-9 (“Respondent set sales goals and implemented sales incentives, including an incentive-compensation program, in part to increase the number of banking products and services that its employees sold to its customers. Thousands of Respondent’s employees engaged in Improper Sales Practices to satisfy sales goals and earn financial rewards under Respondent’s incentive compensation program. During the Relevant Period, Respondent terminated roughly 5,300 employees for engaging in Improper Sales Practices.”). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

March 21, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Bank of England, London, United Kingdom As prepared for delivery First, let me thank Governor Carney, the Lord Chief Justice, and Dame Colette for including me in today’s discussion. It is an honor to be here. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 I also want to thank the Banking Standards Board for its important work on improving standards of conduct in financial services. The effects of this work will, I think, be felt throughout the industry, not just in the City of London. We learned from the LIBOR and FX scandals that poor conduct can proliferate quickly throughout the global marketplace. That’s because short-term thinking—maxing out this year’s compensation bonus or this quarter’s accounting profits—is a catalyst for poor conduct. In contrast, good conduct may take longer to catch on. Good conduct depends on a longer-term frame of reference. It is building a viable career that one can be proud of, and, at the firm level, building franchise value and reputation that takes decades to accomplish. In both cases, though, the same enabling mechanism is at work: culture. Culture—within a firm or across an industry—is not determined primarily by rules or laws, though certainly rules and laws can amplify good or bad attributes. Culture comprises, instead, what people observe and do, resulting in accepted and mostly unspoken norms. Mostly, people look for what succeeds and what does not, and they try to align themselves with the former. If we want to improve culture and conduct, we need to start by being realists about human behavior. At the New York Fed’s culture conference last October, Dame Minouche Shafik observed pragmatically that an end to all misconduct is not the goal of reform. There will always be a few bad apples. Rather, the goals should be far fewer instances of misconduct and far less scope, magnitude and duration when such misconduct inevitably occurs. I submit that the best way to keep problems small is to encourage a culture that spots issues and raises concerns early. In my view, the most dangerous type of culture in finance occurs when people see something wrong but do not say something. I think back to the chat room transcripts from the LIBOR and FX scandals. The way traders communicated so openly about their manipulation of markets makes it hard to imagine that others in their firms did not know what was happening. So, why didn’t those people say something? There are understandable, human tendencies that can cause each of us to avoid rocking the boat. People want to be team players. 2 Those behavioral traits can be amplified through a firm’s culture, which can weigh on one’s willingness to do the right thing. This is, unfortunately, what seems to have occurred at Wells Fargo, one of the largest retail banks in the United States. Whether to obtain a bonus or simply to keep a job, employees felt they had to keep quiet and meet sales targets despite the cost to customers. 3 So, how do you change a culture where silence leads to misconduct? I will offer two ideas that might help and one idea that will not. Here is what will not work: Merely telling your employees to speak up. Cultures do not change simply by exhortation. Eloquent speeches, a well-phrased value statement, and an annual requirement to acknowledge the code of conduct are just not sufficient. That’s the easy one. The two ideas that might work are harder. First, managers have to lead by example. Senior executives must be seen within the firm to expect and respect challenges, and in turn must challenge ideas themselves. And, they have to explain difficult decisions to their employees—sharing not only the news of what they have done, but why. More important, mid-level managers have to do the same. Of course, mid-level managers will not generally behave that way unless they see their senior leadership setting the example. Second, if your organization values people when they raise their hand, your incentives have to reflect that. Employees who speak up should be recognized. The courage it takes to speak up, despite the perceived costs, should be counted as a very positive factor in evaluations. And, where raising one’s hand has saved the firm’s money and reputation by avoiding or keeping a problem small, that action should be rewarded. It’s only natural for an economist like me to consider the issue of unintended consequences. One that comes to mind is creating a culture of distrust and suspicion, where everyone looking over his or her shoulder. That would be unfortunate and costly. But, I think it is more likely that a different culture will result. Instead, talented and conscientious people will be happy to remain at a firm or in the industry because their personal and professional values are well aligned. Such employees will feel relief that they can speak up without fear of reprisal, and they can enjoy a clear conscience for having done the right thing. There is significant value in being able to sleep well at night. Moreover, being receptive to diverse and dissenting views will likely yield better results. It is in the industry’s self-interest to deter silence, not only because money will be saved on fines not incurred for misconduct, but also because better ideas will be brought to the table. I believe that business performance will benefit from having a culture in which people feel empowered to speak up. Let me give you a few examples from my own experience at the New York Fed. I want employees to speak up. That’s why, at the start of my tenure as president, I made it clear that I wanted the “best idea to win,” regardless of where it originated or whether it contradicted something that I thought. In some instances, that will require people to admit mistakes. In that regard, I have to set the example that we all make mistakes, and that recognizing and addressing them head on—and, importantly, learning from them—is the best approach. A few years ago we created a new group at the New York Fed called Integrated Policy Analysis. Its purpose was to consolidate teams from many parts of the organization to develop a more integrated view of the economic and financial environment to help inform our policy responsibilities. I was a strong advocate for the idea. But, after two years of effort, it became clear to me and others that it was not working as well as we had hoped. There were a lot of reasons for that, and in the end we dissolved the group and reassigned the work and staff. I let our employees know that I took a calculated risk and it didn’t work out. By doing this, I aimed to show that when things do not go as planned, the best approach is to address it, not to be silent. I hope that, when our people are confronted with disappointing results in their work, they will do the same. I mentioned earlier that we also need to reform incentives in order to encourage people to speak up. This is hard. I’ll share with you some of the change we have made at the New York Fed, recognizing that we do not have a monopoly on good ideas, nor can we claim to have a perfect culture. Skip-level meetings are common, and occur for the purpose of providing forums for sharing ideas. They are also a signal that escalation of problems matters to us. We offer training for new employees that emphasizes the importance of cognitive diversity and speaking up. We evaluate employees on their level of engagement with colleagues and their willingness to share insights. So, part of getting promoted is contributing diverse views and raising your hand. We have created programs to encourage peer recognition of good ideas, including backing for actionable initiatives selected by staff. This resulted, for example, in ideas like a “share your story” series to create institutional memory of past experiences and lessons learned. None of these ideas is a panacea. And, I know that we have not yet achieved our goal: a culture in which employees perceive that, by raising their hands and challenging what may be an orthodoxy or conventional wisdom, they are contributing to the mission of the New York Fed. I hope, however, that with the right incentives and good leadership models, we can move closer to that ideal state: an organization characterized by fresh ideas and open dialogue. At conferences like these, we tend to focus on the cost of misconduct. But, getting rid of scandals should not be the sole reason for changing culture. 4 The public expects more from the financial sector than a lack of another financial crisis or scandal. The industry would do well to listen to Baroness Onora O’Neill: Think about your purpose. 5 What are you for? Surely, no one would answer that question by saying, “We’re for a lack of misconduct.” Rather, the financial services industry should support a well-functioning, growing economy, reflecting the interests of all its stakeholders. Banking in particular should provide critical intermediation services—the economic infrastructure that allows businesses to grow, families to save and invest, and standards of living to improve over generations for as broad a cross section of people as possible. When society prospers, the financial services industry prospers, too. Creating a culture that encourages and rewards diversity of thought, perspective, and experience is one means by which the industry can both do good and do well at the same time. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Sarah Bell, Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Thomas Noone, and Joseph Tracy assisted in the preparation of these remarks. 2 See Preet Bharara, Criminal Accountability and Culture , Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Conference: Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue , Oct. 20, 2016. 3 In re Wells Fargo , Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Administrative Proceeding 2016-CFPB-0015 (Sept. 8, 2016) (Consent Order) ¶¶ 8-9. 4 To borrow from the English writer Robert Macfarlane, “proof of competence [should not be] derived only from the absence of catastrophe.” Robert Macfarlane, The Old Ways 133 (2012). Macfarlane was describing the navigation of the English Channel by night. In that case, perhaps the proof of competence is the absence of catastrophe. 5 See Onora O’Neill, What is Banking For? , Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Conference: Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue , Oct. 20, 2016. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

March 24, 2017 Posted March 28, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Dr. Olajide Oladipo: President Dudley, can you please share with us the purpose of your trip here today to Queens? President Dudley: So, there are 12 Federal Reserve Banks around the United States, and one of them is the Federal Reserve Bank in New York that sits downtown in Manhattan, and near Wall Street. Our Second District consists of New York, Northern New Jersey, Fairfield County, Connecticut, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. Haven't gotten to the Virgin Islands yet. As part of our Mission, we want to represent the communities in our District, and so four times a year, I get on the road, and I go out to visit people, to find out what's really happening on the ground. It's meeting with businesses, meeting with people from educational institutions, going to visit manufacturing facilities, community development organizations. It's really designed to do two things. One, explain sort of a little bit of what we do – like for example there, in the introduction, talking about this BIS. What the heck is the BIS? Well, BIS is a bank for central banks that sits in Basel, Switzerland. In fact, what did I do last weekend? Well, I was in Basel, Switzerland, at the BIS. This is where central bankers get together from across the world, exchange information with one another. So, the first thing is to explain ourselves to people in the community. Because the Federal Reserve is pretty mysterious in terms of – when I went to grad school even, I wasn't really sure again what the Federal Reserve was. Had to be explained to me. The second thing we do in the community, and this is the more important piece, is to really learn what's going on, on the ground, in the community. What's happening in terms of businesses – are they successful? If they're having trouble, what are the reasons for the trouble? Do they have access to the credit? Can they find people with the job skills they need to support their businesses? What are the challenges in the community, in terms of education, in terms of transportation? Queens, one of the issues is that if you're not located near a subway line, it's pretty hard to get around in Queens, and that has pretty significant implications for people's ability to get to and from work, which is important in terms of economic development. Another issue is the affordability of housing. Queens is actually doing quite well. If you look at the employment growth in Queens over the last few years, it's been very strong. Just like New York City as a whole. But one of the consequences of economic development can be gentrification, where richer people move in and they make housing less affordable for people who have been living here for a much longer period of time. So, all these type of issues that we talk about when we visit. And oftentimes I get some personal stories and anecdotes that are actually pretty valuable to me in terms of how I think about how the economy is operating and what we need to do as the Federal Reserve in terms of how we set monetary policy. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. The economy is coming out of a serious crisis that started in 2008. From your perspective, where do you see the greatest growth in the economy right now? President Dudley: Well, the good news is the economy is actually in a pretty good place right now. Not for everybody, but if you think about the unemployment rate today, it's 4.7%, which is pretty close to what we think is full employment. You could probably push that unemployment rate even lower, but if you did, you'd probably start to have an inflation problem. So, that would not be something that you could sustain over the longer term. The Federal Reserve has two missions: maximum sustainable employment and price stability. And so we're trying to find that balance. Right now we're doing pretty well. We're pretty close to both our objectives. In fact, if you could tell me that we could just stay here for the next 20 or 30 years, I would be very happy with that. So, things are going pretty well. What's driving the economy? I think in the local economy in Queens, it's very dependent on transportation, very high level of transportation employment, in part because of La Guardia and JFK. Those industries are doing quite well. Tourism is important to this region, so New York City has really benefited from tourism. And the fact that people want to live in cities now as opposed to live in suburbs or more rural areas is also helping a lot. In terms of actual employment in this area, you have the transportation component. Healthcare is also very, very important. A lot of uncertainties on that front. Maybe we'll get some resolution of some of those uncertainties today. Also business and professional services is a very important driver of growth in this area. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. From your perspective, which sector do you think is actually propelling the growth? President Dudley: Well, I think – one thing that's been really good for New York City over the last few years, it's become much more diversified as an economy. In the old days, New York City was sort of rise and fall, depending on how the financial services industry was doing, especially the securities industry. And what's happened in the last few years is the securities industry employment has been pretty flat. And the securities industry, while they're making some money, it's not at all as profitable as it was back in the days of 2005, 2006, before the great financial crisis. Now that profitability was a little bit ephemeral because it was not built on a strong foundation. Since then, the city I think has become a lot more diversified. Tourism has become more important. Technology – the technology sector really is about the same size now as the financial services sector. We still see pretty good manufacturing. The hollowing out of the city in terms of manufacturing seems to be over. In fact, manufacturing employment is actually doing pretty well in the city, in certain parts of Queens. It's actually quite supportive. So, in general, it's a pretty positive story. The city still faces challenges. I think one of the most significant ones is going to be: how does the change in the conversation about trade and immigration affect people's willingness to visit New York City? I think there is some prospect that international tourism to New York could decline over the next few years, and that would be something that would hurt the hospitality industry in New York City. So, that's something that we're going to have to keep a close eye on. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. The Dodd-Frank Act, which is often referred to as the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, placed regulations on the financial industry. I wanted to ask you, do you think the removal of the Dodd-Frank Act would be productive for the economy? And if so, why? President Dudley: So removal of the Dodd-Frank Act be productive for the economy? I'm going to give you a little bit more nuanced answer. I don't think it's a question of either the Dodd-Frank Act or no Dodd-Frank Act. I certainly wouldn't want to go back to the world we were in 2006, 2007, because that financial system led to the worst financial crisis that we've had since the Great Depression, and as you know the economy suffered greatly. The unemployment rate climbed over 10%. So clearly, we don't want to go back to that. But at the same time, is the Dodd-Frank Act as it exists today perfect? I doubt it. What I tell people is we really want to be careful not to throw the baby out with the bathwater. What we want is a system where we have banks with adequate capital, adequate liquidity – number one – so the probability of a large bank failing is a lot lower today than it was back in 2006 and 2007. Number two, we want a system where if a large bank were to get into difficulty, we have the ability to resolve it in a way that it doesn't threaten to take down the rest of the financial system. The Federal Reserve intervened in a very unusual and aggressive way in 2008 because the failure of a large financial institution was threatening to basically push the U.S. economy into a Great Depression. We didn't do it because we wanted to save the institution. We did it because we wanted to save the economy. We don't want to be in that situation again. So we need to have a regime in place, so if a large institution were to fail, it doesn't threaten to take down the rest of the financial system. And the third thing we need is we need to a financial system that's robust and resilient to bad economies, to financial stress. One of the things that the Dodd-Frank Act does that I think is important is it mandates central clearing of derivatives activity. Now derivatives activities are things where corporations exchange interest rate payments, fixed income interest rate payments for floating interest rate payments, et cetera. During the pre-Dodd-Frank era, most of these were firm-to-firm. Financial institution to financial institution. Now they're all cleared centrally. This is a tremendous innovation because it reduces the amount of risk in the financial system. The Dodd-Frank Act has one of its chapters or titles all dedicated to the clearing of over-the-counter derivatives. And finally, we have some entities called financial market infrastructures. What is a financial market infrastructure? So, let's say I buy a stock, and then that stock has to be transferred to me through some entity that actually clears and settles that stock transaction. The entity that actually manages that stock transaction – you selling stock to me, or me selling stock to you – that's a financial market utility. They have to be robust as well. And one of the things the Dodd-Frank Act does is it allows the Federal Reserve to have some oversight capacity to make sure that those financial market utilities are sound. So, there are definitely things that could be changed. I think you could definitely relax the regulatory burden on smaller banking organizations because I don't think they pose a systemic threat to the U.S. financial system. I think you could take a look at certain regulations like the Volcker Rule to see if they could be administered in a less aggressive way. So, it's not in my mind a question of Dodd-Frank or no-Dodd-Frank. I think it's a question of better financial reform legislation. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. Just like you said, the economy is picking up now, and at the same time, we are experiencing a kind of upward trend in interest rates. I wanted to ask you, do you think the current movement in interest rates is politically-driven? If not, what is the business reason for the upward movement? President Dudley: Well, if I said it was politically-driven, that would be an unbelievable news story. Because we try to stay as apolitical as possible and set monetary policy, not based on the political winds and fortunes of the different political parties, but what we think is appropriate to keep the economy on an even-keel and to achieve our goals of maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability. So, we're basically trying to set the level of interest rates in a way that will keep the economy close to our objective of full employment, with relatively stable price. It's 2% inflation. That's sort of where we are right now. So, why are we raising interest rates a little bit? First of all, I would point out that the interest rate rise that we've had in place has been extraordinarily gradual. The short-term interest rates that the Federal Reserve sets, the federal funds rate, that range is three-quarters of a percent to 1%. If you lived like I did through the 1970s and '80s, you realize that that's an extraordinarily low level of interest rates. Monetary policy over the last few years has been what we think is accommodative. In other words, it's been supporting economic activity. As we get closer to full employment, we want to make monetary policy a little bit less accommodative because if monetary policy were too accommodative, we would actually get an inflation problem over time. Then the Federal Reserve would have to slam on the brakes, we'd have a recession, people would be thrown out of work. Not a good situation. So, the idea is to have an economy that moves in a smooth way. And so by taking out a little bit of that accommodation, moving up interest rates just a little bit, we think it's more likely that we'll achieve a soft landing and keep the economy about where it is today in terms of employment. So, it's a delicate adjustment. It's not something that's very harsh. We think it's appropriate and necessary. But I think the economy will be able to adjust to this just fine. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. Sometime ago, I think that was 2012, 2013, I took some students to the Federal Reserve Bank. And you do have annual events at the Fed which I attend every year, often in March. A question that came to mind is that the students were very excited when they went to the Federal Reserve Bank. The question I wanted to ask you is what are the skills required to work at the Fed? President Dudley: Well, there's lots of different parts of the Federal Reserve. There isn't one particular skill. There's a lot of economists because we think about how the economy is working and operating and the conduct of monetary policy. There's a lot of people that work on overseeing banks. Supervision is one of our biggest groups. We have a lot of bank supervisors who typically get degrees in public policy or business, and come and work at the Federal Reserve and become bank examiners. We have a lot of people in the Markets Group, which I ran prior to becoming President of the Bank. We monitor the markets. We talk to market participants to understand what's going on. We execute monetary policy on behalf of the Federal Reserve System. We have people that are in Operational Risk, who assess risk. We have people who manage custody accounts for foreign and central banks. We have about $3 trillion of foreign central bank assets in custody at the New York Fed. We have the largest holdings of gold in the world in the vault of the New York Fed, so someone has to protect that. We have a number of people in the Protection and Law Enforcement Services that make sure that the gold is safe regardless of what one of the Die Hard movies implied, that it could be robbed pretty easily. That's not the case. When I became the President of the Bank, I actually rented out the Die Hard movie because I wanted to see if it was plausible – the way they stole the gold from the New York Fed, and it turned out that they sort of glossed over that. There was apparently supposedly a subway line that was really close to the gold vault, and so they just had to punch a little hole in the subway tunnel and the gold vault was right there. But it doesn't really actually work that way. So sorry. My point is, there's a lot of different activities that we do. Obviously in education, Bachelor's or Master's, is sort of I think probably a good place to start. The more analytical skills you can get in terms of math and economics and business – those are the skills that are very attractive to us. Training and public policy because that's what we do, is very important. It's a great place to work. The typical New York Fed employee joins the Bank and says I'm going to be here two, three years. And then the next stop I ask them how long have you been here? “25, 30 years.” Which I think means that it has – it's a good place to work. Reasonable pay, good benefits But mainly, a great culture. People are very committed to what we do. People have a strong sense of mission and integrity. I tell people that one of the great things about working at the New York Fed is there's no moral ambiguity at any day about why I'm going to work. We're there to serve the public interest, and that's a nice thing to think about every day when you go to the office. You don't have to think about, well, why am I doing this exactly? Well, we're trying to serve the public interest, keep the economy on an even-keel, and execute on our mission as the New York Fed. The New York Fed is a little different than the other Reserve Banks because we're really the operational arm of the Federal Reserve System for many, many different things. So, it's sort of interesting. We do policy, and we do operations. Very unlike most central banks around the world, where the policy and operations are all in headquarters down in Washington. In the Federal Reserve it's split, with the New York Fed doing a lot of the operational activities of the Federal Reserve System. It's a pretty cool place. Check us out! Dr. Olajide Oladipo: I will surely do. The Federal Reserve has been around since 1913. How would you compare the 1929 Depression to that of 2008? President Dudley: Well, very different outcome. In 1929, the stock market crash led to a widespread banking panic, where people basically tried to get their money out of banks because they were afraid the banks were going to fail. And of course in the process of trying to pull all those deposits out of the banks, the banks didn't have enough money, so a lot of banks actually did fail. And in fact, in 1933, FDR declared a national banking holiday where all the banks were closed for a period of time. Fortunately, we didn't get to that point during this crisis. The Federal Reserve, and many other people around the world, pulled out all the stops to avoid the collapse of the banking system, of the financial system, and as a consequence, we had a bad recession – worst recession that we've had since in the post-WWII period, but far short of what happened in the Great Depression. The Great Depression, the unemployment rate I think climbed above 20%. The price level, the level of prices dropped by about I think a third. So it was a really absolutely horrendous experience. If you talk to someone like my mother, my mom's 94 years old, she was a relatively young girl during the Depression. She still remembers and talks about it, just incredibly searing. People were out of work for really until WWII. The Crash started in 1929, the U.S. economy really didn't get back to close to full employment, only in the 1940s, and because of WWII. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. President Dudley: So this time was quite a bit different, thank God. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: I'm sure that everybody here invests. And they are ... students in economics and finance. We talk about investment. I wanted to shed light or your perspective on how the fixed income investor performed in the last eight years, please. President Dudley: Well, the fixed income market has been a good place to be because, basically, interest rates have been generally coming down, if you look at long-term bond yields. So, we would like to look at the government debt issue by the U.S. Treasury. Ten-year government debt is trading today about 2.4% which is pretty low, and credit spreads have narrowed over that period. So, fixed income has been a pretty good place to be invested in over the last 8 years. Same thing with U.S. equity market, though, for that matter. If you bought the U.S. equity market at the very bottom in 2009, it's more than tripled in price since then. As an investor, you've done pretty well if you've stayed invested through that entire period. Now, I would expect that fixed income investing is going to be less attractive going forward because interest rates still are at a very, very low level. So, some of the gains that people have seen in fixed income have been really prices going up because interest rates were declining. And I think that you're probably not going to see prices going up a lot because interest rates are declining going forward. So I would guess most likely, most people think that short-term interest rates will gradually rise over the next couple of years. That certainly is what the Federal Open Market Committee expects, and as that happens people generally expect that longer-term interest rates will eventually rise. And so that means that there will probably be a little bit less good returns in the fixed income market compared to the last 8 years. We've had a bull market in fixed income really going back to 1982. My first house I ever bought, mortgage rates at the time were 17%. They're now around 4%. I got financing from the seller. I got a 12% mortgage. I thought it was a really good deal. So now mortgage rates are around 4%. We've had a very, very long bull market in fixed income. People are debating now whether this is the end of that bull market or it's going to go on for a little bit further. So, we'll see. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. If you look at the global economy, it's looking buoyant now. Also the national economy, which is the United States economy, is looking buoyant now. I wanted to ask you, looking at the United States, which region do you think is growing at the moment? President Dudley: I would answer that question, which region is growing at the moment, in two ways. Regionally, in terms of the geography of the United States, it's really the South and West, and this has been a pattern for a long time, that there has been sort of a migration to – when they invented air‑conditioning, they made the South a lot more attractive to people. And so the South and West have been growing faster than the country as a whole for a very long time. Now there are some pockets of weakness there because we had a big collapse in energy prices, so some of the areas in the South and West that are very dependent on the energy sector are probably a little bit less robust. So, that's the first way I would describe it. The second way I would describe it is rural/suburban/urban. There's been a tremendous shift in people's enthusiasm for living in big cities, and that's really one reason why New York City is doing so well because people basically want to live in the big cities, especially younger people. And so you're seeing the cities, especially the big cities, outperform the smaller cities and outperform the rural areas. New York City has actually been very much a beneficiary of this, relative to many other parts of the country. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. I'm sure now that we may have questions from the audience. To my right we have – a stand there. And to my left, we have another. If you have questions, please, students, colleagues? It's time for Q&A. If you have any questions, please. Audience Member: Good morning, and welcome to your college. Although the Die Hard scenario may not work in reality, cybercrime has been a greater threat to the financial system. And recently, it was reported that North Korea was able to illegally transfer monies from a Bangladesh account at the Fed to an account at the Philippines. What's being done to protect funds that are held not only at the Fed but also at other financial institutions? President Dudley: Well, that's a good question. Cybersecurity is a really important activity for us at the Fed. We want to make sure that not only is the Federal Reserve well-protected but also the banks that we supervise are also well-protected against cyber-risk. This is a particularly hard risk to evaluate on any given day because we're trying to improve our defenses, but the bad guys are also improving their capabilities. So, we do a lot of different activities within the bank to make sure that we're secure from a cyber-perspective. For example, we phish our employees, and we send them emails that sort of suggest that if you'll click on this, and if you click on this you get a message from our Information Technology Department that you've been phished and you learn that you have to be a lot more careful about what you actually click on. That's important because a threat can both come from outside, but it can also come from within. The other thing we've done is we're spending a lot of time internationally to try to make the financial system safer by making sure that the payment executer, their systems are secure. So, think of that as Bangladesh. That the messenger, who the person is who's transmitting the payment, this is SWIFT, is secure. And the receiver. So in this case, the New York Fed is secure. That goes for anybody who is executing payments. It doesn't have to be Bangladesh, through the SWIFT, to the New York Fed. It's anybody executing a payment through any payment medium to any receiver. The thing that we're trying to work on internationally is to try to make sure that everyone understands their responsibilities in that chain. So, it's really important that the person executing the payment, that their facilities are secured. What seemed to be the case in the Bangladesh situation was their facilities were not secured, so someone executed a payment that looked completely authentic through the SWIFT pipes to the New York Fed. It was an authentic payment – it looked like an authentic payment when we executed on some of those payments – not all of those payments. So, we need to make sure that that first leg is buttoned up, and also we need to make sure that everyone understands their responsibility along that chain. So, this is something that we take very seriously. We're working also with the institutions that we interact with. One of the things that the Federal Reserve runs – the New York Fed runs – is called FedWire, so if you have to wire money, if someone needs the money immediately, you can wire that through a New York clearinghouse in the CHIPS system, or you can wire that through FedWire. It's really important that – and FedWire interacts with lots of institutions around the country. We need to make sure that all those institutions that interact with FedWire also have their systems secured. So, it's a big issue. We spend a lot of resources on it. We're going to continue to spend a lot of resources on it. We take it very seriously. Audience Member: We welcome you to Jamaica. I'd just like to ask, there have been some other regulatory measures taken over the past couple of decades. As I understand it, they repealed the Glass-Steagall Act and also passed the Sarbanes-Oxley laws. Would you say that these things had any effect on the 2008 recession, or has Congress been more responsible than not for the recession? President Dudley: I think that – well, I think Sarbanes-Oxley is actually – was basically about good financial reporting, good financial accounting. Accountability of the people at the top of the house for all the financial records and statements. The Federal Reserve is not subject by law to Sarbanes-Oxley, but we actually follow Sarbanes-Oxley nevertheless. We think it's good governance. So, I would say Sarbanes-Oxley generally makes the system safer because it makes it much harder for people to – it really deters fraud and manipulation of financial accounts in a way that I think is very, very positive. The second part was? Audience Member: Glass-Steagall? President Dudley: Glass-Steagall. Well, I think that – the Glass-Steagall Act was an act that was passed in the 1930s that basically said that you could either be in commercial banking or you could be in investment banking. You couldn't be in both. And so this is an act that basically forced the Morgan Company to separate into Morgan Stanley and J.P. Morgan. Now what happened was many years later in the 1980s, I actually was involved with this because I was working at J.P. Morgan at the time, people started to say, “Look, if I'm a big commercial bank like J.P. Morgan, I'm losing all my customers who are going to the securities market. I need to follow my customers, but I can't because of Glass-Steagall.” And they found that there was a loophole, Section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act basically said that you can't be principally-engaged in securities activities. So, it meant that you could be engaged but just as long as it wasn't principally-engaged. And so this is a little loophole that a number of firms managed to exploit. And so they actually found a way to get into some securities activities, and then Glass-Steagall Act a number of years later was actually formally repealed because the firms were already, essentially, in the business. Now my own personal view is that I don't think the Glass-Steagall Act had much to do with the great financial crisis. If you look at the firms that got into great difficulty, at the earliest stages – Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, AIG – they really had nothing to do with Glass-Steagall because they really weren't banks and securities firms. They were securities firms and insurance companies. My own view is that the Glass-Steagall Act was not a major – the repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act was not a major factor behind the Great Recession and the financial crisis. Now this is something that people probably would debate. Other people might have somewhat different views. You could repeal the Glass-Steagall Act again. I think it would obviously require a lot of financial corporate restructuring because there are a lot of firms in the U.S. that are in both the securities business and the commercial banking business today. I think that there are links between those two businesses. It probably helps those firms, satisfy the demands of their large corporate clients more easily than if you had to separate them into separate entities. But you could do it. One thing I would say if you do do it, you better have a mechanism in place to make sure that those large securities firms that are left actually are well-regulated, well-capitalized, have enough liquidity, and have access to a lender of last-resort. One of the problems that we had in the financial crisis is there wasn't a good method to lend to securities firms. By law, the Federal Reserve discount window – this is the facility that we have open to commercial banks – were not allowed to have that discount window open to securities firms. So, in the crisis, we had to do extraordinary lending activities to securities firms. We need a better lender of last resort backstop for securities firms. If you decide to repeal Glass-Steagall and separate commercial banks from securities firms, that's not something that I would recommend, but if you were to do that, make sure you have a way of backstopping the securities industry, too, so if a big securities firm gets in trouble it doesn't threaten the entire financial system. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. I'll be expecting questions from students, too. Audience Member: Not a student. President Dudley: But you’re a student of something, right? Audience Member: My concern is MWBEs. I feel that the racist element within our capitalization has not allowed us to participate in the economy on an equal level by having access to capital. The government's asking for 30% on major projects. For example, at LaGuardia, we have a $5 billion project. Contracts to facilitate that will probably be too high for many minority and women-owned businesses. Therefore, if we don't have access to capital, we won't even be allowed to bid on that work. And that's when fraud comes in, when a major contractor proposes to a small contractor, “I'll help you out if you bid, give you give me a number on this contract.” If we had access to capital, we then bid. I'd like you to take a look at what the New York State Department of School Construction Authorities are doing. They worked out a system that allows us to bid on major contracts. If you took a look at that, because we need some ingenious new ways of financing. We don't have a black bank per se. There were 94 black banks across this country, now there's only 23. Some of the banks that's going out of business, I don't think is kosher, but something has to be done to allow us to participate in the marketplace. On your material, you have listed some organizations within the minority community that you deal with. I'd like to recommend some additional organizations. For example, the ones that are primarily interested in the flow of contracts and development. I'm not in a prime area of what's going on today. In addition, for example, we have here at York College one of the best small business development sectors. They're number one in the state a couple of times. President Dudley: I agree with your concern. Is there a question? Audience Member: Yes, what can you do to set up financial resources for minority and women-owned businesses to become involved in the economy? Whether that's establishing a bank – we've asked the controller to control this, let him set up a funding source for us using pension funds, and there's a way to do that, if you look at it. But we need you to be an advocate for us in that area, but help us come up with an ingenious idea for how we can develop access to capital. President Dudley: Well, I certainly agree with the importance of access to capital, and I certainly agree with you in the importance of having minority work enterprises have the ability to participate in economic development and bidding on contracts. We don't have the legal authority to do anything direct, but we have a lot of convening authority. One thing that we do do is we do continuing workshops, conferences, symposiums. We've had a number of things with small businesses on how small businesses can get access to credit, how small businesses can figure out how to export their goods and services. And so this is something that for you to talk to our regional development people on how we could be helpful. Because we definitely think this is an important issue, and we definitely want to be helpful and use the resources we have, both in terms of research and our convening power, to try to take this forward. So, let's have a conversation. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Next question please. I'm still expecting a student. President Dudley: Good morning. My question will be in the form of appeal. This is for small homeowners. Recently, the Fed announced about increasing the interest rate. But I don't know how long the Federal Open Markets Operations committee will actually sit for that. But what I'm appealing for is for that period to be extended. We just came out from an economic recession. Thank God we didn't get to the depression part of that business cycle. Many homeowners basically, particularly small homeowners, they are struggling to fix their credits. And because their credit scores are so terrible, they cannot refinance, and therefore they are locked in with high interest rates – we are talking about thousands and thousands of dollars. Banks are making money off them because they cannot refinance. If you go ahead and increase that interest rates when they are still struggling to pay what they have now, I think many will lose their homes. So, my appeal is for the Fed to please, let the current interest rates stay – give a little bit more room for small homeowners to fix their credit scores so that they can refinance. Thank you. President Dudley: Well, first thing I would say is the level of interest rates are still pretty darn low. The federal fund rate, that's the rate we target, is three-quarters of a percent to 1%. And we've only raised interest rates twice since the end of the Recession eight years ago. It's important to recognize that the trajectory has been very, very shallow because we are aware of some of the issues that you're raising and we're trying to get the balance right. End of the day, what are we trying to accomplish? We want to have an economy that can grow for a long time. So, we want to keep the economy in balance growing at a rate that is sustainable over the medium- to longer-run. What we're trying to do is find that level of interest rates that's just right. Now we recognize that anytime that we change interest rates, it's going to help some people, and it's going to hurt other people. So, on the other side of the story are all the people, like my mom, who are savers and they're unhappy. They've been unhappy for the last eight years because interest rates have been so low. So, we're trying to get that balance right. I think we've been pretty cautious in terms of how we've been raising interest rates because of some of the concerns that you raise. Janet Yellen, who's the Chair of the Federal Reserve, has talked about the headwinds that have been slowing down the U.S. economy. One of those headwinds is exactly what you're talking about, the fact that people are locked into homes because their homes are either underwater, the value of the homes are less than the value of their mortgages, or because their credit-rating was damaged during the Financial Crisis because people lost their jobs, and so their credit-rating was impaired. And so that's really the reason why we've been so delicate and so slow in actually raising interest rates. It's partly exactly what you're talking about. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. Audience Member: Good morning. Thank you for being here. One of the things that we've been looking at here in Southeast Queens is the establishment of CDFIs, additional CDFIs to support the growth and the access to capital of small businesses. Would you comment a little bit about what do you see as the future of CDFIs going forward in this economic climate, and any suggestions that you would have to support us in doing that? Thank you. President Dudley: Well, I guess I sort of think of CDFIs as doing God's work in some ways because the hardest thing for someone with a really good idea and starting a small business is to get that initial bit of capital to establish a track record. Banks, as you know, are reluctant to lend to start‑up businesses because the firms don't have collateral to pledge against the loans, and they don't have a track record of experience. So CDFIs are really the group that can provide that lifeblood to small business enterprises at the start-up stage. It's also very resource-intensive to lend to small businesses, so the economics don't work very well for a for-profit company. So, I'm a big fan of CDFIs. We think it's really an important avenue, especially in less developed areas where getting a small business well-established can create local jobs which can create a virtuous circle in terms of economic development. So, this is something that we definitely want to encourage over time, and anything that we can do to be helpful – we try to partner with the CFI community to be helpful, in terms of providing data, information. We have a lot of very detailed information about the local economies and we can be, I think, helpful in actually providing some information and support to the CDFIs. Audience Member: Good morning. I want to thank you for coming here and sharing some information with us. I have two specific questions I wanted to ask. A lot of us, we've already talked about access to capital, which is a huge thing. For those who don't know, Sen. Sanders is the ranking Democrat on the Banking Committee for New York State. My first question is how do we establish a better relationship with your organization in an effort to – we can get this information that you have and its resources on the grassroot level? And my second question is – President Dudley: All you have to do is give me your card afterwards. Audience Member: Oh, okay. My second question is we've done an assessment of the economic state of Southeast Queens, Sen. Sanders' office, and a majority of our residents here are considered banked and under-banked. My question to you is a lot of ... especially for – we have a huge population of Millennials, we're looking to purchase homes in our area. A lot of us make under $50,000 and probably have some problems with credit. But my question with the home buyers programs is there a way, or how can we have a conversation about increasing the matching funds because the highest that the rates for the federal home buyers program is 4:1. And we want to talk about how we can get that to 10:1 so it can help, it can match the demographics, economic demographics, of our community, so people can start receiving in tangible resources like purchasing a home with the resources that they have. President Dudley: I'm not an expert in the issue of how much money you need to match. I don't think I can speak to that directly. But clearly getting people the resources so that they can become homeowners in a prudent way is a good thing. And what we saw in the financial crisis, in the run-up to the financial crisis, is that we were giving credit to people in an imprudent way. I think as long as it can be done in a prudent way, where people understand the responsibilities, have the income to pay on their mortgages, I think it's something that we definitely want to encourage. So, what I would suggest is give me your card, and I'll give it to the right people in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and we'll have a conversation and see what we can do. This is not something that we could probably be involved in directly, as a funding provider. Legally, we don't have the authority. The Federal Reserve is pretty powerful in terms of monetary policy. But our mandate is also pretty narrow in terms of what we're allowed to do. I remember during the financial crisis, people were coming in and saying, “you should do this, you should do that, you should do that.” And most of the things that they were suggesting that we do were some things that were not actually allowed by the Federal Reserve Act that was passed back in 1913. Come talk to us and we will see what we can do. Audience Member: Greetings, good morning to – or good afternoon to you and your guest. Now while it would be interesting to speak of why the New York Fed and the Atlanta Fed are differing on their economic forecasts, that might be interesting, but I want to speak to something far more local. Far more local. This community, and communities like this, were devastated, were ravaged – and I could use a stronger word – during the financial crisis of 2008. We've never recovered from this. The black community lost approximately 50% of its wealth in four years. 50% of the wealth accumulated from slavery till today lost in four years. No one, of course, was ever jailed for these things, no one was ever – very little punishment, if anything, was done. I understand that while you may want to do or feel strongly it's not the purview of the Federal Reserve – I understand that. Using your researchers at Liberty and other parts of your organization, I need to know what laws that I can put on the books to protect communities like this. We're about to go back into another phase of exotic mortgage-lending, and I will humbly differ with you on Glass-Steagall, of course. We're about to go into another phase of exotic lending. They call it exotic lending. We call it predatory lending, and we pay for it. We can expect that again. What laws can I – what do we need to put on the books to protect communities like this? Liberty and other organizations, research organizations, that you guys have can come up with some of these things. I look forward to speaking with you later today. President Dudley: Okay. On this issue of predatory lending, I mean this is – I think you raised a very good point, and this is something that we actually heard about small business lending when we were up I think in the Bronx awhile back, where, basically, people have these come-ons to lend money to small business, and it seems attractive on the surface, but it turns out that the actual rate of interest that people are paying is prohibitive to be able to run a successful business. So, I think the predatory lending thing is a completely important issue that we do need to address. Obviously, the Small Business Administration can play a role in this. I think we would certainly be interested in having a conversation about it, because I think it is a really serious issue. I mean one of the problems, just more broadly, is financial literacy in the United States. Part of the reason that predatory lending can work is because people don't really have a good idea –they don't know enough about the financial system, about the economy, about what's a good value or not. They just say, “What's my payment going to be next month?” And if the payment is low, they don't look at the fine print about what the payment is going to be not next month, but a year from now, or two years from now. And that's how they get into a great deal of difficulty. So, I think not just working on the predatory loans writ narrow, but also on the issue of financial literacy writ large, I think colleges like this one can do a lot in making sure that when people graduate, they have a level of financial literacy that can help them navigate through the world. The number of scams that are out there now are just extraordinary. Sometimes people will pretend that they're me and they send letterhead out supposedly from me telling people that if they were to send a bunch of money to someone, the New York Fed would release a check for a large amount of money, and people actually believe this. Now, my advice to people always is if something seems too good to be true, it probably is. But unfortunately people offer these things, and it's really quite tragic, because the people who fall for these things often are people that are not so sophisticated, of not so large means, and they can't afford to be sending money to fraudsters hoping that there might be a big prize from the Federal Reserve Bank in New York or somewhere else down the road, which of course there's not. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. I think we have – I just have time to take only one more question. Audience Member: Actually, the question I wanted to ask is for the students. Why do you refuse to ask questions? Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Somebody wants to ask now. Thank you. Audience Member: How are you, sir? My question for you today is what are, or were, your daily habits or rituals that helped you get to the level of success that you have today? President Dudley: Oooh, I can't think of any rituals. Habits. I guess what I would say is I've always just tried to learn more. So basically, it's always about trying to find opportunity to, what I call, grow my human capital. So, I think – my view of the way to success is find a job that's interesting to you, because you need that passion about what you do. If you don't have passion about what you do, it's not going to feel like a lot of fun and you're not going to do it with a great enthusiasm. So, if it's not fun and you're not enthusiastic, you're probably not going to do very well at it. So, the first thing is to find something that you're really liking, you're enthusiastic about. And two, basically find something where you can continue to learn. If you get into a job and you've been in the job for a long time and you're doing the same thing, you've sort of mastered the job, then it's probably time to move on. I was at a large investment bank for many years – 20 years to be exact – and I decided at the end of 2005 that I was going to retire because there was no job that they had that they would give me that I wanted. And vice versa. There was no job I wanted that they would give me. So it was sort of, I can keep doing my same job of being the Chief U.S. Economist and continue to do that for a great many, many years. But at that point I felt I was no longer learning so much. I was bringing in a little bit less enthusiasm to the job, and so, it was time for a change. I didn't know what that change was, and after I announced I was retiring, Tim Geithner, who was the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the time, called me up. First conversation was, he asked me if I'd be an advisor at the New York Fed. I said, “Tim, that's a great job. I really like you, I'd love to work with you, but what do I do the 39 other hours of the week besides advise you?” And then a couple of weeks or months later, I can't remember exactly how long it was, he called up again and said, “Well, how would you like to come to the New York Fed and run the Markets Group?” Markets Group at the time had about 230 employees. They executed monetary policy for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. I wasn't sure I was going to have any time to talk to Tim Geithner in that role. And so I said yes immediately. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: You have a question? Are you a student? Audience Member: Yes, I am. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: Thank you. Audience Member: I am a student. Thank you so much for taking the time and speaking to us. My question was, being from a younger generation, I'm definitely interested in investing, but what would be your biggest piece of advice. Especially for us, the younger generation, with a limited budget, what would you – how should we go about it? President Dudley: Well, I don't think I've ever been asked for investing advice before now. It's probably not appropriate for the Federal Reserve to give out investing advice. I think the first thing is you want to get knowledgeable. I think the first thing is you want to get some knowledge before you start to invest. And recognize that there are no quick, get-rich-quick schemes. If something seems to be too good to be true, it probably is. I remember when I got out of college, back in 1974, a long time ago, I decided – I had this very small amount of money that my great-grandmother left to me, I think it was $2,000, and I decided I was going to go out and invest. And I have to say, at the beginning, I didn't really know what I was doing. But I read a lot of books and I got really pretty well educated. There's a lot of good books in the market, and I think you can actually educate yourself. And if you do that I think then you can start to gingerly start to invest. And you'll learn as you go. It's a long journey. I've learned things as I invested over the years. Now I don't do anything, but I'm sort of retired from investing in my current role. But part of that I found that I kept learning it over a very long period of time. So, it wasn't like the journey of knowledge was over at any point in time. But first thing is to find a really good book on investing, and read that. When I did it, I read probably five or ten different books, and that gave me a good sort of basis for thinking about investing. But before investing, make sure you have that $400 that you need in case an emergency comes up. Audience Member: Thank you. President Dudley: Thank you. Dr. Olajide Oladipo: With two good questions from our students, I think I'm comfortable now to bring the discussion to an end. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

March 30, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the University of South Florida Sarasota-Manatee, Sarasota, Florida As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to be here today. I would like to thank the University of South Florida for sponsoring this conference. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 One aspect of today’s event is the dedication of a financial laboratory to help students learn about financial markets, which I think has great value. Knowledge of how financial markets operate is an important aspect of financial and economic literacy, and it leads to greater financial security over time. For example, one important lesson is that when the promised returns on an investment offering are extraordinarily high, it is because the investment is either very risky or fraudulent. When investing, it is important to remember that if it seems to be too good to be true, it likely is! Today, I want to take the opportunity to talk about the importance of financial markets in influencing the economic outlook and, in turn, U.S. monetary policy. This is a subject near and dear to my heart. Nearly 20 years ago—when I was working in the private sector—my colleagues and I introduced an index of financial conditions. 2 I believe that my long-standing focus on financial conditions has, over time, helped me become a better economic forecaster. And, I am pleased that economists and analysts increasingly incorporate financial conditions into their assessments of the economic outlook. As I will argue, financial conditions in the United States play an important role in influencing economic conditions. Because movements in financial markets are a major factor influencing broader financial conditions, it is necessary to understand how financial market developments can affect the economic outlook and, therefore, the appropriate setting of monetary policy. But, this story gets more complicated, as the setting of monetary policy, in turn, affects market developments and financial conditions. This two-way feedback is an important feature of the interaction between financial conditions and monetary policy. To begin, let me be clear about what we mean by “financial conditions.” Focusing on the United States, financial conditions can be broadly summarized by five key measures: short- and long-term Treasury rates, credit spreads, the foreign exchange value of the dollar, and equity prices. Although many other measures and prices can also be included in one’s assessment, I think these five are the most essential. 3 In the conduct of monetary policy, the FOMC does not have targets for either specific components of financial conditions or for financial conditions more broadly. We care about financial conditions not for themselves, but instead for how they can affect economic activity and ultimately our ability to achieve the statutory objectives of the Federal Reserve—maximum employment and price stability. Let me provide a few examples. A decline in mortgage rates can lift the demand for owner-occupied housing and support construction activity. A rise in equity prices can boost household wealth, which is one factor that underpins consumer spending. The foreign exchange value of the dollar can affect the relative competitiveness of importers and exporters, which, in turn, influences the country’s trade performance. Narrower credit spreads can reduce the cost of capital for business and help support greater business investment. In sum, financial conditions affect households’ and firms’ saving and investment plans, and, therefore, play a key role in influencing economic activity and the economic outlook. This is why the evaluation of financial conditions is so crucial in the conduct of monetary policy. The FOMC traditionally implements monetary policy by adjusting the federal funds rate—the short-term interest rate paid by banks that borrow reserves from other financial institutions. However, few economic decisions directly depend on the federal funds rate. Rather, changes in the federal funds rate affect the economy through their impact on other interest rates, which, consequently, influence broader financial conditions. If financial conditions moved predictably with the policy rate, then there would be no need for the FOMC to focus on financial conditions. In such a world, by adjusting the level of the federal funds rate, the FOMC could be fully confident that it could generate the appropriate financial conditions necessary to support achievement of full employment and price stability. In fact, the response of financial conditions to changes in short-term interest rates is not rigid and predictable. Instead, as we shall see shortly, the linkage between the federal funds rate and financial conditions changes over time, as it is influenced by a whole host of other factors. Recent evidence suggests that even the relation between short-term and long-term rates has shifted substantially over the past 15 years. 4 Moreover, at times, we have observed cases in which financial conditions did not move in the same direction as the monetary policy stance. Let me highlight two recent divergences which indicate that we need to keep a separate eye on the evolution of financial conditions. The first occurred in the mid-2000s. In June 2004, the FOMC decided to begin raising the federal funds rate target in order to remove policy accommodation. It raised the target in 25-basis-point increments at 17 consecutive meetings, pushing the rate up from a starting point of 1.0 percent to a peak of 5.25 percent. Despite this tightening of monetary policy over two years, financial conditions failed to tighten in a similar manner. This can be seen by looking at the behavior of well-known measures of financial conditions during this period (Exhibit 1) . The rise in short-term rates was offset by a decline in long-term yields, a rise in equity prices and narrower credit spreads. In contrast, there have been times when financial conditions tightened even as the FOMC reduced short-term interest rates. For example, consider what happened during the heart of the financial crisis. Even as the FOMC lowered the federal funds rate in the fall of 2008—eventually hitting its effective lower bound that December—credit spreads widened sharply, household and business loan underwriting standards tightened sharply, liquidity in many financial markets dried up, and the U.S. stock market plummeted. Financial conditions tightened despite the aggressive easing of monetary policy during this period. There are many explanations for why the relationship between the federal funds rate and financial conditions is so variable. Without being exhaustive, let me highlight three. First, animal spirits in financial markets wax and wane, pushing asset values up or down in a manner that can more than offset the effects of movements in short-term interest rates. The movements in many financial markets following last year’s presidential election are a notable example of this phenomenon. Second, domestic financial conditions are influenced by what happens abroad. If the monetary policy of major U.S. trading partners becomes easier relative to policy in the United States, then it could lead to a dollar appreciation that would weigh on U.S. trade performance, all else equal. Third, financial instability and stress can cause risk-averse investors to increase their demand for safe assets. This can push up risk premia and credit spreads, and push down stock prices—which can more than offset the impact of an easier monetary policy. Divergences between short-term interest rates and financial conditions often appear to be larger and more persistent in the United States than in most other advanced economies. There are several reasons for this. First, the U.S. financial system depends less on its banking system to intermediate financial flows than in other countries. The share of credit supplied by the banking sector fluctuates around 50 percent in the United States, which is much lower than in the euro area, Japan and the United Kingdom (Exhibit 2) . Second, in contrast to most other countries, U.S. residential housing is financed mainly by 30-year fixed-rate mortgages, rather than—as is the case in most other countries—adjustable-rate mortgages with rates that much more closely track their central banks’ short-term interest rate targets. Third, the equity market plays a much more important role in the United States than elsewhere. The total market capitalization of the U.S. equity market is considerably higher than in the euro area and Japan (Exhibit 3) . Because the evolution of financial conditions can diverge from the path of the federal funds rate, financial conditions need to be carefully considered in the conduct of monetary policy. However, I want to reiterate that what we care about is not financial conditions themselves, but rather their influence on economic activity. Accordingly, we should care much more about longer-term movements in financial conditions than about higher-frequency, transitory movements. That is because behavior in firms and households will be influenced much more by how financial conditions evolve over time, rather than by where they happen to be at a particular moment. To emphasize this point, let me give two contrasting examples—one where financial conditions moved sharply but not persistently, and another where financial conditions moved systematically over a longer time period. We will see that it is the long-lived movements that have the largest influence on the economic outlook. For the first example, consider the U.S. equity market in 1987. The S&P 500 index began the year at 242, shot up to a peak of 337 in August (an increase of almost 40 percent) and plummeted to a trough of 225 in October (a fall of 33 percent). When the stock market fell more than 20 percent on October 19th—which came to be known as “Black Monday”—many feared that the decline would lead to a recession. After all, that crash was the largest-ever one-day percentage decline of the U.S. stock market. But, no recession occurred. Importantly, households sustained their spending despite the sharp decline in household wealth. This happened, in part, because household spending had not yet responded much to the sharp run-up in stock prices earlier in the year, so consumer spending turned out to be relatively insensitive to the market’s sharp reversal. In addition, the damage from the sharp stock market decline was mitigated by the Federal Reserve’s commitment “to serve as a source of liquidity to support the economic and financial system.” 5 A contrasting example is the sharp appreciation of the dollar that began in 1978 and reached a peak in March 1985. The persistent strength of the dollar had a significant negative consequence for U.S. trade performance. Our trade deficit widened sharply in 1985 and 1986, which contributed to the sharp slowdown in U.S. manufacturing production growth—and a milder slowdown in GDP growth—over this period. This leads to an important question: When should the FOMC take changes in financial conditions into consideration in its conduct of monetary policy? I don’t think there is a simple answer. Financial conditions matter in influencing the economic outlook, but so do many other factors. It is true that monitoring financial conditions can help improve the effectiveness of the policy decision-making process. However, as I hope is clear from my previous examples, there is no mechanical link between policy rates and financial conditions that monetary policymakers can systematically rely upon to set policy. Another key question is what one should focus on in assessing financial conditions. Again, I don’t think there is a simple answer, as the significance of any particular aspect of changes in financial conditions depends on the economic circumstances and environment. In the early- to mid-2000s, the combination of looser mortgage underwriting practices and home equity withdrawal were major financial factors contributing to that economic expansion. The subsequent housing crash was exacerbated by the sharp reversals of mortgage lending standards and home equity withdrawal, which together contributed to the severity of the Great Recession. Today, these factors seem less important because lending practices in the housing market have been much more stable in recent years. The importance and complexity of financial conditions also underscore the need for caution in following any mechanical monetary policy rule. For example, the most well-known rule—the Taylor Rule—does not explicitly take financial conditions into account in terms of its monetary policy prescription. In that rule, the federal funds rate depends only on the deviations of output from its potential and inflation from the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent objective, and on the level of the real short-term interest rate consistent with a neutral stance of monetary policy. Because the interactions can shift between financial conditions and the economic outlook—as well as between financial conditions and the federal funds rate—the absence of financial conditions in this rule can cause it to perform poorly as a guide for monetary policy. As a case in point, consider what the 1999 variant of the Taylor Rule indicated as the appropriate monetary policy setting in September 2008, just prior to the failure of Lehman Brothers. In the Bluebook document that the Federal Reserve Board staff prepared for the September 2008 FOMC meeting, the 1999 Taylor Rule called for a federal funds rate setting of 3.5 percent for the fourth quarter of 2008, well above the 2 percent setting at the time of the meeting. The standard 1993 Taylor Rule—which puts a greater weight on inflation—called for an even higher federal funds rate target of 4.1 percent. Given the rapid deterioration in financial conditions, instead of following the prescription from these rules, the FOMC cut the federal funds rate rapidly over the next three months, pushing the federal funds rate down to a range of 0 to a quarter of 1 percent by year-end. Consistent with this episode, such rules often perform poorly at times when the economic environment and outlook are rapidly changing. This is one important reason why I do not support proposals that would require the Federal Reserve to explain to Congress whenever its federal funds rate target deviates from a particular prescriptive monetary policy rule. As Federal Reserve Chair Yellen explained in a recent speech, not only are there a plethora of rules to choose from, but following any monetary policy rule in a perfunctory manner would likely lead to inappropriate monetary policy at times—especially during economic turning points when the outlook is changing rapidly. 6 Also, requiring the Federal Reserve Chair to explain frequently why the FOMC had deviated from a particular rule would unduly impinge on the ability of the FOMC to conduct monetary policy in a manner insulated from short-term political considerations. Of course, Congress has the right to hear from the Federal Reserve about its conduct of U.S. monetary policy. There are already several opportunities, including regular testimony and semiannual monetary policy reports. If Congress desires, such communications could become more frequent or enhanced. But, my point is that these exchanges should not be triggered by deviations from a mechanical rule. And, of course, I feel that this is especially true for a rule that does not account for financial conditions. Now that I have expounded upon the importance of financial conditions, I would like to discuss their implications for the current stance of U.S. monetary policy. As I see it, there were a number of factors behind the FOMC’s decision in March to take another step in gradually removing accommodation by raising the federal funds rate target by 25 basis points to a range of three quarters of a percent to 1 percent. Most importantly, the economy has continued to grow modestly above its sustainable long-term pace. This has led to continued, sturdy monthly job gains and a gradual diminution of the amount of slack in the U.S. labor market. Forward-looking indicators foreshadow a continuation of this trend. For example, household and business confidence has increased markedly over the past few months. The economic outlook abroad also appears to have brightened. Growth has picked up in Europe. Commodity prices have risen, reducing the pressure on emerging market economies that are major commodity exporters. There are still significant uncertainties and risks abroad, but overall, these risks seem significantly lower than they were a year ago. Inflation has moved closer to our 2 percent longer-run objective. Headline inflation on a year-over-year basis has moved up in the past few months as the sharp declines in energy prices in late 2015 and early 2016 have fallen out of the calculation. Core inflation—which ignores the more volatile movements in energy and food prices—also has moved slightly higher. Over the 12 months through January 2017, the core personal consumption expenditure deflator has risen at about 1.75 percent, up from 1.6 percent a year earlier. Thus, I have become more confident that inflation will stabilize around the FOMC’s objective over the medium term. While there is still considerable uncertainty about fiscal policy and its potential contribution to economic activity, it seems likely that it will shift over time to a more stimulative setting. Consequently, it appears that the risks for both economic growth and inflation over the medium to longer term may be shifting gradually to the upside. Even after the latest increase, the federal funds rate target range at three quarters of a percent to 1 percent is still unusually low in both nominal and inflation-adjusted terms. While most FOMC participants judge the equilibrium short-term real interest rate that is consistent with a neutral monetary policy to be low—perhaps in a range of 0 to 1 percent—this is still above the current inflation-adjusted federal funds rate. In such circumstances, it seems appropriate to scale back monetary policy accommodation gradually in order to reduce the risk of the economy overheating, and to avoid a significant inflation overshoot in the medium term. Finally, prior to the March FOMC meeting, financial conditions were generally easing rather than becoming tighter, even as the FOMC raised its policy rate in December and market participants increasingly expected further policy tightening in the coming year. Between the December and March FOMC meetings, U.S. equity prices rose by about 4 percent, and credit spreads, such as those for high-yield bonds, narrowed. Long-term yields and the trade-weighted dollar were little changed over this period. William McChesney Martin, the ninth chair of the FOMC, once famously opined that the Federal Reserve is “in the position of the chaperone who has ordered the punch bowl removed just when the party was really warming up.” I don’t think we are removing the punch bowl, yet. We’re just adding a bit more fruit juice. Before I conclude, let me make a few comments about the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. As you are undoubtedly aware, the Federal Reserve dramatically expanded the size of its balance sheet during and following the financial crisis to provide accommodation to support the economy when short-term interest rates were constrained by their effective lower bound. Currently, we are reinvesting maturing Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities repayments to keep the size of the balance sheet generally stable. We have said that we plan to continue this policy of reinvestment until we are well along in the process of normalizing the level of the federal funds rate. As the FOMC has raised the federal funds rate three times, this process seems to have proceeded smoothly so far, prompting renewed interest in our balance sheet and reinvestment policy. The anticipation of and actual announcement by the FOMC of changes in reinvestment policy is likely to push up longer-term interest rates and tighten financial conditions somewhat, just as the earlier purchases pushed down long-term interest rates. To what extent is difficult to judge. Presumably, financial conditions would tighten by more if we were to end reinvestments earlier and more abruptly. This suggests a better course may be to taper reinvestments gradually and predictably. In addition, because changes in reinvestment policy will likely tighten financial conditions, we will have to take this into account in our interest rate decisions. My view is that reducing the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet and raising short-term interest rates are two different, yet related, ways of removing monetary policy accommodation. Therefore, I would expect that, when we begin to end reinvestment, we will have to consider the implications for the appropriate short-term interest rate trajectory. In conclusion, financial conditions are important. They matter enormously to monetary policy because their movements can often diverge from the trajectory of short-term rates, and because they affect economic activity and the economic outlook. While it is essential to account for financial conditions appropriately in conducting monetary policy, it is also important not to overreact to every short-term wiggle in financial markets. In addition, it is important to remember that the policy goal is not the level of financial conditions per se, but the achievement of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate objectives. Sometimes, that will be consistent with easing financial conditions, and at other times, it will be consistent with tighter financial conditions. At all times, our focus will be on achieving our objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability, thereby supporting the livelihoods of households and businesses throughout the United States. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Ozge Akinci, Nicola Cetorelli, Richard Crump, David Lucca, Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See William Dudley and Jan Hatzius, “The Goldman Sachs Financial Conditions Index: The Right Tool for a New Monetary Policy Regime,” Goldman Sachs Global Economic Paper Number 44, 2000. 3 For a discussion of various financial conditions indexes see Jan Hatzius, Peter Hooper, Frederic S. Mishkin, Kermit L. Schoenholtz, and Mark W. Watson, “ Financial Conditions Indexes: A Fresh Look after the Financial Crisis ,” U.S. Monetary Policy Forum (Chicago: Chicago Booth Initiative on Global Markets, 2010) pp. 3-59. 4 Samuel G. Hanson, David O. Lucca and Jonathan H. Wright (2017), “ Interest Rate Conundrums of the 21st Century ,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 810, March. 5 Carlson, Mark, “ A Brief History of the 1987 Stock Market Crash with a Discussion of the Federal Reserve Response ,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2007-13, Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, November 2006. 6 Janet L. Yellen, “ The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy ,” speech at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California, January 19, 2017. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Opening Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on Household Borrowing, Student Debt Trends and Homeownership - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on Household Borrowing, Student Debt Trends and Homeownership April 03, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on Household Borrowing, Student Debt Trends and Homeownership, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning, and welcome to the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing. Today, we will focus on recent developments in household borrowing, with special attention on student debt. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Following a period of steady deleveraging that began during the Great Recession, households have gradually increased their borrowing during the past three years. Later this year, total household debt is expected to reach its previous peak, from the third quarter of 2008. Given past experience, one might wonder whether this level of indebtedness is sustainable or a reason for concern. Answering this question requires a fuller consideration of household balance sheets and a deeper analysis of who is indebted. The increase in liabilities in recent years has been accompanied by significant improvements in the value of assets held by households, due to strong growth in housing and stock prices. Moreover, household incomes have been rising at a moderate pace due to sturdy job gains and modest wage increases. As a result, the household sector’s financial condition today is in unusually good shape for this point in the economic cycle. In relative terms, household indebtedness is low, and—thanks in part to low interest rates—debt service burdens relative to household income have fallen to levels not seen since at least the early 1980s. As we will show in today’s presentation, compared to 2008, a greater proportion of overall debt today is now held by older households that have higher and more stable incomes and more experience as borrowers, on average. Consequently, a much larger proportion of debt is currently held by borrowers with higher credit scores. The resulting higher overall debt quality is reflected in historically low overall delinquency rates. Transition rates into new delinquency are below the levels of the early 2000s, and foreclosure and bankruptcy rates in 2016 are the lowest since our data series began in 1999. Notwithstanding this overall rosy picture, the improvement in aggregate debt quality and performance conceals important underlying changes in debt holdings that could be consequential, with implications for the housing market and for consumer spending over the longer term. While older borrowers hold more debt of all types, there has been a significant shift among younger people toward student debt and away from mortgage and other debt. Student debt has increased more than fivefold over the past 14 years, with more young adults taking out loans and borrowing larger average amounts. And, while debt delinquency rates overall have fallen, those for student debt have remained elevated. Since 2012, the New York Fed has devoted considerable attention to the rapid growth in student debt levels and delinquencies by publishing a number of reports. The findings in these reports were largely based on data from our Consumer Credit Panel (CCP), a nationally representative dataset sourced from Equifax credit reports. This unique dataset has enabled us to provide new insights into the overall state of the student loan market and into individual student loan borrowing and repayment behavior not available from other data sources. Today, we will first provide a brief overview of aggregate household debt and its borrowers, followed by a presentation based on new research on student debt, which focuses on delinquency and repayment rates. We find that recent cohorts of college students are defaulting at a lower rate than those who left higher education during the recession. But, at the same time, their repayment rates are also lower. Despite an improving labor market, overall delinquency rates on student debt remain stubbornly high, and repayment progress has slowed further, likely reflecting the recent introduction of more accommodative payment plans. Payment progress is particularly low for those with larger debts and for those from lower-income areas. Much remains to be learned about the causes of the observed expansion of debt burdens and repayment problems among recent college graduates. Over the past two decades, there has been a significant change in the financing of higher education—with state and local funding covering a smaller share, and students and their families bearing a greater proportion of rising college costs. While the federal student loan program has undoubtedly helped mitigate the impact of higher costs on college enrollment, more students now leave college with higher amounts of debt. At the same time, college dropout rates remain stubbornly high, and empirical evidence indicates that graduates from some colleges have had trouble finding good-paying jobs. Another important question concerns the consequences of growing student debt for the overall economy. To investigate this question further, we linked our CCP dataset to student enrollment records from the National Student Clearinghouse in order to analyze the relationship between homeownership, educational attainment and student debt. Not surprisingly, our research shows a strong positive association between educational attainment and homeownership, consistent with the fact that higher educational attainment is associated with higher average earnings. Interestingly, this relationship appears to hold irrespective of family background, suggesting that colleges may be successful in “leveling the playing field” across students from different socioeconomic backgrounds. At the same time, our analysis reveals that those with significant student debt are much less likely to own a home at any given age than those who completed their education with little or no student debt. This finding is consistent with other past and ongoing research here at the New York Fed that points to the potential longer-term negative implications of student debt on homeownership and other types of consumer spending. Of course, homeownership is more than just consumption—it has historically been an important form of wealth accumulation. For a large share of households, housing equity is the principal form of wealth. Thus, changes in the way we finance post-secondary education could also have important implications for the distribution of wealth. Before turning it over to my colleagues, I would like to comment briefly on the importance of college costs, financing and access to higher education. It is well known that the average earnings premium from having a college education is high and has risen over the past few decades, in part because of a decline in real average earnings for those without a college degree. In addition to higher earnings, a college education is associated with increased homeownership, as I just discussed. The economic and social returns to having a well-educated and skilled labor force are also well documented. However, I would like to highlight another important role of higher education: it is a pathway to and engine of upward income mobility. I believe that income mobility—the degree to which individuals or families can move up or down in the income distribution over time—is a foundational element for a well-functioning society and indicates the ability of an economy to provide opportunities for all. As I have discussed previously, important research by Stanford economist Raj Chetty and his co-authors has shown that intergenerational income mobility in the United States—a child’s chances of moving up in the income distribution relative to his or her parents—has remained stable over the past half century. 2 However, because of the increase in income inequality and stagnant or declining incomes for the least well-off, the consequences of being born to low- versus high-income parents are greater today than in the past. These trends have contributed to a steady decline in “absolute” upward income mobility in the United States, as defined by the share of children who earn more in real terms than their parents. This fraction has fallen from 90 percent to 50 percent over the past half century. Recent work by Chetty and his co-authors has investigated the importance of higher education in achieving upward mobility. They find that many highly qualified lower-income students do not attend selective colleges, while those low- and middle-income students who do—despite facing greater challenges—fare almost as well as affluent students who attend the same colleges. Their research also indicates that some colleges are better engines of upward income mobility than others, and that colleges that offered the largest number of low-income students pathways to upward mobility have become less accessible to them during the 2000s. As a result, higher-education’s contribution to increasing intergenerational mobility has diminished. It is unclear why access has fallen to colleges with relatively high mobility rates. One possibility is that recent budget cuts may have forced these colleges—which tend to be mid-tier public institutions—to raise tuition and change their admissions policies more than other institutions, such as less budget-constrained elite private institutions. Empirical evidence points to a greater sensitivity to college costs in the higher education decisions of low-income populations. As a result, continued increases in college costs and debt burdens could inhibit higher education’s ability to serve as an important engine of upward income mobility. In my view, these developments are important and deserve increased attention. Thank you for your kind attention. I will now turn it over to Wilbert van der Klaauw, who will give a brief overview of the current state of household debt. 1 Andrew Haughwout, Joseph Tracy and Wilbert van der Klaauw assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See Economic Opportunity and Income Mobility , Remarks at the Association for Neighborhood and Housing Development Annual Community Development Conference, April 11, 2016. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

April 07, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Princeton Club of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today on the important topic of financial regulatory reform. As always, what I have to say reflects my views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 A robust financial system is central to our economic well-being. The financial crisis and the Great Recession wreaked havoc on millions of American households and businesses, and much of this damage was due to a flawed regulatory framework. In particular, many large banks and securities firms had inadequate capital and liquidity buffers, and the financial system had a number of important structural weaknesses that made it vulnerable to stress. In response, legislators and regulators made significant changes to strengthen our regulatory framework. Importantly, as we consider further changes, we must avoid throwing the baby out with the bathwater. As I see it, an effective regulatory regime for the financial system must do three things: Ensure that all financial institutions that are systemically important have enough capital and liquidity so that their risk of failure is very low, regardless of the economic environment. Have an effective resolution regime that allows such firms to fail without threatening to take down the rest of the nation’s financial system, and without requiring taxpayer support. Preserve the important structural changes put in place since the financial crisis that make the financial system more resilient to shocks. These include the centralized clearing of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, better supervision and oversight of key financial market utilities, and the reforms of the money market mutual fund industry and the tri-party repurchase funding (“repo”) system. In contemplating changes to the regulatory regime, the good news is that the U.S. financial system is much sounder today than it was on the eve of the financial crisis. The quantity and quality of capital and liquidity for U.S. banks have markedly improved, meaning that the banking industry can support the economy even under considerably more adverse economic conditions. And, although returns on equity have dropped as balance sheet leverage has declined, banks remain profitable enough to cover their cost of capital and continue to serve their household and business customers. Much of this progress is due to regulatory changes enacted since the crisis. In addition to buttressing the capital and liquidity standards for major banks, the regulatory community has made significant strides in many other areas. We developed a resolution framework for systemically important banks that better enables a failing bank to recapitalize with less risk to the rest of the financial system, and in a way that should not require taxpayer assistance. We reformed key segments of the financial system such as the money market mutual fund industry. We reduced the aggregate risk in the system by mandating the centralized clearing of OTC derivatives. And, we strengthened the prudential oversight of those systemically important financial market utilities (FMUs) that clear such activity. Collectively, these reforms make the system more robust and resilient to the failure of a large, systemically important institution. Thus, we have made considerable progress toward ending a regime in which some financial firms were “too big to fail.” We want to avoid the unfortunate situation where authorities are faced with a Hobson’s choice: save a failing firm to prevent it from taking down the entire financial system, or allow the firm to fail but risk the collapse of the financial system. Nearly a decade ago, we suffered the worst financial and economic crisis since the Great Depression. In fact, we were perilously close to experiencing another depression. The harm the crisis caused Americans can only be described as catastrophic. From November 2008 to April 2009, the economy lost an average of 700,000 jobs per month. Total employment in the United States fell by nine million jobs, and the unemployment rate rose to more than 10 percent. There was also a broad-based decline in home prices—about 30 percent on average, nationally. As a result, nearly 8 million foreclosures occurred, and the homeownership rate declined to levels not seen since the late 1980s. The crisis exposed many significant structural weaknesses in the U.S. and global financial systems. Among them: Systemically important firms were allowed to operate with inadequate amounts of capital and insufficient liquidity buffers, and were overly reliant on short-term wholesale funding. They were excessively complex and interconnected with each other and with the shadow banking system. Large firms came up woefully short in monitoring, measuring and controlling the risks that could—and did—materialize under stress. Securitization markets suffered from a number of defects, including poor design for many securitized products and misaligned incentives in the credit ratings regime. This led to inflated credit ratings for many mortgage securitizations that subsequently performed poorly as mortgage delinquencies increased. There were significant problems in funding and derivative markets, including flaws in tri-party repo, money market mutual funds that were vulnerable to runs, and massive and opaque bilateral OTC derivative exposures. Finally, all of these problems were magnified by the lack of a good resolution process for large, complex financial firms that got into trouble. As a result, policymakers were forced to develop ad hoc interventions to contain contagion and to prevent the collapse of the U.S. financial system. We should never forget how close we came to a full-blown depression, and we must resolve to never allow a return to conditions like those that existed prior to the financial crisis. That said, it is entirely appropriate to take a critical look at the changes that were made to the regulatory regime. While we do not yet have evidence of how these reforms will hold up during the next economic downturn, many have been in place long enough that we can begin to evaluate their efficacy. In such an evaluation, we should keep in mind the three goals I mentioned in my introduction. First, we must ensure that the probability of failure for a systemically important firm is exceedingly low. Such a failure can lead to contagion that can damage a broad set of financial market participants, and impede the ability of the financial system to support the economy. The failure of a single systemically important firm—because of its size and interconnectedness—can significantly weaken the entire financial system. We saw this firsthand following the failure of Lehman Brothers. Second, if a systemically important firm does fail, we must have mechanisms in place to minimize the damage to the rest of the financial system. While we can make individual firms stronger, more robust and less prone to failure, I expect that there will still inevitably be failures in the future. In principle, we could make individual institutions completely bulletproof in all possible environments. However, this would require such high levels of capital and liquidity that it would likely make them uncompetitive in their ability to provide financial services to their customers. Third, we must keep in place the structural changes that have made the global financial system less vulnerable to adverse shocks. So, what does this imply when we consider revisions to the Dodd-Frank Act and other aspects of reform? Capital and Liquidity Standards It is important to maintain appropriate capital and liquidity standards for large, complex firms to mitigate external shocks and the risks they pose to the economy. In particular, we need to maintain our focus on firms whose impairment would have significant negative consequences for the rest of the financial system. Effective capital and liquidity standards help to limit these adverse consequences. At the same time, they work against conferring a competitive advantage to large banks from a perception that they may be too big to fail. Accordingly, large financial firms have had to more than double their stock of high-quality capital since the crisis. Prior to the financial crisis, large financial firms were not required to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to protect against runs, and, as a result, several would have failed if not for extraordinary government intervention. Today, the liquidity buffers for large financial firms have dramatically improved in terms of both their size and quality. This is due in part to investors’ demands, but also to the efforts by regulators and supervisors in the United States and abroad to develop appropriate liquidity standards for large banking institutions. Some have argued that capital standards alone would be sufficient to mitigate the risks of failure. I am not convinced. As I just noted, the crisis clearly demonstrated the added importance of liquidity, as the firms that failed appeared to have been appropriately capitalized based on traditional regulatory metrics at the time. Moreover, I strongly favor a system of capital and liquidity requirements that is harmonized on a global basis. Some believe that the United States should no longer participate in international forums—such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision—that discuss and recommend minimum capital and liquidity standards for global banking institutions. The argument is made that these international bodies are dictating to and constraining the choices of the United States. That is simply not the case. The Basel standards and other international efforts actually benefit the United States and its banks. In the preponderance of cases, agreements struck in these forums raise international standards closer to existing U.S. standards. Establishing a more level playing field enhances the competitiveness of internationally active U.S. firms. It also makes the global financial system safer by ensuring that foreign banks are subject to appropriate standards that cover their global operations. This protects the U.S. households and businesses that transact with these banks in the United States and abroad. 2 Also, it is important to note that the recommendations of these international standard-setters are not automatically legally binding in the United States. They do not go into effect unless they are adopted by a U.S. authority acting under U.S. laws following an administrative process. They are also subject to a period of public notice and comment. When appropriate, U.S. authorities have adopted different standards than those proposed in international forums. Finally, following the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve developed a capital stress testing supervisory program—known as the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). CCAR has become an integral part of ensuring appropriate capital levels. By imposing a discipline of forward-looking capital assessment on our largest firms, CCAR helps protect the safety and soundness of the largest financial institutions—and therefore the stability of the entire financial system. The CCAR process consists of two parts. First, the quantitative assessment evaluates whether a firm holds a sufficiently large capital buffer so that it can continue to be a viable financial intermediary even in a stressed market and macroeconomic environment. Second, the qualitative assessment evaluates whether the firm’s risk management and capital planning processes are well-developed and well-governed. CCAR has helped to strengthen the capital levels of the largest financial institutions, and has pushed these firms to steadily improve their risk management and capital planning processes. While appropriate capital and liquidity standards are necessary, they must be augmented by a supervisory regime that can assure the quality of a firm’s governance, controls, risk culture and compliance with applicable laws and regulations. As we saw with JPMorgan Chase in the “London Whale” episode and with Wells Fargo more recently, effective risk management and governance is a necessary complement to having adequate capital and liquidity buffers. Resolution We also must have an effective resolution mechanism that allows a firm to fail without threatening to bring down the entire financial system. We are not quite there yet—given some of the challenges in executing resolution on a cross-border basis—but we have made significant progress. In particular, I would point to two developments that are especially important. The FDIC and the Federal Reserve have used the authority provided by Title I of the Dodd-Frank Act to oversee the so-called “living will” process—the resolution planning that large financial firms must do as a contingency for their potential failure. Developing living wills necessitates that firms and regulators consider, in advance, how bankruptcy can serve as the basis for resolution, and take actions to address any obstacles to an orderly resolution under the bankruptcy code. This effort has helped to reduce the complexity of large financial firms and has made them better positioned to enter bankruptcy without imposing large costs on society. In addition, the Federal Reserve recently finalized a rule that requires systemically important bank holding companies to have minimum levels of total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC). Firms are expected to meet this requirement mainly via the issuance of long-term debt by the holding company parent. In bankruptcy, this debt could be used to recapitalize these firms and would be available to absorb any additional losses. The Dodd-Frank Act also created a “last resort” option for the resolution of a large financial firm—Title II Orderly Liquidation Authority. This authority can be triggered only in special circumstances, and requires the action of a number of regulatory and fiscal authorities. There is an understandable reluctance for the government to be directly involved in resolving a large firm. It creates the perception that the largest firms get special advantages. This is why many would prefer to eliminate Title II and rely exclusively on a bankruptcy process. 3 But, if we were to rely on ordinary bankruptcy rather than Title II for the resolution of a systemically important financial firm, we would need to ensure that the bankruptcy regime would work in a way that does not destabilize the financial system. First, such a regime would need to enable a systemically important firm to initiate a resolution strategy over a weekend while markets are closed so that the firm’s subsidiaries could continue to operate. Otherwise, the remaining franchise value of the troubled firm would quickly evaporate and we would experience significant contagion across the financial system. Second, there would need to be a credible liquidity backstop for the restructured firm in place by Sunday evening when Asian markets open. Many of the troubled firm’s counterparties would undoubtedly initially run because the cost of doing so would be very small. They would be especially likely to do so if there were no credible liquidity backstop. Debtor-in-possession financing would not be not a viable option because it simply would not likely be available in a timely manner and on the scale—potentially hundreds of billions of dollars—needed to fill the hole created when counterparties run away from a systemically important financial institution. There is also another difficulty. In the event of a financial holding company’s bankruptcy restructuring, there are limits on the Federal Reserve’s ability to lend to subsidiaries that continue to operate. The Federal Reserve has the legal authority to lend through the discount window against a subsidiary bank’s high-quality collateral, with appropriate haircuts. But, under existing laws and regulations, the Federal Reserve cannot lend to the securities affiliates. Moreover, Section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act restricts the commercial bank subsidiary of a systemically important firm from on-lending the funds borrowed from the Fed to its broker-dealer—even if the broker-dealer has good collateral to pledge against the loan. Put simply, in today’s legal and regulatory regime, there is a large potential liquidity gap. There is not a credible liquidity backstop for a broker-dealer in bankruptcy. In contrast, Title II provides for temporary funding through the Orderly Liquidation Fund, which can support the resolution of the recapitalized entity, including the broker-dealer. This means that if one were to eliminate Title II, one should develop an alternative means to provide a temporary, comprehensive liquidity backstop to the restructured firm. Reforms to Market Structure We should also keep in place the key structural reforms of financial markets that are making the financial system safer. In my mind, the most important of these include money market mutual fund reform, tri-party repo reform, and the mandate for the centralized clearing of OTC derivatives. In each case, the post-crisis structural reforms have made the system more resilient to the potential insolvency of a major financial institution. As a result, the level of stress placed upon the entire financial system by the failure of a single firm should be considerably lessened. As part of this, we must maintain the capability for robust oversight of key FMUs. Centralized clearing is a beneficial development for financial markets. It reduces the amount of risk in the system by facilitating the netting of exposures to the central clearing party. As a result, centralized clearing makes the financial system more resilient and enables greater efficiency and transparency for trading counterparties. However, the trade-off for these benefits is that more residual risk is now concentrated in the FMUs. Consequently, it is important to retain the protections contained in the regulatory framework provided by Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act. We must ensure that FMUs are appropriately supervised and can withstand the failure of one or two of their largest counterparties and continue to operate. Worth Another Look So, what hasn’t worked as well as we might have expected, or might be less crucial in light of the principles that I discussed earlier? First, I would start with regulations for small and medium-sized banking institutions. As I discussed earlier, we must ensure that the firms whose failure could impose the greatest costs on ordinary borrowers and savers have the capital, liquidity and risk management standards appropriate to that risk. But, the majority of banks in the United States do not come close to falling into this category. For smaller institutions, the regulatory and compliance burdens can be considerably lighter because the failure of such a firm will not impose large costs or stress on the broader financial system. Also, we must recognize that smaller firms have less ability to spread added compliance costs across their business. All else equal, an increase in compliance burden can create an unintended competitive advantage for larger institutions. We should also recognize the important role that smaller banking institutions have in supporting local communities around the country. The ability to lend to local businesses often depends on close bank-customer relationships, and on knowledge that is often difficult to develop when the home office is very distant. There have been efforts by regulators at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere to reduce the regulatory requirements for such institutions, and that is something that we should continue to work on. Lawmakers could also evaluate statutory thresholds to see if they should be raised to apply to fewer, larger institutions. For example, the Dodd-Frank Act sets a higher prudential regime for those firms with $50 billion or more in assets. I believe that this threshold could be raised significantly without unduly increasing the risk to the broader financial system. Second, policymakers might reexamine the implementation of the Volcker Rule to ensure that it is efficiently achieving its policy objectives. The fact is that most market-making activity has an element of proprietary trading. The market maker that bids successfully often does so based on a view on which way the market might be headed in the near term. Thus, the line between market-making and proprietary trading is not always clear-cut, which makes regulation in this space difficult. Some market participants have argued that the Volcker Rule has contributed to the decline in market liquidity of corporate bonds. Although I view the evidence on this point as inconclusive, it may be worth considering giving greater discretion to trading desks that facilitate client business to intervene when markets are illiquid and volatile. Also, community banks are subject to the Volcker Rule even though they typically do not engage in proprietary trading, or sponsor or retain ownership interests in hedge funds or private equity funds. This seems like an unnecessary burden that drives up compliance costs without a significant corresponding public benefit, so we also should exempt community banks from the Volcker Rule. Third, although CCAR is a vital part of our bank regulatory toolkit, I believe that we should consider changes that might lessen the burden it places on banks. In this vein, the Federal Reserve recently removed the CCAR qualitative assessment for large, non-complex firms. This is a good example of identifying regulatory burdens that are not worth the cost. We are also considering the implementation of a stress capital buffer that would better align the dynamic stress capital requirements of CCAR with our more static, point-in-time regulatory capital rules. Other potential adjustments include changes to the assumptions about the pace of a firm’s planned dividend and share repurchases, and how a firm in a stressed environment would likely manage its balance sheet and business footprint. The financial crisis provided a vivid reminder that a well-functioning financial system is a necessary condition for a vibrant economy. The efficient intermediation of funding from savers to borrowers supports economic activity and, over time, raises living standards. This means that we need a financial system that is robust and resilient to shocks. Most of the changes that have been implemented since the financial crisis have moved us in this direction, and it is important that any new changes to laws and regulations be grounded in what we have learned. Our central purpose must be to ensure a safe and sound financial system that efficiently provides financing to households and businesses through the ups and downs of the business cycle. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 James Bergin, Dianne Dobbeck, Jack Gutt, Kristin Malcarney, Kevin Stiroh, Joseph Tracy and Emily Yang assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 In addition, a regime with common, harmonized standards helps to reduce compliance costs for U.S. firms that operate internationally. 3 However, we should recognize that in the current setup large banks pay a price for being systemically important in terms of higher capital requirements and the need to maintain a large cushion of TLAC. Combined with the requirement to develop living wills and to simplify their operating models and their business, this should eliminate any competitive advantages associated with potential availability of Title II. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 11, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Bombay Stock Exchange, Mumbai, India As prepared for delivery Thanks, Ashish, and thanks to the U.S.-India Business Council, the Confederation of Indian Industry, and the Bombay Stock Exchange for organizing this event. As always, what I have to say reflects my views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity today to talk about the issue of globalization. Although the debate about the benefits and challenges of globalization is not new, it has recently come into sharper focus. This debate is important to all of us, and I think it is particularly relevant to India given its growing role in the global economy. Globalization means different things to different people. In my remarks today, I will focus on the role of globalization as a force for international economic integration and economic development. I will highlight three themes: First, the important role that trade plays in promoting higher standards of living globally. Second, how changes in trade can create challenges for industries that become less competitive. We have not adequately considered and remedied the very large costs this can impose on certain communities and households. Third, the answer to those challenges is not greater protectionism. Instead, we need to provide greater support to displaced workers so they can obtain the skills needed to find new well-paying jobs. We need to do better in preparing workers to deal with the challenges of globalization and technological change. These issues are important to me as a central banker, as they affect the long-term health and productivity of the economy, and the economic opportunities available to our people. The debate around globalization, particularly in advanced economies, reflects a range of factors. Undoubtedly, the global financial crisis and subsequent slow recovery have been significant. But, just as important have been longer-term trends, such as growing income inequality, the loss of middle-income jobs, and the rise of large emerging market economies such as China and India. Although the debate about globalization is not new, I believe we are at a particularly important juncture. If support for liberalized trade and an integrated global economy were to suffer a significant setback, the consequence could be slower economic growth and lower living standards around the world. While considerable effort has gone into liberalizing trade and developing the existing set of trade agreements, that does not mean they cannot be improved upon. I have no doubt some trade agreements could be enhanced or updated. Some may not adequately address recent changes in the global economy—such as the rise of digital trade—and may need to be refreshed. And, important trade barriers still remain and should be addressed. In particular, from a U.S. perspective, the access of U.S. firms to some foreign markets and the protection of intellectual property rights are issues that deserve close attention. But, in addressing these issues, we should take care to preserve the vital benefits of trade to higher standards of living in both advanced and emerging market economies. Our focus should be on further strengthening an open trade regime, and, as appropriate, amending and improving these agreements. The Pace of Globalization To begin, let me briefly describe the pace of globalization as a reminder of what is at stake. Global economic integration has increased dramatically in recent decades. Trade, for example, has grown from nearly 40 percent of global GDP in 1990 to 57 percent in 2015. Over the same period, the stock of foreign direct investment has increased from roughly 10 percent of global GDP to 34 percent. Ultimately, economies have become more integrated and interdependent. 2 This rapid growth in trade reflects falling trade barriers, declining transport costs, and improved information and communication technology. These trends have enabled the development of complex global supply chains that allow companies to manage their production more efficiently. Emerging market economies now make up a much larger share of global trade, the global economy and global growth. As an illustration, emerging market economies have accounted for 70 percent of global output growth since the crisis—double their share from two decades ago. 3 This growth has provided much-needed support to world economic activity, as advanced economies have recovered slowly from the crisis. Rising economic integration is also very evident when we examine the trade relationship between India and the United States. Bilateral trade flows have risen tenfold, from $11 billion in 1995 to almost $110 billion in 2015. In particular, half of U.S. imports of computer services are now sourced from India. In 2015, the stock of bilateral foreign direct investment in both countries was $37 billion, up from $4 billion in 2002. 4 The potential for further increases has been reinforced by the liberalization measures India announced last year to encourage greater foreign direct investment. Benefits of Open Trade Increased trade, through its longer-term impact on productivity, has been a key contributor to global growth and prosperity since the Second World War. Openness to trade brings many benefits to the supply side of the economy. These include: larger markets, greater specialization opportunities, and the increased ability to exploit economies of scale and scope; faster transmission of technology and innovation; and greater competitive pressure on domestic firms to increase their productivity. Collectively, these forces lead to a more efficient allocation of a country’s scarce resources—one that is more closely aligned to its international comparative advantage. As a consequence, consumers can benefit from lower prices, higher real incomes, and greater variety and quality of goods and services. Increased openness may also reduce wasteful rent-seeking behavior on the part of protected industries and the related costs of corruption. These benefits from open trade are very evident in India. Academic research has found substantial gains for India following its dramatic trade reforms in the 1990s, which benefited consumers via lower prices and firms via higher markups. These higher profit margins spurred innovation and provided funds for the development of new products. Looking ahead, the upcoming implementation of the goods and services tax in India—which will create a common market internally—is expected to provide many of the same benefits as trade liberalization does internationally. Openness to trade has certainly played a large role in the economic ascent of Asia. Following the rise of Japan, Korea, Taiwan and others, fast growth in China and India has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of extreme poverty—an unprecedented feat in human history. The benefits of economic integration and other reforms are exemplified in India’s higher growth rate since the introduction of market reforms in 1991. Growth has averaged 6.5 percent annually in the post-reform period, compared to about 4 percent annually over the prior 40 years. Indeed, India is the fastest-growing major economy in the world today. Reflecting these gains, a number of emerging market countries have been strong supporters of open trade, a sign of how much the world has changed in recent years. A few examples can help to illustrate some of the benefits of globalization. India’s green revolution—which helped to greatly increase its agricultural productivity and food security—was facilitated by U.S. technology and scientists working with their Indian counterparts. Similarly, as is well known, Indian engineers and entrepreneurs have played a key role in the technology sector’s tremendous achievements in recent decades and now lead some of America’s largest companies, including Google and Microsoft. This success, in turn, has had important benefits for India as well, including increased foreign investment flows and employment opportunities that have helped develop a vibrant information technology ecosystem. But, increased openness to trade is not a panacea in and of itself. Actual benefits depend on a range of other critical factors, including macroeconomic policy, the business and regulatory environment, the legal regime, the quality of infrastructure, and the quality of public services, including education. While the gains from a liberalized trade regime are not guaranteed, the alternative of trying to achieve a high standard of living by following a policy of economic isolationism will fail. Trade has played a key role in nearly all of the high-growth success stories since the middle of the last century. Challenges of Open Trade It is important to recognize that while trade and international integration tend to increase the overall economic pie, the distribution of the larger pie may be very uneven. In fact, slices for individual groups may shrink. Some workers—particularly those in industries that are less able to compete and whose skills have become less relevant—can be hurt and find it difficult to adjust. This often requires individuals to change industries and to relocate to different regions. So, while trade is almost always a win for a country’s economy, not everyone within that economy will be a winner. This is especially the case where there are no policies to cushion the negative consequences of trade and to facilitate adjustment. Effects are also country- and industry-specific, and depend on initial endowments and conditions. Low-income workers in emerging markets, for example, may find it more difficult to adapt given weaker safety nets and less financial resources available to deal with adverse economic shocks. The bigger the adjustment process, the more the gains from trade will tend to be eroded. While the rise in the skill premium from trade liberalization has been well established for both developed and developing countries, determining the aggregate impact of trade on jobs has been more challenging. To date, the evidence has been mixed. We need further research in this area to determine with more confidence a reasonable range of estimates for these employment effects. Although evidence on the extent to which jobs have been lost due to global trade is inconclusive, job losses that are attributed to trade tend to be viewed differently. That is, they are seen as having been “lost to foreigners” and are often viewed as a consequence of the policy decision to liberalize trade in the first place. Having said that, the challenge of adjusting to open trade is a serious issue that has not received the degree of attention it fully deserves. This may partly reflect the fact that the burden has been borne unequally and spread out over a long time period. It also may reflect the fact that the winners from trade have often tended to have a stronger voice than those who have been the losers. Research has documented that the effects on individuals of job dislocation—including those resulting from trade—can be significant and long lasting. Older workers tend to suffer larger earnings losses, and may face larger transition costs. Displaced workers may not have the appropriate skills to find good jobs in other areas of the economy, including in growing export sectors. When the affected industry represents a large share of the local economy, the damage is often magnified. In this case, the burden is more widespread because wages across the community are likely to be hit as well. And, this doesn’t begin to capture the full human toll—including the impact on workers who have lost confidence in the future and the poorer health outcomes that occur because of increased stress. For too many individuals in the United States, for instance, the American dream has been put at risk, with parents increasingly pessimistic about whether their children will have the opportunity to do better than they did. We should find better ways to help communities that are struggling because of the effects of free trade. In the United States, we have historically experienced a high degree of geographic labor mobility—much higher than in other advanced economies. The ability to move in search of better opportunities, when possible, has helped to mitigate some of the adverse effects of trade. But, mobility has declined in the United States in recent years, implying that the adjustment costs to trade may have increased. Protectionism Is Not the Answer Given these costs of global integration and more liberalized trade, what is the best path forward? Protectionism can have a siren-like appeal. Viewed narrowly, it may be potentially rewarding to particular segments of the economy in the short term. Viewed more broadly, it would almost certainly be destructive to the economy overall in the long term. Countries need to compete better, not compete less. Trade barriers are a very expensive way to preserve jobs in less competitive or declining industries. They blunt opportunities in export industries and they reduce the affordability of goods and services to households. Indeed, such measures often backfire, resulting in harm to workers and diminished growth. A better course is to learn from our experience. From a U.S. standpoint, we should work to reduce remaining foreign trade restrictions that impair our ability to capitalize on our comparative advantages. For example, market access restrictions can mean that certain U.S. industries cannot realize their full potential. Similarly, weaknesses in the protection of intellectual property rights limit the ability of U.S. producers to realize the full returns from their investments. This lowers profits and diminishes incentives to grow the business and employ more workers. If we are going to enhance the benefits of free trade and better manage its costs, it is critical that we continue to strengthen the global rules-based system. On the positive side, I would point to the WTO’s recent Trade Facilitation Agreement, which addresses customs procedures and could reduce global trade costs by almost 15 percent. But, at a broader level, the momentum behind global trade reform has clearly waned in recent years. This has occurred notwithstanding the fact that there are substantial areas in need of further reform, such as agriculture, services and non-tariff barriers. That momentum needs to be rekindled and reaffirmed. Although advanced economies historically have tended to lead the way, it is important that large emerging market countries now play a greater role. This is appropriate given their growing prominence in the global economy. There are many approaches to dealing with the costs of globalization, but protectionism is a dead end. Trade restrictions address the symptoms and not the underlying problems, and they introduce other costs and distortions. While such measures might generate temporary boosts to growth from greater domestic production and consumption, these would likely be offset by a range of other costs. Over time, such measures would retard productivity growth and thereby shrink the economic pie. As an illustration, import substitution models that were pursued by many emerging market economies following the Second World War eventually led to lower long-term growth outcomes. This was the experience in India, which helped trigger the reforms of the early 1990s. In assessing the benefits and costs of trade, it is important to understand that a nation’s trade balance reflects much more than its trade policy. Just as important are the country’s saving and investment spending proclivities, which are affected by many factors, including tax and fiscal policies. For example, in the United States, we have a chronic trade deficit because domestic investment spending exceeds our domestic saving. Foreign capital inflows make up the gap. In this process, the foreign exchange value of the dollar plays an important equilibrating mechanism. If the domestic saving/investment imbalance is unchanged, then any reduction in the trade balance from higher trade barriers will be offset by lower exports. The domestic currency will appreciate to cause the trade deficit to widen to accommodate the desired capital inflows. Thus, trade restrictions affect the composition of trade but not the gap between exports and imports, which is determined by the difference between domestic savings and investment. At the end of the day, the protectionist country would produce more goods in sectors protected by higher trade barriers but also fewer goods for export. The expectation that higher trade barriers would save jobs ignores these critical second-round effects. Moreover, the story may not end there. What happens if another country that now faces higher trade barriers responds by raising its own barriers? That would push production even further out of high-value-added exports that are now deterred by the higher foreign trade barriers and into those exports that face lower trade barriers, or into the goods protected by the higher domestic trade barriers. Raising trade barriers would risk setting off a trade war, which could damage economic growth prospects around the world. Measures that raise trade barriers typically would protect lower-wage, import-competing jobs, but would also weigh on the prospects for jobs in the more efficient export sector, which tend to be higher-paying. The outcome would be countries producing more where they have a competitive disadvantage, and less where they have a competitive advantage—the exact opposite of what we should be aiming for. For example, in the United States, one of our largest manufacturing exports is aerospace parts (which requires skilled labor) and one of our largest imports is apparel (which requires less skilled labor). These second-round effects would also likely hurt productivity growth. Scarce resources would be used less efficiently and trade protection would likely lessen the level of competitive pressure that helps drive innovation. Moreover, lower productivity growth would likely lead to a slower improvement in a nation’s living standards over time. This negative consequence of higher trade barriers can be illustrated most starkly by the estimates of the costs per job saved through protectionist measures. Researchers that have studied this closely estimate that the costs per job saved from protectionist measures in the United States typically run into the hundreds of thousands of dollars per year. To illustrate, consider the case of import restrictions on Chinese tires. The cost of a job saved was estimated at $900,000 per year while the measures were in place, or more than 20 times the average worker’s compensation. 5 Better Approaches to Deal With Globalization Rather than protectionism, a better policy would be to help domestic workers and companies compete more effectively, rather than compete less. We need additional mechanisms that allow us to more fully capture the benefits from liberalized trade and to more proactively mitigate its costs. Ideally, policy should also better address job losses and income inequality from automation and other technological advances. How we respond should depend on regional and industry circumstances. These include the nature of trade impacts, the skill sets and location of the workers that have been affected, and the amount of resources that can be mobilized to facilitate adjustment. Increasing specialization brings real economic benefits, but can also leave workers more exposed to shifts in demand for their services, potentially on short notice. These issues are not going away, especially as emerging market economies take on a larger role in the global economy and automation continues apace. If we are to maintain a more open trade regime, globalization must be socially and politically sustainable. For that to be the case, we have to provide greater support to those who are hurt by trade. Policies should include more assistance with job retraining, help with job search and mobility, and broader unemployment support. We need to do more research into what measures have been effective in economies around the world, and we should encourage greater experimentation with new approaches. Getting the balance right between providing assistance and making sure that individuals hurt by trade can get back on their feet and achieve their earning potential will be a challenge, and we need a better understanding of what actually works. More generally, we need to do a better job positioning our workforce to cope with globalization and technological change. This will involve improvements across a range of areas, including not only education and training, but also the business regulatory environment and infrastructure investment that could support greater worker mobility. These measures would also promote higher productivity growth. While the scope and scale of issues differ substantially by country, many of these policy areas may also be relevant in India. Lastly, there are various measures available in current trade agreements, such as antidumping measures and countervailing duties for dealing with “unfair” trade, as well as escape clauses that provide safeguards for industries that face a sudden surge of imports. Again, the challenge is to ensure that such measures are effective, that they help facilitate rather than retard adjustment, and that they are not abused so as to avoid foreign competition. But, both sanctions and temporary relief have been provided for in global trade rules. We should be willing to use them when their use would lead to more equitable outcomes and would help sustain political support for a more open trade regime. Conclusion Free trade is a concept that remains compelling but periodically will be tested by economic change. That is an inescapable fact of life and is a good thing because it requires the economics profession to articulate anew the value of a liberalized world trade regime. While the value from trade is very high, the associated adjustment costs can be significant and will require greater attention if globalization is to work for all of us. Thank you for your time. I would be happy to take some questions. 1 Mary Amiti, John Clark, Gerard Dages, Matthew Higgins, Tom Klitgaard and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 Figures from UN World Investment Report, IMF World Economic Outlook Database, World Bank World Development Indicators. 3 IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2017, in market exchange rate terms. 4 Figures from Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, UN World Investment Report. 5 Hufbauer and Lowry, “US Tire Tariffs: Saving Few Jobs at High Cost”, Peterson Institute for International Economics, April 2012. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
