September 25, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Onondaga Community College, Syracuse, New York As prepared for delivery Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here with you in Syracuse, and I want to thank Onondaga Community College for hosting us. This is my fourth visit to Central New York as president of the New York Fed, and I always look forward to coming back as part of our regular visits to different parts of our district. These trips and our meetings with stakeholders in the region give me and my colleagues important insight into what’s happening in the economy. Today, I will briefly discuss my outlook for the U.S. economy and what we are seeing at the regional level, and offer some reflections on the challenges and importance of workforce development in the region and across the nation. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Two years ago, I spoke in nearby Rochester on the topic of workforce development. 2 Since then, the need for effective workforce development has become no less pressing, and both the New York Fed and the Federal Reserve System have focused greater efforts on this critical issue. This morning, I will return to some of the themes from that speech and look at lessons we have learned. The U.S. Economic Outlook Although the damage wrought by Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria has imposed immeasurable hardship on many and will undoubtedly disrupt commerce for a time, these effects are likely to be relatively short-lived in the context of the overall economic outlook. Natural disasters tend to depress economic activity initially, but once the recovery and reconstruction efforts get underway in earnest, such disasters actually serve to lift economic activity. Looking beyond the storm effects—which will make interpreting near-term economic data releases more difficult—the U.S. economy remains on a trajectory of slightly above-trend growth, which is gradually tightening the U.S. labor market. Over time, this should support a rise in wage growth. The fundamentals supporting continued expansion are generally quite favorable. Low unemployment, sturdy job gains, and rising wages—even at a pace below previous expansions—are lifting personal income. Household wealth has been boosted by rising home and equity prices, and household debt has been growing relatively slowly, contributing to a healthy household balance sheet. Thus, consumer spending should continue to advance in coming quarters. Business fixed investment outlays are also likely to continue to rise. With the supply of labor tightening, there are greater incentives for businesses to invest in labor-saving technologies. Investment spending should also benefit from a better international outlook and improvement in U.S. trade competitiveness caused by the dollar’s recent weakness. The softer dollar and solid growth abroad also suggest that the trade sector will no longer be a significant drag on economic growth. With a firmer import price trend and the fading of effects from a number of temporary, idiosyncratic factors, I expect inflation will rise and stabilize around the FOMC’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. In response, the Federal Reserve will likely continue to remove monetary policy accommodation gradually. The Regional Economy While the national economy has been growing steadily since the end of the Great Recession, the economies of Upstate New York have lagged behind, with job growth running at only about half the national pace through much of the expansion. And, over the past year, job growth in Upstate New York has slowed considerably, particularly in Rochester and Buffalo. Here in Syracuse, job growth has also been disappointing through most of the expansion, with an even slower pace of growth than many other upstate areas. In fact, today, almost 10 years after the Great Recession, Syracuse has still not fully recovered all of the jobs that were lost—a benchmark most of Upstate New York passed some time ago. However, this slow growth does not imply that the region is standing still. Indeed, there is a lot of activity going on beneath the surface. The Syracuse economy and labor force are evolving and becoming better positioned for the future. But, more needs to be done to help workers adapt to change, a theme I will return to in a moment. As is the case in much of the country, Syracuse has experienced a dramatic decrease in manufacturing jobs, reflecting the dual forces of technological change and globalization. These were well-paying jobs that supported a vibrant middle class. Now, I am a firm believer in the overall positive effect that open trade has had on the United States, but I also recognize that its benefits and costs are distributed unevenly, and the positive and negative consequences can be geographically concentrated. 3 On the whole, we have not done enough to recognize the vast consequences of these changes and to help those hurt by technological change and globalization. The Syracuse economy has changed considerably from 25 years ago, when manufacturing was the dominant source of jobs and income. The number of manufacturing workers has been cut in half since then, reducing the sector’s share of employment from 15 percent to 8 percent—a share that is now on par with the nation. This transition has been painful, but has resulted in a more diversified and stable regional economy. In manufacturing’s place, the healthcare and education sectors have picked up the slack, and have been a stabilizing force for the Syracuse economy. Offsetting the 20,000 manufacturing jobs that were lost over the past 25 years are around 25,000 jobs added in education and healthcare. Those two sectors now employ almost 20 percent of the workers in the region. Other sectors, like business services and leisure and hospitality, have also been creating new job opportunities that differ from the ones the region previously relied on. In addition, jobs are being created in innovative hot spots in the region. For example, start-up companies rising from the Syracuse Tech Garden, as well as a new global center for unmanned aerial systems, are providing exciting new opportunities. While these particular efforts are still relatively small in scale, they have the potential to change the trajectory of the regional economy over time. However, Syracuse will need workers with deep skill sets to fill such jobs. To that end, it can be difficult for workers to adapt to these changes, and they may need help to get there. Taking a broader view, the good jobs being created in today’s economy require more education, training, and, ultimately, skill than ever before. The skill requirements for virtually all jobs are increasing, and workers will need to rise to the occasion to thrive in today’s economy. The challenge facing all of us is how to best help workers develop the skills necessary to land a good job, and how to enhance those skills over time as work requirements evolve. Workers with years of experience in jobs that are no longer in demand have it especially hard, as their skills may not be sufficient or match current opportunities—an all-too-familiar story for workers in the Syracuse area. Workforce Development Workforce development must, therefore, be a top priority for everyone involved: workers, employers, communities, government, and educational and training institutions. There is no silver bullet or one-size-fits-all solution. This is a complex challenge that requires a combination of strategies. But one thing is clear: it requires a holistic approach encompassing the “three P’s” I described two years ago—Partnerships, Programs, and Placement—and then some. Before delving deeper into these, let me first explain why we, as the nation’s central bank, care about workforce development. As many of you know, the Federal Reserve is tasked by Congress with a dual mandate: maximum employment in the context of price stability. Clearly, we cannot declare success if we have people who want to work but lack the skills to fill available jobs. A skilled workforce that is matched to the needs of employers is necessary for the economy to grow and prosper, and for individuals to reach their potential. Monetary policy can help labor markets recover by providing incentives for firms to invest and grow. However, monetary policy cannot by itself solve skill mismatches and gaps that exist in the economy. So, what can we do? The Federal Reserve provides research and analysis, and leverages its convening ability to bring together diverse stakeholders to better understand the issues and identify practices that work. For example, we run the Leading the Way video campaign with P-TECH schools and employer partnerships. 4 This competition challenges teams of high school students in the Rochester area to create public service announcements detailing skills required to work in industries that are currently hiring. We also participate in the New York City Data Science Task Force to increase the number and diversity of students in the metropolitan area prepared to enter graduate school or the workforce with data science skills. And, we are finalizing the results of a survey of community colleges across New York State that looks at their engagement with employers for the purposes of workforce development. I will talk a bit more about the survey’s preliminary results shortly. In addition, we are working with the Federal Reserve Board of Governors and our fellow regional Reserve Banks on broader initiatives to promote investment in workforce development and encourage partnerships, including next month’s Investing in America’s Workforce Conference in Austin, Texas. The conference is a joint effort by the Federal Reserve System and several leading institutions in the field 5 intended to connect businesses, government agencies, non-profits, academics, and philanthropic organizations. The goal is to reframe workforce development as an investment, attract new resources, and leverage existing ones to improve economic mobility and job opportunities for potential workers. The Three P’s of Workforce Development The core of any workforce development effort is the need to help workers build the skills necessary to adapt to change, meet the challenges of an evolving economy, and find good-paying jobs. We have been hearing from business owners across our district, on our advisory councils, and through surveys for several years about the skills gaps they face, in areas as diverse as engineering, long-haul trucking, welding, and metalworking. What they all have in common is that they require specific skills and training, whether through a certification program, a two- or four-year degree, or a formal apprenticeship—an approach that has been very successful in countries such as Germany and the UK, but has not been as widely used here. This is where the partnership concept comes into play. Partnerships entail cooperative efforts between local employers and educational institutions to determine the best strategies to help workers develop the skills employers need. The good news is that New York State seems to be ahead of the curve in this area. As I mentioned, we are in the process of completing a survey of community colleges in New York State. The early results are encouraging: we have found that all community colleges in the state offer some workforce development programming, and partnerships with employers are the norm. In fact, the median number of employer-partners among community colleges is over 100, and there are partnerships in every industry, from healthcare to utilities to agriculture. Such partnerships are growing in importance and fill a need for both local workers and employers. This goes to my second P: Programs. Community colleges in New York are becoming very adept at creating programs tailored to the current skills required by local employers. Locally, I’d like to highlight Onondaga Community College’s partnership with Madison County manufacturers, which trains workers through the Apprentice Career Training program. This program provides paid training for students that can lead to four-year apprenticeships in participating businesses in advanced manufacturing, where they will develop skills necessary for jobs that are in high demand, including maintenance mechanics, tool makers, and machine operators. I would also like to call attention to Work Train’s job training and industry collaboration, 6 as well as the work of the Onondaga Citizens League to quantify the types of jobs that are in Central New York, what job opportunities will likely exist in the future, and other critical workforce-related questions. I anticipate that the Citizens League’s report on how Central New York works will serve as an important resource for shaping workforce development programs in the area. 7 However, while training and skill-building are foundational, they are not enough. Placement into good jobs—my third P—is a critical component of effective workforce development, especially for those currently unemployed. Recent work by Federal Reserve economists highlights some of the hurdles to job placement that will need to be overcome. This research leveraged the New York Fed’s Survey of Consumer Expectations to examine how people find work. 8 The difference between those looking for work while employed versus those who are unemployed is stark. Relative to the unemployed, employed workers spend less time searching for jobs but have three times higher contact rates and two times as many job offers. Furthermore, workers hired from another job do better than those who are unemployed, receiving 28 percent higher wages and twice the level of benefits. While we have always known how difficult it is for recent high school or college graduates to find their first job, it seems that those currently unemployed face an even greater hurdle, and this is an issue that we need to address. Another finding from this work is the importance of networking and references for those seeking employment. Referrals accounted for 40 percent of total job offers, and while 60 percent of all job applications were the result of job board searches, these accounted for only 24 percent of offers. This all suggests that workforce development providers need to build relationships and trust with employers as a way to help their job-seekers find available opportunities and successfully apply for them. Having covered the three P’s, I’d like to now focus briefly on the “and then some,” which refers to addressing a number of social and structural factors that work against even the best workforce development efforts. In my travels throughout the region and my interactions with workers, business leaders, workforce development practitioners, and others, I regularly hear how access to transportation and childcare are preventing able and willing workers from actually working. People’s inability to get to jobs relatively far from where they live—either because they can’t afford a car or there is no viable and reliable public transportation. This is a challenge we are seeing both in sparsely populated areas, like the North Country, and in cities, where jobs may be available in the surrounding suburbs and exurbs with no easy public access. With regard to childcare, cost and access are what we hear most as hindering people’s ability to fill jobs. And, even for those who can afford childcare, irregular scheduling by employers makes it very difficult to plan effectively. Additional adverse factors include a decline in geographic mobility—that is, people’s ability or willingness to relocate to where the jobs are—and the opioid epidemic, which Chair Yellen recently spoke about as having a significant negative impact on our workforce. 9 While I am not an expert on these subjects, I can say that the inefficiencies these impediments create are keeping us from realizing our full potential individually and as a country, and that addressing them as part of a comprehensive workforce development solution is essential. I would like to conclude by saying that Syracuse, as well as Upstate New York more generally, has been dealing head-on with the consequences of economic change for a long time. Perhaps because of this, the region has developed a deep understanding of the importance of helping its people adapt through workforce development programs. The issue of workforce development is a complex one that requires a holistic approach and close collaboration among all interested parties. The good news is that many great organizations in the area are trying different approaches to discover what works best. Our region is in many ways leading the way, and we at the New York Fed will continue to support these efforts. Thank you for your kind attention. I would now be happy to take a few questions. 1 Jaison Abel, Jason Bram, Gerard Dages, Tony Davis, Richard Deitz, Jack Gutt, and Anand Marri assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See William C. Dudley, Workforce Development and Reinvention in the Rochester Economy , August 12, 2015. 3 See William C. Dudley, Benefits and Challenges from Globalization , May 11, 2017. 4 P-TECH stands for Pathways in Technology Early College High School. 5 Some of these institutions include the John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University, the Ray Marshall Center for the Study of Human Resources at the University of Texas at Austin, and the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. 6 Work Train is a program of the CenterState Corporation for Economic Opportunity. 7 How CNY Works , Onondaga Citizens League, 2017. 8 R. Jason Faberman, Andreas I. Mueller, Ayşegül Şahin, Rachel Schuh, and Giorgio Topa, How Do People Find Jobs? , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics (blog), April 5, 2017. 9 Smialek, J. (2017, July 13). Yellen Says Opioid Use Is Tied to Declining Labor Participation . Bloomberg News. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

October 06, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Council for Economic Education’s 56th Annual Financial Literacy & Economic Education Conference, New York City As prepared for delivery Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak at this Council for Economic Education (CEE) event, marking the CEE’s 56th Annual Financial Literacy and Economic Education Conference. Given the hard lessons of the financial crisis—and the economic challenges still facing many Americans—there are few goals more worthy than promoting greater financial and economic literacy. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Personal Educational Experience Before discussing the economic outlook and the role of education in income mobility, I will offer a few remarks on my own educational experience. While it may not be surprising that I have a Ph.D. in economics, the path that led me to the University of California, Berkeley, is a bit unusual. I started college in the 1970s at Columbia University. On the positive side, the professors were engaging, and I had the opportunity to read the great books of the university’s core contemporary civilization curriculum. But, I was troubled by the emphasis on grades and test taking. I wanted something that was more free-form. The idea was to find an environment that fostered learning for learning’s sake. So, in a small act of rebellion—after all, it was the early 1970s and I was a teenager—I decided to transfer to New College in Sarasota, Florida. New College provided a strong liberal arts, cross-disciplinary, and flexible education program that relied—as it does today—on an unstructured format of evaluations, study programs with individual professors, and contracts rather than grades. I like to call it “graduate school for undergraduates,” because it really is a place that encourages students to engage intellectually, read and think critically, and communicate effectively. This experience made me a strong advocate of a liberal arts education, which I believe is now more valuable than ever, given the greater importance of synthesizing and evaluating the vast array of information we have at our fingertips. The cross-disciplinary approach of a liberal arts program is also vital to understanding and solving complex problems. I believe that training—combined with the excellent education in economics I got at Berkeley—helped me to better diagnose what was going wrong in 2007 and 2008, and how the Federal Reserve could be most effective in our response to the crisis. Economic and Monetary Policy Outlook Turning to the economic outlook, the damage wrought by Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria has imposed immeasurable hardship on many. And, the damage will undoubtedly disrupt commerce for some time. However, these effects are likely to be relatively modest in the context of the national economy. Natural disasters tend to depress economic activity initially, but once the recovery and reconstruction efforts get underway in earnest, such disasters actually serve to lift economic activity. Looking beyond the storm effects—which will make interpreting near-term economic data releases more difficult—the economy remains on a trajectory of slightly above-trend growth at about 2 percent, and the fundamentals supporting continued expansion are generally quite favorable. Low unemployment, sturdy job gains (recognizing the near-term negative impact of the storms), and rising wages (even at a pace below previous expansions) are lifting personal income. Household wealth has been boosted by rising home and equity prices, and household debt has been growing relatively slowly, contributing to a healthy household balance sheet. Thus, consumer spending should continue to advance in coming quarters. Business fixed investment outlays are also likely to continue to rise. With the supply of labor tightening, there are greater incentives for businesses to invest in labor-saving technologies. Investment spending should also benefit from a better international outlook and the improvement in U.S. trade competitiveness caused by the dollar’s recent weakness. The softer dollar and solid growth abroad also suggest that the trade sector will no longer be a significant drag on economic growth. Turning to the outlook for inflation, I have been surprised by the persistence of the shortfall from the FOMC’s 2 percent long-run objective. While some of this year’s shortfall can be explained by one-off factors—such as the sharp fall in prices for cellular phone service—its persistence suggests that more fundamental structural changes may also be playing a role. These include the increased ability of prospective buyers to compare prices across different sellers quickly and easily, the shift in retail sales to online channels of distribution from traditional brick-and-mortar stores, and the consequences of these changes on brand loyalty and business pricing power. Over the coming months, I hope that we will be better able to differentiate between these competing explanations. If it turns out that structural changes have played a significant role, I would generally view this as a positive, rather than negative, development. It would imply that the U.S. economy could operate at a higher level of labor resource utilization without generating a troublesome large rise in inflation. More people could be put to work on a sustainable basis, enabling them to gain opportunities not just to earn greater income, but also to develop their skills and grow their human capital. Slightly above-trend growth is gradually tightening the U.S. labor market, which should support a rise in wage growth over time. When combined with a firmer import price trend—partly reflecting recent depreciation of the dollar—and the fading of effects from a number of temporary, idiosyncratic factors, I expect inflation will rise and stabilize around the FOMC’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. Thus, even though inflation is currently somewhat below our longer-run objective, I judge that it is still appropriate to continue to remove monetary policy accommodation gradually. This judgment is supported by the fact that financial conditions have eased, rather than tightened, even as the FOMC has raised its short-term interest rate target range by 75 basis points since last December. But, the upward trajectory of the policy rate path should continue to be shallow, in part because the level of short-term interest rates consistent with keeping the economy on a sustainable long-run growth path is likely to be considerably lower than it was in prior business cycles. The FOMC recently launched the process of balance sheet normalization—in which an increasing proportion of maturing Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) repayments are allowed to run off the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. While this process also should exert some monetary policy restraint over time, I believe the impact will be quite modest. Not only was this shift in policy widely anticipated, but we also have seen that the impact on the level of long-term interest rates has been small as expectations have adjusted. The economy has made great strides in recovering from the Great Recession, as the unemployment rate has fallen from 10 percent to 4.2 percent, aided by accommodative monetary policy. Measures of underemployment have also improved considerably and are near pre-crisis levels. Stronger labor market conditions are perhaps the best means to improve the economic well-being of most Americans, particularly those who have been struggling and are most vulnerable to economic downturns. And, as discussed in the Federal Reserve’s July Monetary Policy Report and in Chair Yellen’s accompanying testimony before Congress, it is encouraging that unemployment rates continue to fall for most demographic groups, including African-Americans and Hispanics. 2 At the same time, we should remain concerned that the jobless rates for those groups remain above the unemployment rate for the nation. Recent U.S. Census Bureau estimates of household income growth also provide some reason for optimism. Median real household income rose 3.2 percent in 2016, after strong gains the prior year. Gains were particularly notable among African-American and Hispanic households, and the poverty rate fell to near pre-crisis levels. While this is good news, I think we can all agree that we have a long way to go to improve income inequality and mobility in the United States. As I see it, these are among the most important issues we face as a nation. Income Mobility and Education Now, it is clearly the case that, given differences in individuals’ abilities, a free-market society will generate some level of inequality. However, there are persistent trends toward growing inequality and diminished economic mobility—and in my view, these are problematic. 3 First, income inequality has widened notably since about 1980. 4 Second, and more distressing, is a relatively low rate of economic mobility, or the degree to which individuals or families can move up or down in the income distribution over time. For example, the fraction of children who earn more than their parents has fallen from 90 percent to 50 percent over the past half century, and only 37 percent of parents believe that their children will be better off financially than they are, according to a recent Pew Research Center survey. 5 High inequality combined with a low rate of mobility is particularly problematic in a democratic society. In short, it means that being born into a low-income family is likely to severely limit an individual’s opportunities and well-being over his or her lifetime. The United States fares notably weaker on both dimensions relative to its OECD peers. 6 That is concerning, and something we should be working to address. One significant initiative we have taken within the Federal Reserve System is the establishment of the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Minneapolis Fed, which conducts research and makes recommendations on the structural barriers to economic advancement in the nation. The New York Fed has been, and will continue to be, an active participant and supporter of this initiative. Let me now turn to the primary routes of economic mobility and the impediments that too often block them. The primary avenue to higher incomes for most people is investment in their human capital, namely through education. Indeed, the income returns on education are very high, and they continue to rise in spite of very significant increases in the supply of highly educated workers during much of the 20th century. Since the 1980s, however, increases in the supply of well-educated workers in the United States have slowed, while demand for these workers has accelerated due to technological change. These forces have been a major contributor to the increase in the college wage premium. 7 While college graduation rates in the U.S. have stagnated, those in many other OECD countries have continued to rise. As a result, only one-quarter of those in the 25-to-34 age bracket in the United States have more education than their parents, compared with an OECD average of one-third. 8 This represents a dramatic decline in college education’s influence as an engine of upward mobility. So, part of a solution to the increase in inequality and the reduction in social mobility is to increase the level of educational attainment in the population. There are many barriers to expanding post-secondary education, however. From the potential student’s perspective, a lack of information, low college preparedness, and high costs are all substantial barriers to college attendance and completion, and these barriers restrict social mobility. Let me discuss each of these in turn. By lack of information, I mean the recognition that in spite of its high price tag, a college degree typically offers an even larger payoff in terms of future earnings. Many aspects of the college attendance decision are complex and hard to predict, especially for students from families without much experience with higher education. For example, research indicates that decisions about college attendance are highly correlated with an understanding of the future payoffs from attendance and particular majors. 9 New York Fed research shows evidence of systematic underestimation of the average benefits—and overestimation of the costs—of a college education, with larger biases among lower-income and non-college households. 10 Families may not realize that listed tuition prices may not be what a particular student actually pays. Moreover, misperceptions about the net return from a college degree can be consequential, influencing parents’ expectations and intentions for their children’s college attendance. Importantly, however, these expectations are not hardwired. Evidence from an information experiment indicates that students do respond to new information by revising their expectations and their education choices. 11 This suggests that making information about higher education decisions more available to families—particularly those with less experience with higher education—is a promising way to expand economic mobility. I was fortunate as a child that I didn’t face this problem. Both my parents went to college and there was no doubt among us about the payoff from higher education. Another concern is the lack of college preparedness among new college entrants. Nearly seven out of 10 students entering public two-year institutions and four out of 10 students entering four-year public institutions take remedial courses in college. 12 Generally, these are courses they should have taken in high school. The costs of taking these courses in college are high, especially because they do not count for college credit. Low readiness contributes to persistently low college completion rates, with only 55 percent of first-time undergraduates completing a degree within six years. 13 College dropout rates are especially high among lower-income, part-time, and nontraditional students, with high costs, low perceived ability to pay, and a lack of information about the returns to degree completion also contributing to the high dropout rate. The importance of college readiness underscores the value of high-quality K-12 schooling. But, research indicates that fewer than half of five-year-olds from low-income families possess the math and reading skills, behaviors, and overall health required for learning success, compared to 75 percent of children from middle- and high-income families. 14 These differences are important because they have long-lasting effects on academic achievement and future careers. A substantial body of evidence, including research by economists at the Minneapolis Fed, points to very large economic returns to high-quality preschool and early-childhood development programs. 15 Clearly, such programs can play an important role in improving economic mobility. I benefited from nursery school and kindergarten and a mother who taught me to read before I entered elementary school. And, when my junior high school tried to move me out of an accelerated math program, my mom intervened and got me back in. Paying for college is another major impediment to college attendance and completion. While college is generally a good investment, it has become increasingly expensive over the last several decades to attend a four-year program, as costs have risen considerably faster than wages—especially wages for all but the very top of the income distribution. This means that college has become increasingly unaffordable for those families who need it most, if we are to increase social and economic mobility. Of course, one result of the increasing unaffordability of college education is that fewer people get a college degree, which could help account for the slowdown in the growth rate of the college-educated workforce that I discussed earlier. However, recent research by my colleagues at the New York Fed shows that young Americans have mostly adjusted to rising tuition and fees not by foregoing college education, but rather by amassing more debt. Over the past few decades, funding for higher education has shifted from state and local sources to students and their families. While the federal student loan program has helped ease that transition, the result has been that more students are leaving college with significantly higher amounts of debt. In fact, student loan debt has grown 170 percent over the last decade and now totals over $1.3 trillion. 16 To be clear, I don’t want to downplay the importance of student loans. When accompanied by college completion, they allow students to make what generally turns out to be a very worthwhile investment. I personally benefited from student loans while at Berkeley. But, compared to alternative ways of financing higher education—such as greater government support for public universities and increased federal education grants—student loans can have adverse consequences. This is especially true when loans are taken on by those who don’t complete their education. For borrowers with large student loan balances, such consequences include slow or late repayment, serious delinquency, and default. 17 New York Fed researchers have shown that such unfavorable outcomes are related to family background. Thus, at times, student loans can have the perverse effect of limiting social mobility. In addition, our research indicates that, for any given level of educational attainment, workers who have student debts are less likely to own homes than those who got their education without incurring debts. Certainly, for those who have difficulty repaying their student loans, the resulting damage to credit scores will make obtaining a mortgage very difficult, especially under today’s lending standards. A student loan default, which is unhappily common, means that borrowing to buy a home is essentially impossible. And, we know that these factors—slow repayment, delinquency, and default—are most prevalent among those from modest family circumstances. This connection between rising college costs, increased student borrowing, and reduced homeownership is important for inequality and social mobility because, for the great majority of American families, increasing home equity is the major form of wealth accumulation. 18 Thus, changes over the last few decades in the way that college is financed mean higher education is less able to lift people from poverty into the middle class. I should note here that economic education has an important role to play in mitigating these challenges, which increasingly arise as debt becomes a more common part of the college experience. For example, financial literacy and the skills taught by educators have been demonstrated to better prepare young people for the management of their finances, enhancing their well-being. Financial literacy allows people to better understand the terms of student loans and the consequences of missed payments, and how to accumulate wealth. 19 I strongly support the CEE’s efforts to bring economic knowledge to young people, as I believe that it is increasingly vital for everyone, and has an especially important role in fostering social and economic mobility. Other factors that can foster or inhibit social mobility are the practices of universities themselves. In some very recent work, Raj Chetty and his co-authors have documented the role that different universities play in fostering economic mobility. 20 From my perspective, the most important findings are that access to the best universities is very closely related to parent income—children from wealthier families are more likely to go to Ivy League schools, for example. Yet, those students from poorer families who actually are admitted to the best universities do just as well in their future earnings as those from more advantaged backgrounds. Part of the problem, aside from cost, is the legacy admission policies of elite schools—where children of alumni receive preferential access. This is patently unfair, and scrapping such policies would help increase economic mobility. 21 I really don’t see how our best universities can continue to justify this practice. Yes, fund-raising might suffer slightly over time—but I suspect the impact would be very small. More importantly, do we really want to encourage what is essentially a “donate to admit” policy at our major universities? Such an approach only preserves the status quo and constrains economic mobility. The research shows that upward mobility differs substantially across colleges. Ivy League schools are good at producing top earners, but, as I noted, they accept very few lower-income students, so their impact on income mobility is small. Meanwhile, other schools with economically diverse student bodies produce few high earners, and their impact is likewise small. Then there are certain schools—some of which can be found in the CUNY and California state systems—that manage to produce a large number of high earners from economically diverse student bodies. Learning exactly how they do it and how it can be replicated strikes me as a first-order question for further study. While I am distressed by the high and increasing levels of inequality and diminished mobility that our economy has delivered over the last several decades, I remain optimistic about the future. There is more attention now to inequality and low intergenerational mobility than I can recall at any time during my professional life. Organizations like the CEE and the National Association of Economic Educators exist to improve awareness of economic concepts. This enhances the ability of young people to make better financial decisions and helps to close the gaps in knowledge that contribute to inequality. Top-tier researchers in both academia and the Federal Reserve System are focusing their attention on the causes, consequences, and solutions of this social problem, using better data, methods, and means of communicating their results. Even more importantly, policymakers are also paying close attention. Ultimately, I believe we will identify and implement policies that can make the dream of a better life a reality for more of our fellow citizens. Thank you again for your kind attention. I would be happy to take your questions. 1 Gerard Dages, Jack Gutt, Andrew Haughwout, Anand Marri, and Wilbert van der Klaauw assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Monetary Policy Report – July 2017 , July 7, 2017. 3 See William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the Regional Economy , August 10, 2017. 4 See the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing on Wage Inequality in the Region , August 10, 2017. 5 Pew Research Center, Global Publics More Upbeat About the Economy , June 5, 2017. 6 Corak, 2013. “Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational Mobility.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 27, no. 3 (Summer). 79-102. 7 Goldin and Katz, 2007. Long-Run Changes in the U.S. Wage Structure: Narrowing, Widening, Polarizing . NBER Working Paper No. 13568 (November, revised December). 8 OECD, 2015. Education at a Glance 2015: OECD Indicators , OECD Publishing. p. 78. 9 Wiswall and Zafar, 2011. Determinants of College Major Choice: Identification using an Information Experiment . Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 500 (June; revised August 2014). 10 Bleemer and Zafar, 2015. Intended College Attendance: Evidence from an Experiment on College Returns and Costs . Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 739 (September). 11 Wiswall and Zafar, 2015. “How Do College Students Respond to Public Information about Earnings?” Journal of Human Capital, vol. 9, no. 2 (Summer). 117-169. 12 Chen, 2016. Remedial Coursetaking at U.S. Public 2- and 4-Year Institutions: Scope, Experiences, and Outcomes (NCES 2016-405). U.S. Department of Education. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics. 13 Shapiro, Dundar, Khasiala, Yuan, Nathan, and Hwang, 2015. Completing College: A National View of Student Attainment Rates – Fall 2009 Cohort (Signature Report No. 10). Herndon, VA: National Student Clearinghouse Research Center (November). 14 Isaacs, 2012. Starting School at a Disadvantage: The School Readiness of Poor Children . Brookings Institution Center on Children and Families (March). 15 Wat, 2010. The Case for Pre-K in Education Reform. A Summary of Program Evaluation Findings . The Pew Center on the States (April). Grunewald and Rolnick, 2010. An Early Childhood Investment with a High Public Return . The Regional Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (July). 16 See the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing on Household Borrowing, Student Debt Trends and Homeownership , April 3, 2017. 17 For example, the default rate for students from relatively modest backgrounds is around 35 percent, 2-3 times that of those from wealthier backgrounds. See Press Briefing on Household Debt, with Focus on Student Debt , p.26. 18 Bleemer, Brown, Lee, Strair, and van der Klaauw, 2017. Echoes of Rising Tuition in Students’ Borrowing, Educational Attainment, and Homeownership in Post-Recession America . Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 820 (July). Tracy, Schneider, and Chan, 1999. Are Stocks Overtaking Real Estate in Household Portfolios? Current Issues in Economics and Finance, vol. 5, no. 5 (April). 19 Zafar, Bleemer, Brown, and van der Klaauw, 2014. What Americans (Don’t) Know about Student Loan Collections . Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics (June 5). 20 Chetty, Friedman, Saez, Turner, and Yagan, 2017. Mobility Report Cards: The Role of Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility . NBER Working Paper No. 23618 (July). 21 See Richard Reeves, Dream Hoarders (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2017). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 06, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at The Economic Club of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have the opportunity today to speak again at the Economic Club of New York. As we mark the tenth anniversary of the onset of the financial crisis, I would like to focus on some of the lessons we should draw from that harrowing experience, and the implications of those lessons for regulatory policy going forward. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and opinions and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The first lesson is that financial crises can have grave consequences—for the economy and the nation—that can linger for many years. The toll from the financial crisis was severe, with nine million jobs lost and eight million housing foreclosures amid the deepest economic downturn since the Great Depression. Moreover, the road back has been long and slow. Despite economic policies oriented toward supporting recovery, it has taken eight years to push the unemployment rate down to a level consistent with the Federal Reserve’s employment objective. Other residual impacts include the large size of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet; significantly higher public debt; and substantial damage to public trust in the nation’s government and financial institutions. The second lesson follows from the first. We need to ensure that we have a resilient financial system. To that end, we must ensure that the safeguards put in place in response to the crisis are fully appreciated and respected. But, it also means that we need to finish the job—for example, by building out a fully workable regime for resolving a complex, global firm if one were to become insolvent. We need to ensure that our financial system can continue to provide critical services not just during good times, but also during periods of stress. These objectives are particularly relevant today, when reopening the Dodd-Frank Act and modifying our regulatory framework are under consideration. While it is appropriate to evaluate adjustments that might improve our regulatory regime, it is critical that we do not forget the hard-learned lessons of the crisis and—in the haste to reverse course—undermine the robustness and resiliency of the financial system. The U.S. Housing Market Boom and Bust At the heart of the crisis was the U.S. housing boom and bust. Between 1997 and 2006, U.S. home prices nearly doubled in real terms on a national basis. Then, when the boom turned to bust, real home prices reversed course, declining by about 40 percent on a national basis, with larger price declines in several states. 2 The magnitude of the national price declines was unprecedented during the postwar period. The evolution of the financial crisis illustrates a number of key issues, including the potential hazards of financial innovation, the procyclicality of the financial system, and the importance of confidence in sustaining effective financial intermediation. The housing boom resulted from several factors. Innovations in subprime mortgage lending enabled moderate-income households to purchase homes with negligible down payments. This led to an increase in the demand for housing, which helped push up home prices. Home price appreciation masked the potential riskiness of such lending and, in turn, sustained the wisdom of the easier underwriting standards. As long as home values were rising, subprime borrowers could either refinance their loans or sell their homes when the initial teaser rates expired. Thus, losses on subprime and other mortgage lending were low, reinforcing the belief that such loans were “safe.” Easier mortgage underwriting practices were also supported by the ability of mortgage originators to pool their mortgages into collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), transforming low-quality assets into triple-A-rated securities. Investors, including banks, relied too heavily on credit ratings and didn’t do sufficient due diligence on the underlying quality of the assets and the assumptions that underpinned the triple-A ratings. Implicit in these ratings was the assumption that a large, national decline in home prices was extraordinarily unlikely. The rise in home prices led to a surge in construction activity, which helped to sustain the housing boom for a time. This effect was particularly powerful in states such as Arizona, California, Florida, and Nevada. Rising home prices also bolstered the economy by supporting consumption, as households monetized these gains by cash-out refinancings and home equity lines of credit. The housing boom was also supported by an accompanying financial boom. The financing activity associated with the surge in mortgage originations and securitizations pushed up the earnings of the major banking and securities firms. These strong earnings created incentives to ease underwriting standards further. But, as housing supply responded to the increase in home prices—housing starts rose from a 1.5 million annual rate in mid-2000 to a 2.3 million annual rate in early 2006—the positive feedback loop began to run in reverse. Home prices began to soften, subprime borrowers found it more difficult to refinance, and mortgage loan defaults and delinquencies rose. As the bust got underway in earnest, residential investment declined and consumer spending was undercut as home equity levels fell. The housing boom and bust underscores several important lessons. First, the financial sector is not only a very complex system, but also one that can be inherently unstable—subject to excess, then sharp reversal. This is especially the case when an important innovation occurs and market participants don’t fully appreciate the powerful feedback loops that first sustain a boom and then contribute to a bust when the process runs in reverse. This means that we as regulators must continually evaluate the financial system and monitor the landscape for new developments and innovations that, if taken too far, could lead to excess and put the system at risk. Second, when there are potential excesses that could threaten financial stability, we should look to temper them. For example, in the run-up to the financial crisis, macroprudential tools—such as requiring larger down payments or more closely evaluating the incomes of borrowers—could have been implemented to limit the demand for housing. If such an approach were successful, home prices would not have risen so dramatically, and the subsequent bust would have been less severe. Another approach would have required financial intermediaries to build stronger capital and liquidity buffers as protection against a housing bust and an economic downturn. Prior to the financial crisis, the conventional wisdom was that asset bubbles could not be identified in real time—rather, they could only be cleaned up after they burst. While there are significant challenges to identifying asset bubbles, it is clear that cleaning up only after they burst does not always work out well in practice. Third, we need to carefully monitor the incentives that govern the behavior of borrowers, savers, and financial intermediaries. During the crisis, some examples of bad incentives that sustained the boom included: Compensation practices at financial firms that rewarded volume and short-term performance over longer-term, sustainable returns; The conflict of interest inherent in the willingness of the credit rating agencies to designate tranches of subprime mortgages triple-A in exchange for fees; The ability of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to use their implicit government support to take on large amounts of mortgage risk with very little capital backing; and, The ability of AIG to use its triple-A rating to provide credit protection to banks and securities firms against complex mortgage obligations with little direct capital support or an adequate liquidity backstop. Culmination of the Crisis Once the housing bust got underway, stress on the financial system increased sharply as asset prices fell and bank earnings plunged. In the spring of 2008, such pressures led to a forced sale of Bear Stearns to JPMorgan Chase. Later in the year, the government placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship. In September, Lehman Brothers failed. And, a day later, AIG was rescued in order to protect the rest of the financial system against further losses and even broader contagion. With confidence in financial markets and financial intermediaries badly frayed, the Federal Reserve and the U.S. government intervened and provided a range of liquidity backstops, debt guarantees, and capital infusions to forestall a complete collapse of the financial system and the economy. The bust exposed many structural flaws in the financial system that exacerbated its instability. Without being exhaustive, these included the instability of the tri-party repo system, which supported the nation’s short-term funding markets; the risks of runs in the money market mutual fund industry; and the risk of contagion caused by the huge volume of outstanding bilateral (non-centrally cleared) over-the-counter (OTC) derivative obligations between the major financial intermediaries. The tri-party repo system was centered on two of the major U.S. banks. The system matched investors and borrowers each day—with the investors lending cash, secured by Treasuries and other collateral, to the major securities firms. But, the system was unstable. In times of stress, clearing banks could be faced with very large single-firm exposures—of potentially hundreds of billions of dollars. Not surprisingly, when such counterparties became troubled, the clearing banks were less willing to take on these large intraday exposures. As a result, repo investors, who were primarily worried about getting repaid each morning, were motivated to simply withdraw from the market. As short-term investors withdrew funding, the liquidity buffer of the troubled securities firm was quickly exhausted, particularly as other counterparties to that firm demanded additional collateral to secure their own exposures. Structural weaknesses in the money market mutual fund industry—which was a major source of short-term wholesale funding to the securities industry and various non-bank financial corporations—also exacerbated the crisis. When Lehman Brothers failed, the value of its outstanding short-term obligations collapsed. The Reserve Primary Fund “broke the buck,” and investors rushed to withdraw their funds from prime institutional money market mutual funds in a modern version of a classic “bank run.” The funds generally did not have sufficient cash available to meet these runs because they offered overnight liquidity at par value against a portfolio of assets with weighted average maturities that were considerably longer. Another important source of instability was the large volume of bilateral OTC derivatives positions outstanding among the major firms and the right of a firm to immediately close out such positions if their counterparty became insolvent. For example, when Lehman Brothers failed in September 2008, counterparties to Lehman terminated OTC derivatives in which the contract was in the money (i.e., Lehman owed money to the counterparty) and liquidated the collateral held against those obligations, but kept open obligations in which the exposure went the other way, from them to Lehman. Not only did this create an imbalance in the risk exposures of the failed firm, but it also generated significant market churn and risk as firms scrambled to rebalance their own risk exposures. The contagion generated by the complex web of outstanding bilateral OTC derivative exposures significantly worsened the crisis and was responsible for much of the losses Lehman incurred in its bankruptcy. 3 The near-collapse of the U.S. financial system underscores three critical lessons. First, financial institutions must be robust to stress. In particular, they need to have enough capital to be considered solvent even after sustaining significant losses, so that they can maintain the market access needed to recapitalize. They also need sufficient liquidity buffers so that they can respond to shocks without having to sell illiquid assets. The forced sale of illiquid assets can push asset valuations far below their fundamental value, which can increase insolvency risk. And, it is important that they not be overly reliant on short-term wholesale funding, which can evaporate during times of stress. Second, when we identify potential sources of instability that could amplify shocks, we need to make structural changes to the financial system to reduce or eliminate them. For example, the financial crisis made it clear that changes were needed in how tri-party repo transactions were unwound each day, net asset values were calculated for prime money market mutual funds, and OTC derivative obligations were cleared, settled, and risk-managed. Third, there should be a viable and predictable resolution regime. We need to be able to resolve a large, systemically important bank or securities firm in a way that limits contagion and stress on the rest of the financial system, while at the same time protecting the taxpayer against loss. Meanwhile, central counterparties (CCPs)—through which most standardized OTC derivatives must now be cleared—need to be open for business for the financial system to operate effectively. Here, the emphasis should be on ensuring that these financial market utilities can open for business the day after the failure of one or more of their participants. Credible resolution regimes for large banks and securities firms—and credible recovery regimes for CCPs and other critical financial market utilities—should help support confidence during times of stress. These measures would make the financial system less prone to booms and busts. Financial intermediaries would be more robust to stress when busts inevitably occur, and contagion to the broader system would be reduced when a systemically important firm fails. Such changes should reduce the likelihood of the failure of a large, systemically important firm and the negative consequences of such a failure on the broader financial system. These steps should help to ensure that credit flows can be sustained throughout the business cycle. Considerable Progress So, where are we relative to what is needed? As I see it, there has been considerable progress. The nation’s largest banks are much safer as a result of substantially higher capital and liquidity requirements, as well as robust stress tests. This enhanced resiliency has been achieved without a significant negative impact on the broad availability of credit—recognizing that it is now more difficult for households with low credit scores to obtain a mortgage. Most importantly, improving the capacity of such firms to continue to lend during times of stress should make the overall economy more stable. We have also made significant progress in addressing many of the structural weaknesses uncovered by the financial crisis. Money market reform has made the prime money market mutual fund industry smaller and safer. The elimination of the net asset value convention for institutional prime money market mutual funds has made these funds smaller and less prone to runs during times of crisis. 4 The tri-party repo system has been made more stable as intraday exposures of the large clearing banks have been dramatically reduced. 5 This means that they have less reason to back away from a firm if it were to become troubled. And, firms are much less reliant on short-term wholesale funding. We have also reduced the amount of risk in the system by requiring that most standardized OTC derivatives be cleared through CCPs, where multilateral netting occurs. 6 In a centrally cleared regime, major intermediaries have net exposures to individual CCPs that replace much larger bilateral exposures to other financial intermediaries. Of course, this means putting more eggs in the CCP basket. So, it is particularly important now to closely watch that basket. 7 Greater oversight of CCPs is necessary to ensure that they have good governance, sound risk management, robust technological infrastructures, and adequate liquidity support. In addition, we have made considerable progress in developing a viable resolution regime for large, systemically important banks and securities firms. More Work Is Still Needed Yet, we should not be complacent, as there are important areas where our work is not complete. 8 Relative to other countries, the United States has limited ability to implement effective macroprudential tools. That is because oversight is shared by several different entities, and the power to implement macroprudential tools is constrained. Another challenge is the diverse structure of the U.S. financial system, in which non-banks and capital markets play a substantial role in credit intermediation. Although the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) could conceivably play a greater role here, whether it will be able to do so effectively remains uncertain. Another issue that needs attention is the ability to resolve large, complex financial firms that operate on a global basis. The framework of requiring such firms to hold a large buffer of debt that could be converted into equity at the time of non-viability is an important step forward. But, the task of operationalizing this on a global basis in a way that is fully credible to these firms’ customers and counterparties has not been completed. Achieving clarity about the roles and responsibilities of home and host country authorities is still a work in progress. The Federal Reserve’s lack of authority to lend to a major securities dealer that gets into difficulty is another outstanding issue. The Dodd-Frank Act narrowed the Federal Reserve’s authority under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. No longer can the Federal Reserve lend to an individual securities firm or non-bank financial intermediary. Such authority may not be as necessary now that the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) has the power to lend under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act and firms are required to have sufficient resources to support their resolution plans. But, I would prefer having such a tool available in extremis given the potential need to buy time for coordination and critical decision-making. I think it is important to ensure that one can “get to the weekend.” Finally, the work needed to ensure that CCPs can always recover has not yet been completed. This is an issue of increased importance given that their role in the financial system has become more prominent. Where the Pendulum May Have Swung Too Far At the same time, there are some areas where the pendulum may have swung too far, where the costs of regulation—including compliance costs and the potential impact on the provision of services—are likely to exceed the benefits. In this vein, I favor regulatory relief for smaller banking organizations. First, such firms individually are not systemically important, and therefore do not pose a significant risk to the viability of the U.S. financial system. Second, the regulatory burdens on smaller firms can be heavy because they don’t have the scale over which compliance and other regulatory costs can be spread. Regulatory requirements should be appropriately calibrated to avoid inadvertently creating a competitive advantage for larger financial firms. I also think that the Volcker rule could be modified so that its implementation would be less burdensome. As I see it, regulators could review the criteria for permissible market-making. Trading activity should be viewed as market-making when it is customer-facing and inventories are not excessively large or stale. Market-making serves an important function, and it is important that trading desks can intervene and buy during flash crashes or sell during flash surges. Permitting this could provide greater liquidity and stability to financial markets. I would also exempt smaller banking institutions from the Volcker rule since they rarely, if ever, engage in proprietary trading. Do No Harm Many speculate that Congress will make changes to the Dodd-Frank Act. If the scope is confined mainly to small bank relief and adjusting how the Volcker rule is applied, I have no objection. But, because the Dodd-Frank Act addresses many of the key lessons of the crisis, I think it appropriate that changes be made carefully—with a paring knife, rather than with a meat cleaver. Here, I would underscore the importance of preserving higher capital and liquidity requirements for systemically important banks; Title VII, which mandates the central clearing of standardized OTC derivatives; and Title VIII, which gives the Federal Reserve an oversight role for financial market utilities that are systemically important, and which helps promote more uniform risk management standards. While Title II gives the FDIC the authority to resolve a large, complex financial firm by converting its debt into equity and establishing a new holding company, I do not think this is necessarily the only way to have a viable resolution regime. However, if Title II were to be eliminated, then the Bankruptcy Code would need to be bolstered. There are two essential requirements: the ability to initiate an effective resolution strategy over the weekend, and a government entity—be it the Federal Reserve or the FDIC—that can provide a credible liquidity backstop to the recapitalized entity when it opens for business on Monday morning. If resolution cannot be accomplished in this timeframe, confidence would suffer and there would be contagion. Without a credible liquidity backstop, clients and counterparties would run, making it much more difficult for the recapitalized firm to conduct its business. I would also preserve the authority of the FSOC to designate non-banking firms as systemically important and subject to supervision by the Federal Reserve. As I see it, the designations of GE Capital and AIG were successful in two important respects. First, Federal Reserve supervision resulted in improved corporate governance and risk management. Second, it created incentives for the firms to alter their operations to become less systemically important in order to be de-designated. We should also retain this designation tool because we cannot predict which firms and activities may emerge and become systemically important in the future. After all, I do not think many were focused on or worried about the activities of AIG’s Financial Products Group several years before the financial crisis, though in retrospect those activities proved to be systemically important. That part of the firm should have been better supervised and regulated. Summing Up In conclusion, as we reflect on potential changes to the U.S. regulatory regime, we should not lose sight of the horrific damage caused by the financial crisis, including the worst recession of our lifetimes and millions of people losing their jobs and homes. We had a woefully inadequate regulatory regime in place, and while it is much better now, there is still work to do. We should finish the job as quickly as possible, and we should do no harm as we adjust our regulatory regime to make it more efficient. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 James Bergen, Caren Cox, Gerard Dages, Beverly Hirtle, Anna Kovner, Lisa Kraidin, Lorie Logan, Jonathan McCarthy, and Kevin Stiroh assisted in the preparation of these remarks. 2 Figures are based on the CoreLogic home price index (including distressed sales) and the PCE price index as the deflator. 3 For more background, see Fleming and Sarkar, The Failure Resolution of Lehman Brothers , December 2014. 4 For more background, see Chen, Cipriani, La Spada, Mulder and Shah, Money Market Funds and the New SEC Regulation , March 20, 2017, and Cipriani, La Spada and Mulder, Investors’ Appetite for Money-Like Assets: The Money Market Fund Industry after the 2014 Regulatory Reform , June 2017. 5 For more detail, see Tri-party Repo Infrastructure Reform . 6 For more background, see Over-the-Counter Derivatives . 7 To paraphrase Andrew Carnegie and Mark Twain. 8 For related remarks, see William C. Dudley, Principles for Financial Regulatory Reform , April 7, 2017. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Transcript of Moderated Conversation at UC Berkeley Event, US Economy: 10 Years after the Crisis: November 27, 2017 - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Transcript of Moderated Conversation at UC Berkeley Event, US Economy: 10 Years after the Crisis: November 27, 2017 November 27, 2017 Posted November 30, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Carla Hesse : It’s wonderful to see a sea of blue in this beautiful space here, and to be here for such a wonderful occasion. When we planned this event, I didn’t think we realized we’d be in such an exciting moment, but I couldn’t be more thrilled to be here to have a conversation with Bill Dudley, who graduated from Cal with his Ph.D. in 1982. I want to mention that he got an undergraduate degree from a very small liberal arts college, and that’s meaningful because I think that the depth of having a liberal arts education underneath a very specialized advanced degree really helps people go to the distance in life, and to show the kind of leadership that Bill’s career has exemplified. At Berkeley, he studied with Professor James Pierce, who was a beloved professor, and who I didn’t realize until tonight had launched him at the Fed for his first job, having gotten his Ph.D. He then went on to Goldman Sachs and then back to the Fed eventually, in 2009, where he succeeded Tim Geithner. And has been there until now, and now we’re in a very exciting moment of wondering where he’s going next. So I’d like to invite him up here and ask him a few questions, and then we’re going to be sure to leave some time so that you can have at him too, because I’m sure he has thoughts that you’re curious to hear his views on. I thought we’d just start with the elephant in the room. How disruptive do you think this transition event is going to be? President Dudley : I don’t think it’s going to be disruptive. A couple of things I guess I would point out. First of all, so far so good. I mean the quality of the appointments has been excellent. Jay Powell is a really capable, good pair of hands. I think Janet’s done a fabulous job, but if it wasn’t going to be Janet, Jay’s a really, really good choice to be the Chair of the Fed. And Randy Quarles, who has been appointed to be the Vice Chair of Supervision, is also extremely well qualified for his position. So, if things stay in that sort of vein, everything’s going to be really great. The second thing I would say is that it’s a committee. When you think about monetary policy, you are really talking about, if you have a full complement, 19 participants on the Federal Open Market Committee. So it’s also important to recognize that changing out one or two people like me isn’t going to change what the committee thinks, because it is truly developing a consensus among the committee members that I think is important in terms of driving policy. Another aspect of this is that the committee really is very united right now in terms of what the appropriate policy path is. So if you look at this summer when we announced that we’re going to go and start to normalize the balance sheet, every participant on the FOMC subscribed to the principles of how to normalize the balance sheet over time. There weren’t any dissents. So you change out a few people, but I think the committee is really going to stay together. The last thing I would just say—two final things I would say on that point. One thing I think is really important is that the Fed’s mission doesn’t change. We have a mandate from Congress: maximum sustainable employment and price stability. So, whoever you are and whatever background you come from, when you come to the Board of Governors or you become a president of one of the Federal Reserve Banks and then serve on the FOMC, your mission is to try to achieve those dual-mandate objectives. It’s not like you can just go off and do something totally different. That mandate doesn’t change. And then finally, it’s not just about the principals. People put so much focus on the Chair and the Vice Chair. The Federal Reserve has thousands of really qualified professionals working every day to help make the people at the top well informed and to help in their decision-making. And all those people are still going to be there, they’re still going to be working really hard. So I think people—when you watch the movie “Too Big To Fail,” there’s no staff in the movie. There’s the Bernanke character, the Geithner character, the Paulson character around a table. That is not how policy is made. There’s just hundreds of people involved in thinking about what’s happening in the economy, what’s happening in financial markets. Thinking about various options of how you might respond. And that’s also true in the monetary policy realm. The staff is still going to be there, they’re still highly qualified and very much committed to the mission. So, I’m really not worried at all. Carla Hesse : That’s great. We’re all happy to hear that, I’m sure. So, what I thought we’d do is start with some broad questions, and then we’ll hone in and get a little more insider baseball. The first question I wanted to ask you was about your views of the Trump Administration’s policies that are making it more difficult to secure H-1B visas and to limit legal immigration from several countries. Now, what impact do you think this will have on the United States economy, and what immigration policies should the United States have in place? President Dudley : Well, we are completely apolitical, so I don’t have any views on any policies of the Trump Administration. That said, I think that when you educate people in the United States, you’re developing a lot of human capital, and I think it’s really logical that you’d want to have that kind of capital stay here in the United States. I mean, the spots at our leading universities—there are not that many spots. So, if you look at the economics program at Berkeley—when I went there, there were about 30 Ph.D. candidates per class. And about maybe half of them actually finished and got their Ph.D.’s. So, in my class, maybe 15 people actually got Ph.D.’s. Those are pretty scarce resources. If you’re going to educate someone to get a Ph.D. in the United States, wouldn’t it be better to try to encourage that person to stay in the United States and take advantage of that human capital that you poured all these resources into to develop? I don’t think you want to go quite so far and say if you get a Ph.D., you automatically get to stay in the United States, because obviously you do want to have secure borders. And you do care about any people who might have bad intent with respect to the U.S. So you certainly have to do the appropriate background checks, and things of that sort. But I think the presumption should be more the default that if you do get a Ph.D. in the United States, the presumption is that you get to stay as opposed to that you have to leave. That’s just good public policy, in my view. Carla Hesse : Yes, I mean you might be interested to know that the Berkeley Economics Department now graduates over a thousand BA’s a year. President Dudley : I know it’s a very big—I actually spoke to the undergraduates a number of years ago. And it’s done in the stadium now. Carla Hesse : There are five top-ranked programs in the country, but what really differentiates Berkeley is this incredible multiplier effect of the education that delivers at that very high level. It is a lot of human capital, and precious. So, staying with this sort of broader vein for a minute, I thought we’d ask a little bit about globalization, and what you see are the benefits and risks of globalization, trade, and increased competition. President Dudley : Well, we could be here for several hours to really answer that question with any detail. Look, I think first of all, we have to recognize that globalization has had huge benefits for the world. I mean, literally, hundreds of millions of people have been wrested out of poverty over the last couple of decades. So that’s number one. That’s probably a good thing, net-net. Number two, I think you have to recognize that globalization has benefits but it also has costs. The benefits for the U.S. have been low-cost goods and services from the rest of the world. But some of the costs in are the adjustment process that has to occur when businesses that were sheltered from competition are no longer sheltered from competition, and therefore have trouble actually carrying on. I think the big mistake is to think that putting up trade barriers is going to somehow make you better off. I do not believe that putting up trade barriers will make you better off. I think what it will do is it will force you to produce things that you are less good at producing. It will also risk the retaliation by those who you put the trade barriers up to, which will probably make you both worse off. In terms of the whole debate about the benefits and costs of globalization, I think what we should be focused on is how to reduce the adjustment cost to those that are hurt by globalization, or by technological change. For all the talk we have about globalization, I think technological change is probably actually more important in terms of the amount of stress it puts on certain segments of our citizenry. And I think we legitimately need to do a better job of helping those people adjust, rather than just saying, “Well, too bad, tough luck. Your plant closed down, you’re living in a small rural community, you don’t have many prospects for employment, and that’s just too bad.” So I think that we need to temper the sharp edge of capitalism at times, and that means workforce development, job retraining, trade assistance adjustment. We could do a lot more on that front, and if we did that, I think there’d be more acceptance of the benefits of globalization and of free trade, and then you’d have a stronger political consensus for the regime in which we have operated for the last few decades. Carla Hesse : One more question in this vein of global dynamics and their relationship to the economy. What do you think about the role of U.S. monetary policy in the global setting and its effect on the rest of the world? Is there a need for, in a similar vein, greater coordination between U.S. monetary policy and…? President Dudley : Well, there is certainly a need for good communication. I go to Basel, Switzerland five times a year, at least. Basel is where all the central bankers get together to talk about the economy, and monetary policy, and regulatory policy. And that’s actually a really important venue because you get to know your counterparts. So, if you’re in the middle of a financial crisis, and you pick up the phone to speak to someone, you actually know who’s on the other end, and you actually have built up some trust and a relationship with them. So that’s really important. I think that it’s important to communicate well and clearly. It’s important to have those personal connections. In the middle of the financial crisis, when we were negotiating the foreign exchange swap lines with my counterparts at the ECB, the Bank of Japan, and a number of other central banks—having met the people and having interacted with them on many occasions made it much easier to get to a good place. So it’s really important to have those personal relationships. In terms of coordination, I think there’s a limit to how far you can go, though. The mandate that’s set for the Federal Reserve on monetary policy by Congress is about maximum sustainable employment in the U.S. and price stability for the U.S. It says nothing about the rest of the world. So you have to recognize that the monetary policy that we pick here is the policy that we think is best for us. That said, if we do the monetary policy well and we communicate well, we can also minimize the disruption to everybody else. So, a good example is to compare and contrast the “taper tantrum” in 2013 and 2014 with the balance sheet normalization process this year. When we rolled out the balance sheet normalization process, we were very, very, very cautious in terms of how we communicated and how we actually implemented the program. We started to talk about what we were thinking about long before we actually enacted the program, and then when we actually pulled the trigger and said we’re going to enact the program starting in October, it was a program that built very, very gradually. And it won’t be fully in place for another year. And so, there were no big surprises. And I think that was very, very helpful in making it so the markets adjusted to this change in policy very smoothly. So we learned some lessons from the taper tantrum. I think communicating clearly, foreshadowing what you’re going to do, explaining why you’re doing what you’re doing, I think can not only be helpful to the U.S. and U.S. financial markets, it can also be helpful to the rest of the world. Clearly, U.S. monetary policy is important for the rest of the world. What we do in the United States does affect financial markets all over the world. And we want to have financial markets globally that behave more well than badly, and to the extent that we can communicate clearly so that the adjustment process is smooth, I think that’s good for everybody. Carla Hesse : So, let’s move onto the regulatory environment. You had the coverage in the Times, you’ve expressed some views on this, and maybe this will be an opportunity to elaborate a little bit more on what’s been covered already in the Times. Let me just start with asking you about how you view the unfolding of the Dodd-Frank Act. We all know that in response to the recession and financial crisis, Congress enacted much greater regulation in the financial industry. Recently, there have been calls to reassess that decision, and particularly to reassess and maybe even repeal the Dodd-Frank Act—or at least modify it in some form. How effective do you think Dodd-Frank has been, and can it be improved? Should it be reformed? Or is repeal a justified decision? President Dudley : Well, I certainly wouldn’t want to repeal the Dodd-Frank Act, and go back to the regime that we had in place prior to the financial crisis. I think we learned a lot during the financial crisis about a lot of inadequacies within our financial system. Banks didn’t have enough capital, they didn’t have enough liquidity. A lot of over-the-counter derivatives were cleared bilaterally, which created a huge mess when firms actually got into difficulty. We didn’t have particularly good oversight of the major financial market utilities. So large, systemically important firms weren’t required to have higher levels of capital and liquidity available to smaller firms. So there’s a lot of really good things in the Dodd-Frank Act. Title II basically provides a mechanism though which you can actually resolve a large, systemically important firm, probably in a way that wouldn’t necessarily threaten to take down the entire financial system. I think there’s a lot more good than bad in the Dodd-Frank Act. That said, could it be improved? Yes, I think it could be improved. I’ve been on record saying very clearly that I think that some relief for smaller banking organizations probably makes sense, because small banking organizations are not systemic. A failure of a small banking firm is not going to threaten to take down the entire financial system. So, differentiating between how you regulate large institutions and small institutions I think makes a lot of sense. Another change is the Volcker rule. The Volcker rule, as it has been implemented, has a pretty heavy hand of regulatory compliance to it. You could probably get most of the benefits of the Volcker rule with a lot less cost. But it’s important not to throw the baby out with the bathwater. I think that capital liquidity requirements do need to be higher on a permanent basis for large, systemically important institutions. I do believe that the central clearing of over-the-counter derivatives transactions actually reduces risk in the financial system. I think it’s important to have a viable resolution regime so you actually can resolve a firm or allow a firm to fail without necessarily taking down the rest of the financial system. I hope in my lifetime we will never have to have the kind of interventions that we had in 2008, with Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and AIG. Those are not interventions that were politically popular. They weren’t interventions that were comfortable to do. But it was really a question—I really viewed that officials that were making those decisions had a Hobson’s choice, and the Hobson’s choice was to rescue the firms to prevent violent failure or let the financial system collapse. And I think they made the right choice in preventing the violent failure of some of the major financial firms. Because I think if we hadn’t done that rescue, I think we would probably have had a Great Depression. So I think the right choices were made. They just weren’t pleasant choices. You need the Dodd-Frank Act to never get to that situation again, where we’re forced to make such difficult choices. So hopefully, in my lifetime, we’re never going to see anything like this again. Carla Hesse : One of the big concerns that is lingering from the way the economy has emerged from the Great Recession has to do with the labor market and employment. And even though the country is now approaching low—record low—unemployment rates, we haven’t seen wages bounce back and improve at the same rate that one might expect if you were really in a full recovery. You touched on this a little bit earlier, but maybe you could amplify a little bit more on how much you would see that as a consequence of globalization and the way in which it’s affecting wage deflation in the United States, or changes in the structure of labor markets nationally. And where are we with discussion of the sharing economy? And we’ll continue to talk a little bit more in the next question, too, about inequality in a growing economy. President Dudley : Well, the unemployment rate right now is 4.1%, which is a low unemployment rate relative to what we’ve had historically. We think it’s pretty much at full employment. And what we mean by that is the level of unemployment where if you go any lower, you’re actually going to have, over time, an inflation problem. But we don’t really know precisely where full employment is. So, if inflation doesn’t go up, sitting at a 4.1% unemployment rate, that means that you can actually let the unemployment rate go lower still. A lot of people are sort of wringing their hands about, gee, where’s the inflation? We’re at a 4.1% unemployment rate and there’s no inflation. That’s not actually a bad thing. It actually is a pretty good thing, because it means that you should be able to probe, and go to an even lower unemployment rate, which is actually a good thing for all those people that could actually be employed and have jobs and develop skills and grow their human capital. So, I’m not particularly concerned about the fact that inflation’s a little bit lower than our target. I don’t really completely understand why inflation is as low as it is right now. We would have thought that at this unemployment rate, we would be seeing more pressure on wages, and that that would be ultimately filtering into prices. It may just be that it takes some time—that you have to be at this unemployment rate for six months or a year or two years to actually see the consequences for wages and prices. But it’s not a bad place to be. I mean if you told me that you have to live in a world where the unemployment rate is 4.1% and inflation is about 1.5%, and you have to stay there for eternity—most central bankers would say “sign me up.” So, it’s important not to overstate the degree of the problem. I think what’s going to happen is that the economy is going to continue to grow at an above-trend pace. I think that’s going to continue to gradually tighten the labor market further. I think as that happens, we’ll see a little bit more wage inflation, and as that occurs, that will eventually filter into prices. When you look at—people talk about the so-called Phillips Curve. The Phillips Curve is the relationship between wage inflation and the unemployment rate. People saying, well, there’s no wage inflation, therefore the Phillips Curve doesn’t work. I don’t agree with that. If you look at the economy, instead of looking at the economy on a national basis, if you look at state by state, and you look at those states with a lower unemployment rate, you actually tend to have a higher wage inflation in those states with lower unemployment rates. So that’s suggesting the Phillips Curve is alive and well, it’s just not visible yet on a national basis. Carla Hesse : You’re not overly worried about what many, many economists—including some of the most notable ones at Berkeley—are worrying a lot about, which is growing inequality? President Dudley : Well, I am worried about that. In fact, what I’m worried about— so, people having jobs doesn’t mean they necessarily have good jobs. That’s problem number one. Unfortunately, the Federal Reserve and monetary policy can’t do that much about income inequality and can’t do much about income mobility, because monetary policy is really about the business cycle and trying to keep the economy at full utilization of resources. Obviously, if we keep the economy operating at a full utilization of resources, that will help people—because people will have jobs, and they’ll develop skills, and they’ll grow their human capital. But monetary policy is pretty limited on this particular front. I personally think that people talk a lot about income inequality. I actually think the bigger issue in the country is income mobility. The work that Raj Chetty and others have done basically shows that where you are born affects your lifetime earnings. Not what your family’s background is—literally, where you live as a child. That’s pretty damning. That actually seems fundamentally unfair. So, I think there’s a lot of work we need to do to try to address creating greater opportunities for people regardless of where they’re born, who they’re born to, did their parents go to college, did their parents not go to college, were they born in the rural South, were they born in New York City. I mean, the differences are quite vast, and they don’t have anything to do with the endowment of the individual. They have to do with the native environment—where they were brought up. And I think that really tells you that we have a lot of work to do on this front. So, I’ve been talking about this and I think the Federal Reserve is paying a lot of attention to this. We have a research institute at the Minneapolis Fed that’s looking at this issue very closely. And we in the New York Fed very much support that work. I think it’s hugely important. I mean, the whole American dream is based on the idea that anyone can be very successful if they really apply themselves. We’ve got to make that true—in fact, not just in theory. Carla Hesse : And so, the issue of low interest rates you don’t think intersects in any meaningful way, at least for people who rely on, for example, fixed incomes, or the elderly who are relying on pensions? President Dudley : Well—look, my mom is 94 years old, and she would like to have higher interest rates. But, the reality is that our job is maximum sustainable employment and price stability, and at the end of the day, I think that the country as a whole is better off having an easier monetary policy and a lower unemployment rate. I think that’s more consistent with our mission over time than to have interest rates somewhat higher today, and unemployment higher, because that will probably lead to lower interest rates in the future. It’s not interest rates at a particular point in time. It’s interest rates over years and years and decades and decades. And I think the best way you can have the highest sustainable level of interest rates is to get the economy to full employment. And that’s really been what our goal has been over the last seven or eight years. And we’re finally in the vicinity of full employment. As a consequence of that, we’re gradually now removing monetary policy accommodation, and interest rates are going up. It’d be really sad to tell people, “I’m really sorry, but I’m keeping you unemployed for a while longer because we need to have higher interest rates for savers.” I’m not sure that that would feel right. It certainly doesn’t feel right to me. So, my mom has had to do without. She’s doing fine. And I just think that’s—and the mandate that Congress has given the Fed—it’s maximum sustainable employment and price stability, and so we’re following the monetary policy designed to best achieve that mandate. Carla Hesse : And so you don’t worry, like some people—let’s say Ben Bernanke—about interest rates falling so low that it leaves us with very little room to maneuver? President Dudley : No, I do worry about that. I mean, this is the issue of let’s imagine that interest rates this cycle peak at a relatively low level, 4 or 5%. That would mean that in the next recession, the Federal Reserve wouldn’t have that much room to reduce interest rates before you got back to zero. And the issue there then is, OK, what would monetary policy do at that point? Would you have the tools in place to actually lift the economy out of recession? And that’s a legitimate issue. But two things I would say about that. Number one, we have a better toolset today to deal with the zero lower bound for interest rates than we did 10 years ago. We actually learned a bunch of things through this last episode—forward guidance, large-scale asset purchases, open-ended large-scale asset purchases until our goals were actually achieved—which means that the toolset is actually quite a bit better now than it was before. And it’s not as if monetary policy has to do all of the lifting. You can imagine the next recession, fiscal policy can also provide supports to the economy if you’re trapped at the zero lower bound for interest rates. I think that’s a real issue. How big an issue it is at this point, I think it’s really too early to say. We’ve only had one episode in history of being trapped at the zero lower bound for interest rates. How often this is going to happen in the future, I think it’s really, really too soon to say. Carla Hesse : I’m going to ask you one more question, then we’re going to open it up, and it’s a big question. I’m going to ask you to be brief in your response to it. But it’s such an important one, and I’d really be curious to have your thoughts about it. What do you think the work of the Fed in the last decade has had an impact on in the culture and ethics of the business community, the financial community in general? And how do you assess the state of things now? Do you think that there’s been a taking in of some of the more—let’s call them ethical or cultural questions—that were raised by the financial crisis? President Dudley : Look, I think there was a lot of bad behavior in the financial industry in the run-up to the financial crisis, and even in the aftermath of the financial crisis. The classic example I always use is the LIBOR issue, where people were calling up their treasury functions and saying, “Could you change the bid that you submit for your LIBOR submission because that will benefit me in terms of the trading positions I have outstanding?” Completely illegal, unethical, should never have happened. The treasury function should have said, “No, I’m not going to do this.” They should have reported the person to compliance. Compliance should have done an investigation. The traders should have been fired. That’s how it should have worked. It didn’t work that way on all occasions. So, clearly there’s a lot of work to be done in the banking industry—work on culture, in conduct, and in ethics issues. And this has been a priority for me to talk about this issue over the last number of years, and I think we’ve actually had pretty good take-up from the banking industry, that they really do understand now that this is important for them. That if they don’t address the culture and conduct issue, this could be potentially existential for them. Because what’s happened is, number one, the reputation of the industry has been really hurt, and so it makes it hard for them to attract people, good people, into the industry. We had a conversation with a number of deans from business schools a couple of years ago, and a number of them said that they have a number of students that won’t into the financial services industry because they don’t view it as ethical enough. And that’s not a really good self-selection process. So, if you’re not getting the people that think ethics is important, you’re only getting all the other people. That suggests that you have a lot of work to do. So I think that the banking industry now gets this—I mean obviously to different degrees, at different institutions—and I think they’re working a lot harder on this issue. So I think we’ve made a lot of progress. I think we need to do more, though. I think there could be more industry-wide efforts, where banks actually have a valuation of their culture and ethics, a questionnaire that evaluates—they all have the same questionnaire. They get each other’s results anonymously, see how they are doing relative to their peer group, and learn where they actually need to improve. This is being done in the U.K. There’s a Banking Standards Board that’s actually doing work on—they actually have a questionnaire and they share the results, and it really allows you to sort of benchmark yourself, “How am I doing relative to others?” What they’ve also found is they are getting better, more honest answers. So on the same question asked through this questionnaire that’s anonymous from the Banking Standards Board, they get slightly more pessimistic answers than when the bank has just done its internal engagement survey. So I think that we made quite a bit of progress, but I think there’s still more to do. Carla Hesse : I’ll just circle back to the beginning, saying I think this is another area where educational institutions have to play a really big role. And one of the things that I’m very proud of at Berkeley is the liberal arts foundation. Our business majors have to start in letters and science, and they get a very broad formation before they specialize in any particular technical area. And I just think that this is going to be the long-term solution. President Dudley : Can I add just one thing? One thing on that where I think academic institutions can do even better is to embed the ethics stuff in the course material for all the different subject matters. A lot of times the ethics course is off to the side. So, you take your finance, you take your marketing, and then over here is the ethics course. I think you really need that ethics material embedded in each course so that people can see some of the tricky decisions they might be faced with. Carla Hesse : I absolutely agree with that. In fact, I wrote a sentence just like that this morning to a member of our advisory board about the need to have very broad domain-specific ethics curriculum, whether it’s in STEM or the sciences, where also so many important ethical questions are emerging. President Dudley : You know, a lot of them are not black and white. A lot of them are gray. And so, to really draw them out by a particular example, where it’s something that’s not abstract, I think makes it much more real to people. Just to give you an example about how you can effect change: there’s always an issue with cybersecurity and phishing. And one of the things that you want to do is sensitize people to phishing. So one of the things we did at the New York Fed to sensitize people to phishing is I sent a message to everybody in the New York Fed, with a line in the message: “New York Fed restructuring.” And so that really made people really curious. And so people went in to open the e-mail. And the e-mail had a lot of things that made it very clear that it wasn’t from me. For example, in the e-mail my name was signed “William.” I never sign my name “William” in an e-mail. I always sign my name “Bill.” And there was a bunch of other things. But a lot of people clicked through because they just couldn’t help themselves to find out what was on the other side of the “New York Fed restructuring.” And I think that was actually pretty effective at making people much more sensitized to the phishing. It’s no longer abstract. It’s something where they could actually see how they could get fooled. And so you’ve got to get people engaged, where they internalize it. It’s like the difference between taking a class and auditing a class. I audited statistics in graduate school at Berkeley. It was a prerequisite for econometrics. It was a disaster. I’d nod my head through all of the audit, and then when it came down to when they handed out the final exam, and I had to ask myself to actually answer all these questions, I couldn’t answer any questions. Because I wasn’t being forced to actually internalize it by the problem sets, and all of the hard work that it takes to understand a subject like statistics. Carla Hesse : Yes, learning by doing. OK, so now we’re going to open it up, and I see this gentleman right here first. But just feel free to raise your hand. We don’t have a roving mike, so if you can, speak up. Audience Member : Are you concerned that the increase in debt-to-GDP over the last 16 years in the U.S., but also in other developed economies, is potentially an enormous problem as rates start to go up? And how are we going to get out of that problem? President Dudley : I think that your question is well taken in the sense that right now, the U.S. debt-to-GDP ratio is quite a bit higher than it was prior to the financial crisis, number one. Number two, our deficit is quite a bit higher now than it was at the same point in this business cycle during the last cycle. So, in 2007, our budget deficit was 1.1% of GDP. Last fiscal year, which ended September 30th, it’s 3.5% of GDP. And the baby boom retirements and Medicare and Social Security are right ahead. And as you point out, interest rates are rising. So, debt-service costs, which had been held down by the low level of interest rates, are going to rise as we go forward. So, this is an issue that is going to be a significant one at some point in time. It’s really not a market focus at all right now. It’s sort of surprising to me how relaxed the financial markets are about the whole issue of fiscal sustainability. It just doesn’t seem to be an issue that people are concerned about. But ultimately, debt can’t grow faster than GDP indefinitely. So, eventually, you’re going to have to get on a more sustainable fiscal track. I have no idea when the market is really going to focus on that point, but it seems to me that that’s something that’s relevant, not just in the United States, but in a lot of other countries. Audience Member : Crypto-currencies: Is it a medium of exchange, is it a commodity, is it a roulette wheel, or is it a tool? President Dudley : Time will tell. I’m not going to fixate too much about crypto-currencies, except to say that a good medium of exchange has stable store of value. And it’s also widely accepted as a medium of exchange. I personally think the U.S. dollar has those attributes much more than the crypto-currencies that we see outstanding. I essentially feel like if the Federal Reserve does its job properly, and keeps inflation at a lowest sustainable level, confidence in the dollar as a currency will remain high. And the dollar will do just fine as a medium of exchange. Is there a possibility down the road that central banks will get more involved in offering digital currencies as a substitute for cash—for the actual physical currency? I think that’s something that could happen potentially down the road, and certainly central banks are thinking about that. So what do digital currencies mean for—would that be a more efficient medium of exchange than cash? With cash, there’s danger that you could lose your cash. The cash could get stolen. So maybe there are other forms of currency that might be a better medium of exchange than cash. So I think that’s something that central banks should be looking at. I think it’s a legitimate question. Audience Member : You spoke of the ethical unease among students. Do you think any of that may be linked to the fact that there was not a single prosecution that arose out of the financial crisis? Do you think one day we may look back and rue that even more than perhaps some of us do now? President Dudley : Well, I’m not a lawyer, so I don’t have a good basis for judging what was actually possible in terms of successful prosecution. The problem, of course, is that doing dumb things is not against the law. Doing illegal things is, and so the question is where is that line between just doing dumb things versus doing illegal things. But I think that people that have broken the law should be prosecuted and held to account. I absolutely agree with that. I’m just not a lawyer, so I can’t really make a good judgment about whether the judicial branch of our government could have been more effective in that realm. I just don’t know enough to give you a really informed answer. Audience Member : I’m glad you brought up tech and disruption and potential massive unemployment due to tech disruption of the workforce. The response to this has been the idea of universal basic income. What is the feeling among policy makers of this concept, and what are your personal opinions on how it might affect both the country’s economy and the world economy? President Dudley : Well, before we get to the question of the basic income support, I’m not that worried about technology eliminating all the jobs and us having no employment opportunity—at least not in the near term. I mean, what percent of the U.S. workforce was in agriculture 100 years ago—70, 80% of the workforce? And now what percentage? It’s 1 or 2% of the workforce. It seems to me that there’s always new things that come along, new things for people to, new services to provide. So I’m not convinced at all that we’re on the cusp of this new thing. We’ve been having this conversation about what’s going to come next for several hundred years now. I’m just not convinced that all of a sudden there’s going to be no job opportunities for anyone. If there aren’t job opportunities, presumably it’s going to be because we’re just so incredibly productive and rich. And I suppose if we’re really in that environment, where all the robots are doing everything, the robots are making more robots, which are making more robots, that we’re going to actually have a pretty high standard of living. And so, I imagine in that regime we’re probably going to be able to afford something like a minimum income support payment. Right now, to do it would be very, very expensive, and I’m not really sure that people’s satisfaction in life would necessarily be higher if they were given minimum income as a choice versus being forced to seek out employment opportunities. They might in the short run think it’s better to just take the income stipend, but I always wonder whether in the longer term, whether the quality of life and how they experience life would actually be better in that kind of regime. I think the big question, though, in the short run, is just the fiscal costs, which would be pretty large. This is being debated in some smaller European countries right now. I think that if it happens, they’re certainly going to go first. I think the U.S. would be quite a bit further behind. And so I think for the people who decide to go down this path, we’ll sort of see how it works, and then we’ll learn more about how feasible this is in practice. And does it generate the quality of life that the people hope it will. Because at the end of the day, that’s what we really care about, right? It’s people having a good quality of life. And it may be that having a stipend improves your quality of life. But it may be having a stipend doesn’t improve your quality of life, because it makes your life empty and less fulfilling. So I think it’s an experiment, and we’re going to have to see. Audience Member : My question is back on the fiscal side. This is of course an important month ahead of us, with regard to tax policy. So, it’s sort of a two-part question: Do you see a need for tax stimulus to the economy at the present moment, and if you had your druthers and could design a tax policy that would encourage a healthy growth in the U.S. economy, what would be a couple of key features of it? President Dudley : I definitely am in favor of tax reform. I’d love to see the tax code simplified. I’d love to see the base broadened. I’d love to see it much easier to comply. My spouse does our tax returns every year. We don’t send them out to an accountant or anybody. And I watch her slave through the tax returns, and I watch how much time it takes to do the tax return. That can’t be efficient, it can’t be productive. So I think a much simplified tax code with a broader tax base would be very, very desirable. And I think that also applies to the corporate taxes. So I’m definitely in favor of tax reform. I’m not as in favor of tax stimulus at the current time because the economy, as your question implies, doesn’t really need that. So the tricky part, though, is what’s the trade-off between if I can get tax reform, but it requires a bit of fiscal stimulus to develop the consensus—is that a good thing or a bad thing? So I think that the devil is in the details. And so I think everybody has their own view. We’ll see actually emerges from Congress. And everyone will have their own view about is that trade-off a good trade-off, or not a good trade-off, in terms of how much is done on the tax reform side versus how much is done on the fiscal stimulus side. Fiscal stimulus—we don’t really need fiscal stimulus from an economic perspective. And as a question before came up, we do have to worry about the long-term fiscal sustainability of the U.S. But on the other hand, if there’s a price to pay to get tax reform, maybe that price is worth paying. So I think you sort of have to judge the whole package and whether you think those trade-offs are appropriate or not. Audience Member : This somewhat relates to the previous question. What is your view of the movement to increase the minimum wage or the living wage—however one wants to define it—versus unemployment, versus, I don’t know, interest rates, whatever—it’s kind of a triumvirate of factors. President Dudley : Well, I’ve been very clear for a long time in what I’m for in the minimum wage. It’s very simple. I want the minimum wage set as a ratio to the median wage. And none of this, minimum wage flat for X years, and then a debate about how big an increase are we going to have. If you actually had a minimum wage indexed to some percentage of the median wage—and what that percentage is a political decision that needs to be made by politicians—then you actually would have better plans for businesses. They’d know what the minimum wage was going to be over time—it was going to be X percent of the median wage. And it would also be better for the minimum wage earners, because rather than have a period of fallowness, where minimum wage is stuck at a very low level for a long time, then all of a sudden the minimum wage goes up a lot, they’d be compensated at a fairer proportion relative to the median wage. So I think that’d be a much better improvement in the regime. The problem with that proposal, of course, is the legislature gets to make that decision once. And that may make it hard for people to reach agreement. I think it’s a political decision, where you set that minimum wage relative to the median wage. Different states could decide to set it at different attachment points. That’s a political decision. Congress is not very good about equity. Congress is very good about efficiencies. Telling me that minimum wage should be 50% of the median wage or 45% of the median wage, or 60% of the median wage—that’s really a political decision. Congress isn’t going to do very well at telling you one is better than the other. Now presumably, the higher the minimum wage is relative to the median wage, the more there’s going to be a consequence in terms of unemployment. And so you’re going to have to weigh how you’re going to pay that cost in terms of unemployment for having a higher minimum wage. It’s not going to be free. There’s going to be a trade-off there, and you’re going to have to decide where you want to set that trade-off. But indexing the minimum wage to the median seems to be a definite improvement over the current regime. Better for the minimum wage earner, and better for business in terms of planning what their costs are going to be over time. It seems to me that it’s a win-win for both sides. Audience Member : Bill, you’ve done an amazing job. It’s probably the system in terms of meeting the mandates of full employment and price stability. But if you were to step back as Berkeley economist and say what should the mandate be—if you had a magic wand, what should the mandate be for the central bank? President Dudley : I’m not uncomfortable with the current mandate. I think the current mandate is completely reasonable. First of all, it doesn’t really matter what I say. This is something for Congress to decide, and the Federal Reserve is supposed to carry out the mandate. So first thing is, it really doesn’t matter what I think. But I think the current mandate has been really good. You want a little bit of inflation in the system because that actually helps lubricate the wheels of the economy. It helps lead to more efficient allocation of labor resources, because otherwise you have less flexibility in the labor market. I think George Akerlof and others have done work showing that maybe about 2% inflation is probably better than zero percent inflation, just because it allocates labor resources more efficiently. You also want to have a little bit of inflation because you probably want to be a little bit off the—you want to reduce the risk of the zero lower bound problem. So, I’m very comfortable with 2% inflation as a target. Audience Member : What about the full employment? President Dudley : I don’t think the two goals are inconsistent. I think if the Federal Reserve is doing their job properly, the two goals are actually compatible with one another. So if we go to maximum sustainable employment—and the important word there is sustainable. Yes, you could drive the unemployment rate lower for a short period of time, but that would generate inflation, and then the Federal Reserve would have to slam on the brakes, and you’d be worse off than if you actually stayed at a level of unemployment that was consistent with 2% inflation over time. I think the two goals are very compatible with one another. I don’t think there’s a huge tension between those two goals. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Remarks at The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market: Third Annual Conference - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Remarks at The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market: Third Annual Conference November 28, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market: Third Annual Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery On behalf of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and our co-sponsors—the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission—I would like to welcome you to this year’s conference on the structure of the U.S. Treasury market. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 This is the third year the New York Fed has co-hosted the Treasury market structure conference, which provides an opportunity to deepen our understanding of the changing landscape of the Treasury market. Many of you remember the market volatility of October 15, 2014, that precipitated the need for additional engagement between the private and public sectors about Treasury market structure. The Joint Staff Report on the Treasury flash event, the Treasury Department’s subsequent request for information, and the work that has followed identified a number of changes that have reshaped the Treasury market over the last decade. These include the increased electronification of trading, the changing nature of intermediation and liquidity, and the entry of new market participants. In light of these changes, the Joint Staff Report highlighted four important priority areas for additional work. In taking these efforts forward, we have benefited from ongoing engagement with market participants and other members of the public. The first priority is gatherings like this one, where both private and official sector participants come together to study and share views on what the market’s evolution means for its structure and liquidity. Understanding how the Treasury market is evolving can enable us to be good stewards of its trajectory. A second priority is improving the availability of data on activities in the cash market. After the historic volatility that occurred on October 15, 2014, the official sector had limited access to transaction data. This resulted in a months-long lag in the process to gather and analyze data from the event. The introduction this year of transaction data reporting by broker-dealers to the official sector is thus a critical step forward. While closing this data gap for the official sector is an important milestone, work remains to ensure that the scope of collection is sufficiently complete and dynamic to maintain coverage of relevant firms, as intermediaries and liquidity providers evolve. One initiative in this direction is the Board of Governors’ plan to collect transaction data from depository institutions. Looking ahead, I expect that a continuing priority will be increasing data transparency to all market participants and to the public in a manner that supports—and does not harm—market liquidity and integrity. Part of the successful evolution of the modern Treasury market will be adapting to the data needs of its participants. I believe transaction data reporting to the public based on careful study will ensure that the Treasury market does not fall behind other markets, will promote a robust and level playing field, and will help safeguard the liquidity characteristics that make the Treasury market the benchmark for risk-free trading around the world. The rise of electronic trading, another market feature highlighted in the Joint Staff Report, helped to identify a third priority area: the market practices and risks associated with the Treasury market. Market infrastructure—including the financing of Treasury transactions, as well as the clearing and settlement of those transactions—seldom merits investor attention until an element that is vital to smooth functioning of the market goes awry. The history of financial markets is filled with examples—some recent—in which confidence in trading collapsed after market participants no longer knew or could assess the underlying risk of market engagement, leading them to disengage. While such disengagement may be rational from the perspective of an individual participant, it is destructive to the collective market function. A major infrastructure issue for the Treasury market has been the clearing and settlement practices of the cash market. This can be opaque, with a majority of trades cleared away from central counterparties (CCPs). While central clearing is more uniformly used in other segments of the Treasury market—such as futures—many market participants elect to clear and settle cash Treasury transactions in a bilateral fashion. This process includes many market participants: trading venues, clearing agents, and clearing banks. No single participant has a view of the entire clearing and settlement system. The Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG), a New York Fed-sponsored group of market professionals working to support the integrity and efficiency of the Treasury market, has concentrated its recent efforts on this topic. Preliminary findings include an increasing volume of linked trades that clear centrally on one side and bilaterally on the other. This work has also uncovered information asymmetries in clearance and settlement risk management, which potentially could lead to a mispricing of these risks. Moreover, increased understanding about the depth, breadth, and durability of credit arrangements that support clearance and settlement seems desirable. This would improve market integrity through greater understanding of risk throughout the clearing and settlement process and how it is affected by different conditions. Since the financial crisis, there has been an effort to strengthen the resiliency of repo market infrastructure, which is another important element of Treasury market plumbing. Immediately after the crisis, the Federal Reserve was active in pushing reform of the tri-party repo market, which had been a locus of stress in 2008. More recently, Treasury repo markets have undergone further changes, including market adaptations to post-financial crisis regulations, and the introduction of multiple programs expanding access to central clearing to a wider range of market participants. These markets also have been affected by efforts to set heightened expectations for CCPs with regard to liquidity risk management, margins, and governance and recovery planning. This is consistent with the Treasury Department’s recommendation that regulators ensure appropriate risk management at CCPs and other financial market infrastructures. For example, earlier this month, the SEC approved the Capped Contingency Liquidity Facility—a liquidity risk management tool for the DTCC’s Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (FICC). This tool helps to ensure that FICC will have sufficient liquidity to cover the default of a Government Securities Division member to which FICC has the largest exposure. This development reflects another positive step toward a safer centrally cleared repo market, and aligns well with broader official sector efforts to maintain a well-functioning and robust Treasury repo market. Finally, the Joint Staff Report identified the importance of strong interagency monitoring of the Treasury market, in close collaboration with the public. Judging by this gathering, the commitment to this task is strong—which is good because many questions remain. How can the Joint Member Staffs and private stakeholders best collaborate to ensure stability in the Treasury market as the market structure evolves and new technologies are applied? How should practices and culture evolve accordingly? Will new technology and automation in the marketplace introduce unexpected challenges or risks to Treasury market participants? Are there opportunities to improve market transparency in a way that sheds light on risk issues that emerge as the market continues to evolve? Are the regulatory requirements imposed upon the Treasury market appropriate in the current environment? Has a competitive level playing field been maintained given the evolving structure? And, are there any changes that could improve the functioning, efficiency and/or integrity of the Treasury market? As I highlighted before, answering such questions well could require greater transparency. It is important for officials and market participants to fully understand the range of market elements. These include the relative size of transaction volumes by various players, the breadth and resiliency of platforms used to facilitate risk transfer, and the robustness of market infrastructure under contingent circumstances. More broadly, interagency efforts and collaboration with the public to shed light on the evolving structure and its risks are critical to protecting Treasury market function and supporting investor confidence. Because we benefit from the Treasury market being the deepest and most liquid market for government securities, complacency should not be an option. We need to work together to ensure that the longstanding confidence in the Treasury market is sustained in the future. This conference provides an excellent opportunity to continue this discussion and work on these issues. Thank you for coming. I look forward to today’s dialogue and the ongoing engagement between the Joint Member Staffs and the public. 1 Vic Chakrian, Ellen Correia Golay, Frank Keane, Matthew Milroy, Marcus Petersen, Liza Reiderman, William Riordan, and Nathaniel Wuerffel assisted in the preparation of these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Transcript of Fireside Chat at Rutgers University—New Brunswick: November 29, 2017 - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Transcript of Fireside Chat at Rutgers University—New Brunswick: November 29, 2017 November 29, 2017 Posted December 01, 2017 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Moderator: Eugene N. White, Professor of Economics at Rutgers University and a Research Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research Eugene White: Dr. Dudley is going to first give some general comments about the regional economy, and then we're going to move over here for a fireside chat to talk using some pre-prepared questions, and then from the audience. President Dudley: Great to be here. My wife is a graduate of at the school and she sends her regards. She's the Chair of the Douglass investment fund, so she's actually involved with the college on an ongoing basis. It's also great to see Christine Cumming, whom I worked very closely with at the Fed. She was the First Vice President of the Fed, and is now on the faculty here. So, glad to see you here, Chris, as well. I thought I'd just talk a little bit about what we're doing on these kind of roadshows. Like, why do we do this? And talk a little bit about the regional economic outlook. The New York Fed—the Second District of the Federal Reserve, it's New York's Fed district, and it consists of New York State, Fairfield County, Connecticut, Northern New Jersey, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. And we think it's important that in terms of how we interact with our community, to actually go out into the community and find out what's really going on. It's one thing to look at economics, statistics, and data, but it's also very valuable to actually hear from people in terms of what are they experiencing in terms of the economy. What's happening to the labor market, what's happening to job availability, what's happening to the housing market. We learned a lot during the financial crisis about the difficulties people were having with maintaining their mortgages, staying current on their mortgages. So, you get that information by reaching out into the community. I basically go out on four road trips a year throughout the district. So this is the fourth one for Northern New Jersey. We're going down to Puerto Rico which has been devastated by the hurricanes, in a couple of months. That’ll be the next one. It's been very valuable for me in terms of really understanding what's going on, on the ground. So, basically is important. It informs how we think about the appropriate course of monetary policy. It's one thing to look at economic statistics, it's another thing to hear from real people on how the economy is actually affecting them on a day-to-day basis. The second thing we do on these trips is we're really trying to understand what we can help bring to the community in terms of our own outreach efforts. We have a function in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York which is Outreach & Education, and we like to use that to try to actually help the communities that are in our district. Some of the ways that we do that, for example, is we recently ran a small business forum in New Brunswick about how small businesses can gain access to capital. In the wake of Superstorm Sandy, we actually had a set of workshops in New York about how could people actually navigate through the various aid programs and help people recover from the hurricane. We also publish a lot of economic data that is actually helpful to the policymakers locally. So we do a small business survey for the region. We're also now starting to compile a lot of micro-data at the local level, so you'll actually sort of see how is it one day we're doing well and another day we're not very far away from doing much more poorly. And that actually helps policymakers make better decisions about how they can actually help their local community. And the last thing we do is I think we have a pretty strong ability to convene people. If we say something is important, a lot of people will sort of take this pretty seriously. And so if we can have various stakeholders come in—people from the education communities, from government, from private businesses, from community development groups—and have conversations about real issues, which I think actually pushes the ball forward in terms of making progress on tackling some of the tough public policy issues we face. One of the things that I’m very focused on is income mobility. I think people they get in the United States, there's the American Dream, the idea that you can start from the bottom, work hard, and make your way up. But the fact is, income mobility in the United States isn't really good. And that's really something that we need to work on. That's why places like Rutgers are so important because it's really the educational communities that essentially give people that leg up. So, for example, Milton Friedman has a story, I thought was a very interesting one. His parents didn't go to college. Just like my wife Ann. Her parents didn't go to college, and so she came to Rutgers. Her family thought she should go to the local community college, and she said no, I'm going to go to Rutgers, I'm going to go to a four-year college. So I think what happens in the educational communities in our region are really, really important in terms of giving people the job skills and that head start so they can actually make a success of themselves throughout their career. That's the one thing in the Second District, where we really have a comparative advantage, the number of really high quality educational institutions in the Second District is really without parallel. I mean, the only district that could even sort of, maybe slightly compete with us, might be the Boston Federal Reserve’s district. Having those educational communities work closely with business, I think is also important. So that's something else we very much stress. We want to have people graduate with the skills that businesses actually need so that those people can actually get jobs quite easily. So that's really sort of the purpose of why we go on these road trips. Also we can give our views about the economy. So Eugene’s going to ask me a lot of questions, which I'll answer. I'm sure we'll cover not just the local economy but we'll also talk about the national economic outlook and things of that nature. Eugene White: We're going to have a fireside chat here. We're going to move over here. Audience Member: I'm looking for the fire. Eugene White: I don't think in these buildings they allow you to light anything. Except maybe intellectual discussion. So, I've had a series of questions handed to me by faculty and graduate students and undergraduates to ask you. So, one question which is submitted was a quote from Charles Steindel, the former Chief Economist for Chris Christie, who used to also work at the Fed. And he said that the New Jersey economy consistently grows at a 0.5 to 1% slower than the national economy. This has been going on for a half century or more. Given this regional divergence, how do regional considerations figure into the Fed's policy decisions? President Dudley: Well, clearly, we set monetary policy for the nation as a whole. So some regions are doing better, some regions are doing less well. And we take all that in consideration in terms of monetary policy. We can't set monetary policy differentially. You can't have one monetary policy for New Jersey, another one for New York City, another one for upstate New York. So, we have to understand that monetary policy is going to be set for the country as a whole. But the way the Federal Reserve is constructed, you have these 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents, and they can very much come to the FOMC meetings and reflect what's going on in their regions. So the regional views and what's happening in the various regions do get very reflected in those monetary policy discussions and the decision-making. Now in terms of New Jersey, growing a little bit more slowly than the national average, I think that's part of a much broader story, which is the migration of people from the Northeast and Midwest to the South and West that's been going on for 30 years. Population growth in New Jersey is well below the national average, and that's really probably the primary driver of the fact that the growth rate in New Jersey is going to be a little bit weaker than the country as a whole. Eugene White: One of the things I think in terms of the Fed that people aren't aware, they might think that this is all self-chosen by bankers, and so forth. But really the Board of Directors is a very diverse group, right? President Dudley: Yes, it is a very diverse group, and in fact, the bankers—so the Federal Reserve Act sets a mandate of we have to have a board of directors, and the board of directors consists of three groups. There's the Class A directors, which are the bankers—three of them. There's the Class B directors that are supposed to represent commerce. And the Class C directors that represent I think the community sort of broadly. The Class A directors, the bankers, they have no part in the selection process for the President of the Federal Reserve banks, which I think is a good thing. So, it makes it very clear that we're here to represent Main Street, not represent Wall Street. I've announced that I'm going to be stepping down sometime late spring, early summer. So we have a search committee composed of four members of the Board of Directors, excluding the bank directors, and they begin the process of a search for my successor. Eugene White: So, yesterday, bitcoin topped $10,000. How does the use of digital currencies impact monetary policy, and should the Fed play a greater role in adopting digital currencies to the payment system? President Dudley: Right now, bitcoin is tiny relative to the amount of payment transactions that are executed in the United States. It's essentially trivial in the broad scheme of things. But there are some aspects of bitcoin that are quite interesting. So like the ledger, you know, blockchain ledger technology is something that we think actually could be used in other applications. I think at this point it's really very premature to be talking about the Federal Reserve offering digital currencies, but it is something we are starting to think about. So, what would it mean to have a digital currency? How would we offer it? Do we actually need it? I think that in terms of bitcoin, I would be pretty cautionary about it. I think that it's not a stable store of value. It doesn't really have the characteristics you would like to have of a currency or a payment medium. It's not a stable store of value. The price goes up and down very sharply. And it's not legal tender. So someone doesn't actually have to accept bitcoin for your transaction. If I go in the store with dollars, or currencies, people actually have to accept my currency and make that transaction. So, I think that I would be, at this point, pretty skeptical of bitcoin. I think it's really more of a speculative activity at this point. Eugene White: Although some central banks have moved ahead of the digital front. Sweden, for example, pushing very hard. President Dudley: Yes, Sweden is an interesting case. Sweden, the use of cash is much less than in the United States, so that makes digital currency more easy to migrate to. Also more people are participating in the banking system. One of the challenges for the U.S. to move to a digital currency that a central bank offered is a lot of people are not really actually plugged into the banking system. So, you'd have to have a system in place that actually brings those people that are currently unbanked into the financial system. To really have an effective digital currency in the U.S., we have to overcome that challenge. Eugene White: You mentioned about the income distribution. We know that in the U.S. that income distribution, we've had vast growth but it hasn't benefited everyone. Is there anything in monetary or perhaps banking policy that the Fed could do to perhaps improve the performance? President Dudley: Well, monetary policy is a pretty blunt tool in terms of its ability to affect income distribution. But there are parts of banking regulation that do relate to income distribution, the Community Reinvestment Act basically says that you have to actually supply credit to disadvantaged neighborhoods. You can't discriminate based on location. So there are things in banking regulation that can actually help make sure that credit is flowing freely to areas that maybe otherwise would not get those funds. I think that the issue of income distribution, income mobility, I don't think we can do much directly in terms of our policy tools, in terms of monetary policy. But I think we can do a lot from the bully pulpit, basically put attention on this issue, underscore how important it is, and talk about things that we can do address it. Educational opportunity, workforce development, job retraining, the ability to actually have the ability to move from the inner city to where the jobs are. Because a lot of times we see, when we're traveling around the region, we see people in the inner cities actually can't literally get to where the jobs are because there's not appropriate transportation networks. Childcare is another issue. People have trouble holding down a job if they have a young child. Who's going to take care of their child during the day? And how do the economics of that work, if they're not making a very good salary? So I think there's a lot of issues. I think it's really an important issue for us to solve as the country because if you don't have a sense that wherever you're born, you have sort of a roughly similar opportunity to succeed based on your work effort, you don't really have a fair country, in some fundamental sense. Raj Chetty is a researcher who's done some terrific work on this issue and the work that he's done basically shows that where you're born, where you live geographically affects your future prospects. That is really quite disturbing. That means it's not about the person, it's about literally the luck of the draw of where they were born and raised. And so that shows that we have a lot of work to do on this front. Eugene White: And in fact, mobility in the U.S. has actually declined. Interstate mobility has declined significantly. President Dudley: Exactly. Eugene White: Let me ask you a question, which is more about something which is within the Fed's compass of authority. What do you think the biggest risks to financial stability currently are, and where the next crisis—well, hard to ask the question—where the next crisis might originate? But suppose there were another failure on the order of Lehman Brothers. Are you concerned about the limitations that have been imposed on the Fed in terms of emergency lending? President Dudley: Let's have first with the issue of financial stability, how worried am I about it today? It's true that financial markets are pretty buoyant, and so that's raised the question, how concerned should we be about that? I would say at this point, I would say not that concerned, and the reason for that is that the markets I think really reflect the state of the economy. The economy's doing very well, it's been very stable. The economy has been growing 2, 2.5% a year consistently. We're at a very low unemployment rate, 4.1%, and it looks like the expansion has got lots of room to go. There are not a lot of excesses in the economy. The credit growth is growing only slowly. Households seem to be in good shape, businesses are starting to ramp up their investment. So, it seems to me like we actually have a very good prospects for this expansion to continue for quite some time. So, the financial markets in my mind sort of reflect that. If the financial markets were behaving in a way totally disjointed from how the economy is performing, I'd be a lot more worried. The second reason I'm not so worried is that I think the banking system and the financial system is a lot more robust to stress today than it was 10 years ago. So banks have a lot more capital and have a lot more liquidity. There's a lot less leverage in the system. There's a lot less maturity transformation where people are borrowing short and lending long. And so that means even if markets were to go down, if the market prices were to go down, I think the financial system could bear that stress much, much better today than 10 years ago. The issue that I'm actually a little bit worried about that no one else seems to be worried about is really the issue of fiscal sustainability. The budget deficit last year was 3.5% of GDP. In 2007, the budget deficit was 1.1% of GDP roughly at the same point in the economic cycle. So we're pretty deep into this economic cycle, and we still have a sizeable budget deficit, and we have a baby boom generation that's just about to retire, driving up costs for Medicare and Social Security. On top of that, interest rates, the Federal Reserve is gradually normalizing interest rates, raising interest rates. So debt service costs, which have been very, very subdued due to the low level of interest rates over the last 10 years, those are also going to be going up. I'm a little surprised that financial markets aren't at all concerned about the sustainability of our fiscal position. I think that's something that people should be more focused on. Eugene White: Since you brought up fiscal questions, I have to ask, since we have a tax package going through, and there's a partial rollback with the mortgage interest deduction, do you think that would have any effect perhaps on booming house prices? If that was rolled back? President Dudley: I think to the extent that—in terms of the provisions that I see in the two tax bills in the House and the Senate, there could be some downward pressure on high-end housing, but the mortgage interest deductibility I think is going to be retained for about half a million dollars. So that means that for most homes, in most areas, I don't think that you're going to have a big consequence. I would hesitate to say, get too concerned about the fact that very high-end houses could go down in price a little bit. I think the economy can manage that just fine. Eugene White: I know you have a busy schedule, but I'd like to take a few questions from the audience, if that's all right? Audience Member: I was really struck that after a report by the U.S. Treasury in June about financial reform for depository institutions, which really started out with the idea that the principle elements of Dodd-Frank and Basel III, et cetera, should probably stay in place? That both Chair Yellen and you have given very important speeches that have talked about the importance of preserving that basic structure. Are there particular things that concern you in the environment that led both you and the Chair to speak about this? President Dudley: Well, I think the concern on my part, and I think Chair Yellen can of course speak for herself, is that if you open up the Dodd-Frank Act, make sure you don't throw the baby out with the bathwater. There's elements of the Act that I think are very, very important in making the financial system more strong and stable and resilient. Capital and liquidity for banks, especially large systemically important banks, the ability to have a resolution regime in place where you can actually liquidate a large financial institution that gets under stress; the ability to clear derivatives centrally through central counterparties, and make sure that you can actually then have the ability to examine those central counterparties, and make sure that they're well-run and operated. So, as long as you keep those major pieces in place, then I think you can make some minor adjustments to the Dodd-Frank Act. Things that I've talked about and I think other people at the Fed have talked about these same things is relief for smaller banking institutions because smaller banks, if they fail, it's not going to be systemic, it's not going to threaten the viability of the financial system. The Volcker Rule probably could be implemented in a way that is less burdensome to banks, and maybe gives banks and securities firms a little bit more flexibility to intervene when prices go up sharply or down sharply, which is what you actually want them to do in financial markets. I think the news that we've seen in terms of financial reform actually seems to be pretty positive. It's really more of about doing some changes at the margins as opposed to wholesale changes that would really dismantle Dodd-Frank. I think we really do remember the financial crisis, still, thank God. It was the worst financial crisis that we've had since the Great Depression. The unemployment rate soared, millions of people lost their homes. That's why we got the Dodd-Frank Act. We just have to remember that we need to have a financial system that's strong and resilient, and that the Dodd-Frank Act helps us achieve that goal. Eugene White: Questions? Yes? Audience Member: Yes, I want to know how did working for Goldman Sachs impact your outlook as the President? President Dudley: I don't think it was the fact that I sort of worked for an investment bank that was important. I think it was more important what I did in the investment bank. I was in the economic research department, and I was basically someone who basically supported the trading functions of the bank. And that was valuable to me when I came to the Fed because it allowed me to learn a lot about how markets actually work, how markets actually function. And we got deep into the financial crisis. What we saw is the financial markets started to not work well. People lost confidence, they lost trust. They started to disengage, and so my experience at Goldman Sachs, I think, actually helped me understand what was going wrong and then maybe how to address it. So, in the fall of 2008, we introduced a number of very special liquidity facilities, things that we'd never done before, and I think my experience at Goldman and my understanding of how markets work, and my ability to reach out to people that I knew in the marketplace to talk to them, like what's going on?, and understand what they were saying to me, probably helped me. You want to have—we're having a lot of transition at the Federal Reserve right now, and people ask me the question of, “What do you want with the Fed?” I think you want diversity. Diversity, I'm not just talking about diversity of gender and ethnicity but I'm also talking about diversity of background. So you don't want everyone to be a PhD economist from academia. You don't want everyone to be a markets person from Goldman Sachs. You want to have a mix because those different perspectives, when blended together, can lead to better policy outcomes. Eugene White: Someone else? This is a quiet audience. Yes? Audience Member: I had a question. You mentioned that you wanted diversity, both through academics and bankers. The new Fed Chairman-elect Jerome Powell, he doesn’t have an academic background. He's more of a Wall Street kind of guy. Do you think that's going to have an impact on his term looking at the Fed? President Dudley: I think Jay's going to do very well. The thing that you really want I think as a Fed Chair—I don't think an Economic PhD is required. There are plenty of PhD economists within the Federal Reserve system. The Chair does not have to have a PhD in Economics. What you want is someone who's smart—which he is. You want someone who actually works hard—which he does. And you want someone who's not an ideologue. And the reason why I say not an ideologue, because you don't want people to think that they're so convinced that they know how the world works, that they ignore the evidence that contradicts that. And Jay is not an ideologue. So I think he's a fine choice to lead the Fed. I'm not concerned about it in the least. Eugene White: One more question, or two more? Certainly, yes? Audience Member: You mentioned a lot of things to address income mobility, but I'm wondering where you see the role of community banks going forward? Back in the day, they were very important. But now we have a sort of new different kind of large bank system. Do you see community banks still playing a role in that mobility? President Dudley: I think community banks play a hugely important role. We basically still have about 7,000 banks in the United States. And only about five or six of them are really, really large. So, community banks play a unique role because I think they basically are much closer to their customers than large banks are. And so they play a particularly important role in local communities in terms of supplying credit to small businesses and to other customers where they know more about the customer. And so they can actually make more nuanced credit-lending decisions. So, I think they're really important. They also play a very important role in community, in supporting the community. So, I'm a big fan of community banks. I mean my great-grandfather was a community banker, actually, in Sylvania, Ohio. I remember when I was young, I got shown his bank book during the Great Depression, and the bank book had a lot of debits, and these were debits where he was basically putting money into the bank to keep the bank alive during the Great Depression, and the bank did actually make it through the Great Depression. And so I'm very much a supporter of community banks. I think they perform a very important role. Which is why we want to have a regulatory regime that suits, not just the big banks, but also is appropriate for the small banks. We need to have a regulatory regime that's proportioned to the risks that the institution poses to the financial system and the role that the institutions play supplying credit, especially to small businesses and households where I think community banks play a very particularly important role. Eugene White: We have time for one more question? Audience Member: To follow up on that then, could you comment on the role of fintech lenders vis-a-vis community banks? President Dudley: Well, fintech lending I think is still very much in its early days, early stages. This is like peer-to-peer lending. I think it's something that we are following quite closely. I think there's a couple of questions about it. One is how will it actually perform through the business cycle? So, today, it's performing okay—that doesn't really tell us that much because economic times are relatively good. So the real question is how it's going to perform through the business cycle. And the second question I think is going to be about regulation. Are there regulations that need to be put in place to make sure that they're on an equivalent playing field to lenders that are subject to bank regulations. So, I think those are sort of the two questions on the table. I think we want to be careful not to just tamp down any innovation. I think we need to be open-minded to new innovations and developments that we see in the marketplace, but at the same time we don't want to necessarily sort of buy into them hook, line and sinker until we've actually seen that the business models are robust to the entire business cycle. Eugene White: Well, thank you very much! President Dudley: Yes, thank you. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
