Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the "Banking, Liquidity and Monetary Policy," a Symposium Sponsored by the Center for Financial Studies, Frankfurt, Germany Share Watch live Let me start by thanking the organizers for including me in this event. It's a great pleasure to be here with other old friends and colleagues to pay tribute to Raghu, and to congratulate him not only on winning the Deutsche Bank prize for Financial Economics, but also on his new job as governor of the Reserve Bank of India. It's an understatement to say that Raghu has a few challenges on his hands in this new role, but having known him for more than 20 years, I can't imagine anybody being better equipped--in terms of intellect, judgment, and strength of character--to handle these challenges. I would like to talk briefly about some recent research of mine, done jointly with Sam Hanson of Harvard Business School, on the monetary transmission mechanism. 1 As will become clear, our work is heavily influenced by some of Raghu's earlier writing, and in particular his famous 2005 Jackson Hole paper. 2 After describing what we find, I will try to draw some connections to the current monetary policy environment as well as some lessons about the interplay of monetary policy and financial stability. As always, I am speaking for myself, and my views are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). In our paper, Sam and I begin by documenting the following fact about the working of conventional monetary policy: Changes in the stance of policy have surprisingly strong effects on very distant forward real interest rates. Concretely, over a sample period from 1999 to 2012, a 100 basis point increase in the 2-year nominal yield on FOMC announcement day--which we take as a proxy for a change in the expected path of the federal funds rate over the following several quarters--is associated with a 42 basis point increase in the 10-year forward overnight real rate, extracted from the yield curve for Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS). 3 On the one hand, this finding is at odds with standard New Keynesian macro models, in which the central bank's ability to influence real variables stems from goods prices that are sticky in nominal terms. In such models, a change in monetary policy should have no effect on forward real rates at a horizon longer than that over which all prices can adjust, and it seems implausible that this horizon could be on the order of 10 years. On the other hand, the result suggests that monetary policy may have more kick than is implied by the standard model, precisely because long-term real rates are the ones that are most likely to matter for a variety of investment decisions. So what is going on? How, in a world of eventually flexible goods prices, is monetary policy able to exert such a powerful influence on long-term real rates? A first clue is that the movements in distant forward real rates that we document appear to reflect changes in term premiums, as opposed to changes in expectations about short-term real rates far into the future. Said differently, if the Fed eases policy today and yields on long-term TIPs go down, this does not mean that the real short rate is expected to be lower 10 years from now--but rather that TIPs have gotten more expensive relative to the expected future path of short rates. These changes in term premiums then appear to reverse themselves over the following 6 to 12 months. This observation then raises the question of why monetary policy might be able to influence real term premiums. Here is where we draw our inspiration from Raghu's work, in particular his hypothesis that low nominal interest rates can create incentives for certain types of investors to take added risk in an effort to "reach for yield." While an emerging body of empirical research investigates this hypothesis in the context of credit risk--documenting that banks tend to make riskier loans when rates are low--our focus is instead on the implications of the reach-for-yield mechanism on the pricing of interest rate risk, also known as duration risk. 4 The theory we sketch involves a set of "yield-oriented" investors. We assume that these investors allocate their portfolios between short- and long-term Treasury bonds and, in doing so, put some weight not just on expected holding-period returns, but also on current income. This preference for current yield could be due to agency or accounting considerations that lead these investors to care about short-term measures of reported performance. A reduction in short-term nominal rates leads them to rebalance their portfolios toward longer-term bonds in an effort to keep their overall yield from declining too much. This, in turn, creates buying pressure that raises the price of the long-term bonds and hence lowers long-term yields and forward rates. Thus, according to this theory, an easing of monetary policy affects long-term real rates not via the usual expectations channel, but rather via what might be termed a "recruitment" channel--by causing an outward shift in the demand curve of yield-oriented investors, thereby inducing these investors to take on more interest rate risk and to push down term premiums. To provide some evidence that bears on the theory, we look at the maturity of securities held by commercial banks. Banks fit with our conception of yield-oriented investors to the extent that they care about their reported earnings--which, given bank accounting rules for available-for-sale securities, are based on current income from securities holdings and not mark-to-market changes in value. And, indeed, we find that when the yield curve steepens, banks increase the maturity of their securities holdings. Moreover, the magnitudes of these portfolio shifts are large in the aggregate, so that if they had to be absorbed by other, less yield-oriented investors, the shifts could plausibly drive changes in marketwide term premiums. We also find that primary dealers in the Treasury market--who, unlike banks, must mark their securities holdings to market--take the other side of the trade, reducing the maturity of their Treasury holdings when the yield curve steepens. 5 Overall, I read this evidence as suggesting--albeit tentatively--that some mechanism involving yield-oriented investors may eventually turn out to be central to our understanding of how monetary policy works, both in ordinary and extraordinary times. When I say "central," I mean that this mechanism may play a role not only in determining how monetary policy influences the pricing of credit risk, but also in how it shapes the real and nominal yield curves for credit-risk-free Treasury securities. Of course, much work remains to be done before statements like these can be made with any degree of confidence. But I think there is a promising research agenda here, and one that owes much to Raghu's insights. With these observations in mind, let me now turn to the events of the past few months in the bond market. A brief summary goes as follows: Long-term real and nominal rates and term premiums in the United States were very low as of early May, with the 10-year Treasury yield bottoming out at 1.63 percent at the beginning of the month, with an associated term premium estimated to be on the order of negative 0.80 percent. 6 The 10-year TIPS yield reached negative 0.72 percent around the same time. 7 However, following Chairman Bernanke's May 22 testimony to the Joint Economic Committee and after our June 18-19 FOMC meeting, yields rose sharply, with the nominal and real 10-year rates reaching 2.61 percent and 0.60 percent, respectively, as of June 25. 8 In the absence of a significant shift in policy fundamentals, a number of observers have highlighted the role of a variety of market dynamics in driving the observed changes in yields. These factors include the unwinding of carry trades, tightening of risk limits in the face of higher volatility, convexity hedging by holders of mortgage-backed securities, and large outflows from bond funds. I believe these factors to have been important collectively, although it is difficult to say how much of an effect is due to any one of them. However, beyond trying to understand the market dynamics that drove changes in rates over the period from May through June, it is also useful to ask a question about the starting levels: What explains why real and nominal rates were as low as they were at the beginning of May? Clearly, our accommodative policies--the combination of forward guidance and asset purchases--played an important role. But I want to draw a key distinction between two views of how our policies might have mattered. One view would be that the configuration of market rates in early May was largely a direct hydraulic outcome of our policies. For example, according to this view, a nominal 10-year yield of 1.63 percent in early May could be explained to a first approximation based on the expected path of the federal funds rate, plus a negative term premium that was itself primarily a function of the cumulative amount of duration that we were expected to remove from the market via our asset purchase program. Let's call this the "direct Fed control" view. An alternative hypothesis is that our policies were indeed responsible for the very low level of long-term rates, but in part through a more indirect channel. According to this view, real and nominal term premiums were low not just because we were buying long-term bonds, but because our policies induced an outward shift in the demand curve of other investors, which led them to do more buying on our behalf--because we both gave them an incentive to reach for yield, and at the same time provided a set of implicit assurances that tamped down volatility and made it feel safer to lever aggressively in pursuit of that extra yield. In the spirit of my earlier comments, let's call this the "Fed recruitment" view. I take the events of the past few months to be evidence in favor of the recruitment view. And, to be clear, I don't mean this as a criticism of the set of policies that we have in place. Quite to the contrary--it can be useful to enlist help when you have a big job to do. Indeed, my whole point in talking about the research I described earlier was to underscore my belief that something like this investor-recruitment mechanism is central to how monetary policy acquires much of its traction over the real economy even in ordinary times. Of course, the magnitude of the effect--the extent of downward pressure that we may have been inducing other investors to apply to the term premium--is likely to have been more noteworthy given the unprecedented scope of our overall monetary accommodation. But in an important sense, this effect is just a powered-up version of what makes garden-variety monetary policy work. Again, the existence of this recruitment channel is helpful; without it, I suspect that our policies would have considerably less potency and, therefore, less ability to provide needed support to the real economy. At the same time, an understanding of this channel highlights the uncertainties that inevitably accompany it. If the Fed's control of long-term rates depends in substantial part on the induced buying and selling behavior of other investors, our grip on the steering wheel is not as tight as it otherwise might be. Even if we make only small changes to the policy parameters that we control directly, long-term rates can be substantially more volatile. And if we push the recruits very hard--as we arguably have over the past year or so--it is probably more likely that we are going to see a change in their behavior and hence a sharp movement in rates at some point. Thus, if it is a goal of policy to push term premiums far down into negative territory, one should be prepared to accept that this approach may bring with it an elevated conditional volatility of rates and spreads. When we talk about the interplay of monetary policy and financial stability, I think that this kind of tradeoff is an important part of what we should be bearing in mind. Indeed, maybe the term "financial stability" is a bit misleading, because the risk scenario that I am describing--and that may be among the most relevant when thinking about the costs and benefits of our current highly accommodative policies--need not be one that is so dramatic as to call into question the viability of any large financial firm or threaten an important part of the market's infrastructure. Rather, one scenario to be worried about may simply be a sharp increase in marketwide rates and spreads at an inopportune time, such that it becomes harder for us to achieve our dual-mandate objectives. Having said all of this, I believe we are currently in a pretty good place with respect to the pricing of interest rate risk. The movement in Treasury rates that we have seen since early May has led to somewhat tighter financial conditions in certain sectors--most notably the mortgage market--but has also brought term premiums closer into line with historical norms, and thereby has arguably reduced the risk of a more damaging upward spike at some future date. On net, I believe the adjustment has been a healthy one. Finally, let me say a few words about last week's FOMC meeting. I voted with the majority of the Committee to continue our asset purchase program at its current flow rate of $85 billion per month. It was a close call for me, but I did so because I continue to support our efforts to create a highly accommodative monetary environment so as to help the recovery along by using both asset purchases and our threshold-based approach to forward guidance. How should the pace of purchases evolve going forward? The Chairman laid out a framework for winding down purchases in his June press conference. 9 Within that framework, I would have been comfortable with the FOMC's beginning to taper its asset purchases at the September meeting. But whether we start in September or a bit later is not in itself the key issue--the difference in the overall amount of securities we buy will be modest. What is much more important is doing everything we can to ensure that this difficult transition is implemented in as transparent and predictable a manner as possible. On this front, I think it is safe to say that there may be room for improvement. Achieving the desired transparency and predictability doesn't require that the wind-down happen in a way that is independent of incoming data. But I do think that, at this stage of the asset purchase program, there would be a great deal of merit in trying to find a way to make the link to observable data as mechanical as possible. For this reason, my personal preference would be to make future step-downs a completely deterministic function of a labor market indicator, such as the unemployment rate or cumulative payroll growth over some period. For example, one could cut monthly purchases by a set amount for each further 10 basis point decline in the unemployment rate. 10 Obviously the unemployment rate is not a perfect summary statistic for our labor market objectives, but I believe that this approach would help to reduce uncertainty about our reaction function and the attendant market volatility. Moreover, we would still retain the flexibility to respond to other contingencies (such as declines in labor force participation) via our other more conventional policy tool--namely, the path of short-term rates. Thank you very much. I look forward to your questions. 1. See Samuel G. Hanson and Jeremy C. Stein (2012), " Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-46 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July). Return to text 2. See Raghuram G. Rajan (2005), " Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier? (PDF) " in The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25-27, 2005 (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 313-69. Return to text 3. Our findings can be illustrated with the events of January 25, 2012. On that date the FOMC changed its forward guidance, indicating that it expected to hold the federal funds rate near zero "through late 2014," whereas it had previously only stated that it expected to do so "through mid-2013." In response to this announcement, the expected path of short-term nominal rates fell significantly from two to five years out, with the 2-year nominal yield dropping 5 basis points and the 5-year nominal yield falling 14 basis points. More strikingly, 10-year and 20-year real forward rates declined by 5 basis points and 9 basis points, respectively. Return to text 4. The idea that banks take on more credit risk when rates are low is explored in, for example, Gabriel Jiménez, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina (forthcoming), " Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What Do 23 Million Bank Loans Say about the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking? (PDF) " Econometrica . Return to text 5. Primary dealers are broker-dealer firms that serve as trading counterparties of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in its implementation of monetary policy. Return to text 6. The 10-year nominal rate hit 1.63 percent on May 2, 2013. The Kim-Wright term premium was estimated to be negative 0.78 percent on this day. (For more information on the term premium, see Don H. Kim and Jonathan H. Wright (2005), " An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August). Return to text 7. The 10-year real rate hit negative 0.72 percent on April 26, 2013. Return to text 8. See Ben S. Bernanke (2013), " The Economic Outlook ," statement before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, May 22; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, June 19. Return to text 9. Information on the Chairman's June 19, 2013, press conference is available on the Board's website. Return to text 10. To be clear, I am sketching out a broad concept, and many details would need to be filled in to make it operational--such as, what to do if the unemployment rate falls in one month and then later rises. Return to text Last Update: September 26, 2013 Back to Top

Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the Federal Reserve Bank of New York Workshop on Fire Sales as a Driver of Systemic Risk in Triparty Repo and other Secured Funding Markets, New York, New York Share Thank you. It's a pleasure to be here at this workshop. In an effort to provide some broad framing for the sessions to follow, I thought I would try to do three things in my opening remarks. 1 First, I will briefly discuss the welfare economics of fire sales. That is, I will try to make clear when a forced sale of an asset is not just an event that leads to prices being driven below long-run fundamental values, but also one that involves a market failure, or externality, of the sort that might justify a regulatory response. Second, I will argue that securities financing transactions (SFTs) are a leading example of the kind of arrangement that can give rise to such externalities, and hence are particularly deserving of policy attention. And third, I will survey some of the recently enhanced tools in our regulatory arsenal (e.g., capital, liquidity, and leverage requirements) and ask to what extent they are suited to tackling the specific externalities associated with fire sales and SFTs. To preview, a general theme is that while many of these tools are likely to be helpful in fortifying individual regulated institutions--in reducing the probability that, say, a given bank or broker-dealer will run into solvency or liquidity problems--they fall short as a comprehensive, marketwide approach to the fire-sales problem associated with SFTs. In this regard, some of what I have to say will echo a recent speech by my Board colleague Daniel Tarullo. 2 The Positive and Normative Economics of Fire Sales In a recent survey paper, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny write that: "…[A] fire sale is essentially a forced sale of an asset at a dislocated price. The asset sale is forced in the sense that the seller cannot pay creditors without selling assets….Assets sold in fire sales can trade at prices far below value in best use, causing severe losses to sellers." 3 Shleifer and Vishny go on to discuss the roles of investor specialization and limited arbitrage as factors that drive the magnitude of observed price discounts in fire sales, and there is, by now, a large body of empirical research that supports the importance of these factors. However, by itself, the existence of substantial price discounts in distressed sales speaks only to the positive economics of fire sales, not the normative economics, and hence is not sufficient to make a case for regulatory intervention. To see why, consider the following example: An airline buys a 737, and finances the purchase largely with collateralized borrowing. During an industry downturn, the airline finds itself in distress, and is forced to sell the 737 to avoid defaulting on its debt. Other airlines also are not faring well at this time, and are not interested in expanding their fleets. So the only two bidders for the 737 are a movie star, who plans to reconfigure it for his personal use, and a private-equity firm, which plans to lease out the plane temporarily and wait for the market to recover so the firm can resell it at a profit. In the end, the private-equity firm winds up buying the plane at half its original price. Two years later, it does indeed resell it, having earned a 60 percent return. This is clearly a fire sale in the positive-economics sense, but is there a market failure here that calls for regulation? Intuition suggests not. The airline arguably caused the fire sale by using a lot of leverage in its purchase of the 737, but it also seems to bear most of the cost, by being forced to liquidate at a large loss. The movie star and the private-equity firm are, if anything, made better off by the appearance of a buying opportunity, and there are no other innocent bystanders. So the airline's ex ante capital structure choice would seem to internalize things properly; the fire sale here is just like any other bankruptcy cost that a firm has to weigh in choosing the right mix of debt and equity. For a fire sale to have the sort of welfare effects that create a role for regulation, the reduced price in the fire sale has to hurt somebody other than the original party making the leverage decision, and this adverse impact of price has to run through something like a collateral constraint, whereby a lowered price actually reduces, rather than increases, the third party's demand for the asset. 4 So if hedge fund A buys an asset-backed security and finances it largely with collateralized borrowing, A's fire selling of the security will create an externality in the conventional sense only if the reduced price and impaired collateral value lower the ability of hedge funds B and C to borrow against the same security, and therefore force them to involuntarily liquidate their positions in it as well. 5 The market failure in this case is not simply the fact that this downward spiral causes a large price decline, it is that when hedge fund A makes its initial leverage choice, it does not take into account the potential harm--in the form of tightened financing constraints--that this may cause to hedge funds B and C. 6 Another key point is that the fire-sales problem is not necessarily caused by a lack of appropriate conservatism on the part of whoever lends to hedge fund A in this example--let's call it dealer firm D. By lending on an overnight basis to A, and with an appropriate haircut, D can virtually assure itself of being able to terminate its loan and get out whole by forcing a sale of the underlying collateral. So D's interests may be very well-protected here. But precisely in the pursuit of this protection, A and D have set up a financing arrangement that serves them well, but that creates a negative spillover onto other market participants, like B and C. It follows that even if policies aimed at curbing too-big-to-fail (TBTF) problems are entirely successful in aligning D's interests with those of taxpayers, this is not sufficient to deal with fire-sales externalities. They are a fundamentally different problem, and one that arises even absent any individually systemic institutions or any TBTF issues. Fire-Sale Externalities in Securities Financing Transactions The preceding discussion makes clear why SFTs, such as those done via repurchase (repo) agreements, are a natural object of concern for policymakers. This market is one where a large number of borrowers finance the same securities on a short-term collateralized basis, with very high leverage--often in the range of twenty-to-one, fifty-to-one, or even higher. Hence, there is a strong potential for any one borrower's distress--and the associated downward pressure on prices--to cause a tightening of collateral or regulatory constraints on other borrowers. I won't go into much detail about the institutional aspects of SFTs and the repo market. Instead, I will just lay out two stylized examples of SFTs that I can then use to illustrate the properties of various regulatory tools. Example 1: Broker-dealer as principal In this first example, a large broker-dealer firm borrows in the triparty repo market--from, say, a money market fund--in order to finance its own holdings of a particular security. Perhaps the broker-dealer is acting as a market-maker in the corporate bond market, and uses repo borrowing to finance its ongoing inventory of investment-grade and high-yield bonds. In this case, the asset on the dealer's balance sheet is the corporate bond, and the liability is the repo borrowing from the money fund. Example 2: Broker-dealer as SFT intermediary In this second example, the ultimate demand to own the corporate bond comes not from the dealer firm, but from one of its prime brokerage customers--say, a hedge fund. Moreover, the hedge fund cannot borrow directly from the money market fund sector in the triparty repo market, because the money funds are not sufficiently knowledgeable about the hedge fund to be comfortable taking it on as a counterparty. So instead, the hedge fund borrows on a collateralized basis from the dealer firm in the bilateral repo market, and the dealer then turns around and, as before, uses the same collateral to borrow from a money fund in the triparty market. In this case, the asset on the dealer's balance sheet is the repo loan it makes to the hedge fund. Clearly, there is the potential for fire-sale risk in both of these examples. One source of risk would be an initial shock either to the expected value of the underlying collateral or to its volatility that leads to an increase in required repo-market haircuts (e.g., the default probability of the corporate bond goes up). Another source of risk would be concerns about the creditworthiness of the broker-dealer firm that causes lenders in the triparty market to step away from it. In either case, if the associated externalities are deemed to create significant social costs, the goal of regulatory policy should be to get private actors to internalize these costs. At an abstract level, this means looking for a way to impose an appropriate Pigouvian (i.e., corrective) tax on the transactions. 7 Of course, the tax must balance the social costs against the benefits that accompany SFTs; these benefits include both "money-like" services from the increased stock of near-riskless private assets, as well as enhanced liquidity in the market for the underlying collateral--the corporate bond market, in my examples. 8 So in the absence of further work on calibrating costs and benefits, there is no presumption that the optimal tax should be large, only that it may be non-zero, and that it may make sense for it to differ across asset classes. Can Existing Regulatory Tools Be Used to Tax SFTs Efficiently? With this last observation in mind, my next step is to run through a number of our existing regulatory instruments, and in each case ask: to what extent can the instrument at hand be used efficiently to impose a Pigouvian tax on an SFT, either one of the dealer-as-principal type or one of the dealer-as-intermediary type? As will become clear, the answer can depend crucially on both the structure of the transaction as well as the nature of the underlying collateral involved. Also, I should emphasize that nothing in this exercise amounts to a judgment on the overall desirability of any given regulatory tool. Obviously, even if risk-based capital requirements are not particularly helpful in taxing SFTs, they can be very valuable for other reasons. I am asking a different question: to what extent can the existing toolkit be used--or be adapted--to deal with the specific problem of fire-sale externalities in SFTs? 1. Risk-based capital requirements Current risk-based capital requirements are of little relevance for many types of SFTs. In my Example 1, where the dealer firm holds a corporate bond as a principal and finances it with repo borrowing, there would be a capital charge on the corporate bond, but this capital charge is approximately independent of whether the corporate bond is financed with repo or with some other, more stable, form of funding. So there is no tax on the incremental fire-sale risk created by the more fragile funding structure. 9 In Example 2, in which the dealer is an intermediary with a matched book of repo borrowing and lending, there is, in principle, a capital requirement on its asset-side repo loan to the hedge fund. However, the Basel III risk-based capital rules allow banks and bank holding companies to use internal models to compute this capital charge for repo lending, and the resulting numbers are typically very small--for all practical purposes, close to zero--for overcollateralized lending transactions, with repo being the canonical example. I'm not arguing that the very low risk-based charges on repo lending in Basel III are "wrong" in any microprudential sense. After all, they are designed to solve a different problem--that of ensuring bank solvency. And if a bank holding company's broker-dealer sub makes a repo loan of short maturity that is sufficiently well-collateralized, it may be at minimal risk of bearing any losses--precisely because it operates on the premise that it can dump the collateral and get out of town before things get too ugly. The risk-averse lenders in the triparty market--who, in turn, provide financing to the dealer--operate under the same premise. As I noted earlier, these defensive reactions by providers of repo finance mean that the costs of fire sales are likely to be felt elsewhere in the financial system. 2. Liquidity requirements Liquidity requirements, such as those embodied in the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), can impose a meaningful tax on certain SFTs in which the dealer acts as a principal. If the dealer holds a corporate bond and finances it with repo borrowing of less than 30 days' maturity, the LCR kicks in and requires the dealer to hold high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) against the risk that it is unable to roll the repo over. In this particular case, there can be said to be a direct form of regulatory attack on the fire-sales problem. However, this conclusion is sensitive to the details of the example. If, instead of holding a corporate bond, the dealer holds a Treasury security that is deemed to count as Level 1 HQLA, there is no impact of the LCR. Moreover, the LCR plays no role in mitigating fire-sales externalities in the important matched-book case in which the dealer acts as an intermediary. 10 If a dealer borrows on a collateralized basis with repo and then turns around and lends the proceeds to a hedge fund in a similar fashion, the LCR deems the dealer to have no net liquidity exposure--and hence imposes no incremental liquidity requirement--so long as the lending side of the transaction has a maturity of less than 30 days. The implicit logic is that as long as the dealer can generate the necessary cash by not rolling over its loan to the hedge fund, it will always be able to handle any outflows of funding that come from being unable to roll over its own borrowing. This logic is not incorrect per se, but it is very micro-focused in nature, and does not attend to fire-sales externalities. It worries about the ability of the dealer firm to survive a liquidity stress event, but does not take into account that the dealer's survival may come at the cost of forcing its hedge fund client to engage in fire sales. 11 3. Leverage ratio If a broker-dealer firm faces a binding leverage ratio, this constraint can act as a significant tax on two types of SFTs that are largely untouched either by risk-based capital requirements or by liquidity regulations. The first is when the dealer, acting as a principal, uses repo to finance its holdings of Treasury securities or agency mortgage-backed securities, assets that generally have only modest risk weights when held as trading positions. The second is when the dealer acts as an intermediary and has a matched repo book. In both cases, the SFTs blow up the firm's balance sheet and, hence, the denominator of the leverage ratio, even while having little impact on risk-based capital or LCR calculations. The crucial issue here, however, is whether the leverage ratio does, in fact, bind. A traditional view among regulators has been that the leverage ratio should be calibrated so as to serve as a meaningful "backstop" for risk-based capital requirements, but that under ordinary circumstances it should not actually be the binding constraint on firms. For if it were to bind, this would put us in a regime of completely un-risk-weighted capital requirements, where the effective capital charge for holding short-term Treasury securities would be the same as that for holding, say, risky corporate debt securities or loans. Recently, U.S. regulators have issued a proposed rulemaking that seeks to raise the Basel III supplementary leverage ratio requirement to 5 percent for the largest U.S. bank holding companies, and to 6 percent for their affiliated depository institutions. While this increase might be considered a parallel shift that preserves the backstop philosophy in light of the fact that risk-based requirements have also gone up significantly, it does increase the likelihood that the leverage ratio may bind for some of these firms at some times--particularly for those firms with a broker-dealer-intensive business model in which the ratio of total assets to risk-weighted assets tends to be higher. In this event, there would indeed be a significant tax on SFTs undertaken in the affected firms. However, because it is unlikely that the leverage constraint would bind symmetrically across all of the largest firms, my guess is that the effect would be less to deter SFT activity in the aggregate than to cause it to migrate in such a way as to be predominantly located in those firms that--because they have, say, a larger lending business and, hence, more risk-weighted assets--have more headroom under the leverage ratio constraint. Other Possible Approaches To summarize the discussion thus far, the mainstays of our existing regulatory toolkit--risk-based capital, liquidity, and leverage requirements--have a variety of other virtues, but none seem well-suited to lean in a comprehensive way against the specific fire-sale externalities created by SFTs. The liquidity coverage ratio affects a subset of SFTs in which a dealer firm acts as a principal to fund its own inventory of securities positions, but does not meaningfully touch those in which it acts as an intermediary. By contrast, an aggressively calibrated leverage ratio could potentially impose a significant tax on a wider range of SFTs, but the tax would by its nature be blunt and highly asymmetric, falling entirely on those firms for whom the leverage ratio constraint was more binding than the risk-based capital constraint. As such, it would be more likely to induce regulatory arbitrage than to rein in overall SFT activity. These observations raise the question of whether there are other tools that might be better suited to dealing with SFT-related fire-sales externalities. I will touch briefly on three of these. 1. Capital surcharges In his May speech, Governor Tarullo alluded to the possibility of liquidity-linked capital surcharges that would effectively augment the existing regime of risk-based capital requirements. 12 Depending on how these surcharges are structured, they could act in part as a tax on both the dealer-as-principal and dealer-as-intermediary types of SFTs. Accomplishing the latter would require a capital surcharge based on something like the aggregate size of the dealer's matched repo book; this comes quite close to the Pigouvian notion of directly taxing this specific activity. As compared to relying on the leverage ratio to implement the tax, this approach has the advantage that it is more likely to treat institutions uniformly: the tax on SFTs would not be a function of the overall business model of a given firm, but rather just the characteristics of its SFT book. This is because the surcharge is embedded into the existing risk-based capital regime, which should in principle be the constraint that binds for most firms. There are a couple of important qualifications, however. First, going this route would involve a significant conceptual departure from the notion of capital as a prudential requirement at the firm level. As noted previously, a large matched repo book may entail relatively little solvency or liquidity risk for the broker-dealer firm that intermediates this market. So, to the extent that one imposes a capital surcharge on the broker-dealer, one would be doing so with the express intention of creating a tax that is passed on to the downstream borrower (i.e., to the hedge fund, in my example). Second, and a direct corollary of the first, imposing the tax at the level of the intermediary naturally raises the question of disintermediation. In other words, might the SFT market respond to the tax by evolving so that large hedge funds are more readily able to borrow via repo directly from money market funds and securities lenders, without having to go through broker-dealers? I can't say that I have a good understanding of the institutional factors that might facilitate or impede such an evolution. But if the market ultimately does evolve in this way, it would be hard to argue that the underlying fire-sales problem has been addressed. 2. Modified liquidity regulation A conceptually similar way to get at matched-book repo would be to modify liquidity regulation so as to introduce an asymmetry between the assumed liquidity properties of repo loans made by a broker-dealer, and its own repo borrowing. For example, in the context of the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), one could assume that a dealer's repo loans to a hedge fund roll off more slowly than do its own repo borrowings from the triparty market. This assumption would create a net liquidity exposure for a matched repo book, and would thereby force the dealer to hold some long-term debt or other stable funding against it. Although the implementation is different, the end result is quite close to that obtained with the capital-surcharge approach I just described: in one case, there is a broad stable funding requirement for intermediaries against a matched repo book; in the other case, there is an equity requirement. It follows that, whatever its other advantages, going the modified-NSFR route does not eliminate concerns about disintermediation and regulatory arbitrage. 3. Universal margin requirements These sorts of regulatory-arbitrage concerns have motivated some academics and policymakers to think about a system of universal margin requirements for SFTs. 13 In its simplest form, the idea would be to impose a minimum haircut, or down payment requirement, on any party--be it a hedge fund or a broker-dealer--that uses short-term collateralized funding to finance its securities holdings. Because the requirement now lives at the security level, rather than at the level of an intermediary in the SFT market, it cannot be as easily evaded by, say, a hedge fund going outside the broker-dealer sector to obtain its repo funding. 14 This is the strong conceptual appeal of universal margin from the perspective of a fire-sales framework. In this regard, it is worth noting that the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has recently released a proposal to establish minimum haircut requirements for certain SFTs. 15 However, the FSB proposal stops well short of being a universal margin requirement. Rather, the minimum haircuts envisioned by the FSB would apply only to SFTs in which entities not subject to capital and liquidity regulation (e.g., hedge funds) receive financing from entities that are subject to regulation (i.e., banks and broker-dealers), and only to transactions in which the collateral is something other than government or agency securities. In this sense, there is a close relationship between the FSB minimum-haircut proposal and the specific variant of the capital-surcharge idea that I mentioned a moment ago. Both have the potential to act as a restraint on those SFTs that are intermediated by regulated broker-dealer firms, but both are vulnerable to an evolution of the business away from this intermediated mode. The minimum margin levels in the FSB proposal are also quite small, so it is unclear how much of an effect, if any, they will have on market behavior. For example, the minimums for long-term corporate bonds, securitized products, and equities are 2 percent, 4 percent, and 4 percent, respectively. Conclusions Let me wrap up. My aim here has been to survey the landscape--to give a sense of the possible tools that can be used to address the fire-sales problem in SFTs--without making any particularly pointed recommendations. I would guess that a sensible path forward might involve drawing on some mix of the latter set of instruments that I discussed: namely, capital surcharges, modifications to the liquidity regulation framework, and universal margin requirements. As we go down this path, conceptual purity may have to be sacrificed in some places to deliver pragmatic and institutionally feasible results. It is unlikely that we will find singular and completely satisfactory fixes. With this observation in mind, I would be remiss if I did not remind you of another, highly complementary area where reform is necessary: the money market fund sector. Money funds are among the most significant repo lenders to broker-dealer firms, and an important source of fire-sale risk comes from the fragility of the current money fund model. This fragility stems in part from their capital structures--the fact that they issue stable-value demandable liabilities with no capital buffer or other explicit loss-absorption capacity--which make them highly vulnerable to runs by their depositors. I welcome the work of the Securities and Exchange Commission on this front, particularly its focus on floating net asset values, and look forward to concrete action. Another source of fragility arises from money funds investing in repo loans collateralized by assets that they are unwilling or unable to hold if things go bad. This feature creates an incentive for them to withdraw repo financing from broker-dealers at the first sign of counterparty risk, even if the underlying collateral is in good shape. I'm sure we will hear much more about this last set of issues over the remainder of the conference today. I look forward to the discussions. Thank you. 1. I am grateful for helpful comments from Matt Eichner, Mike Gibson, Nellie Liang, Bill Nelson, and Mark Van Der Weide. The thoughts that follow are my own, and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability ," speech at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington, D.C., May 3. Return to text 3. Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (2011), " Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics (PDF) ," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 25 (Winter), p. 30. Return to text 4. An alternative mechanism that works similarly is when the third party is a regulated intermediary and mark-to-market losses reduce its capital ratios, and again force it to involuntarily sell assets in the face of falling prices. Return to text 5. The fundamental welfare economics at work here is developed in John Geanakoplos and Heracles M. Polemarchakis (1986), "Existence, Regularity, and Constrained Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations When the Asset Market Is Incomplete," in Walter P. Heller, Ross M. Starr, and David A. Starrett, eds., Essays in Honor of Kenneth Arrow: Vol 3., Uncertainty, Information, and Communication (New York: Cambridge University Press), pp. 65-95. A discussion of the connection of this work to specific aspects of macroprudential regulation is in Samuel G. Hanson, Anil K. Kashyap, and Jeremy C. Stein (2011), " A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation (PDF) ," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 3-28. Return to text 6. This is the first-round externality. Adverse spillovers from a fire sale of this sort may also take the form of a credit crunch that affects borrowers more generally. Such a credit crunch may arise as other financial intermediaries (e.g., banks) withdraw capital from lending, so as to exploit the now-more-attractive returns to buying up fire-sold assets. Ultimately, it is the risk of this credit contraction, and its implications for economic activity more broadly, that may be the most compelling basis for regulatory intervention. Return to text 7. Of course, the Pigouvian taxation approach by itself cannot completely eliminate the ex post costs associated with fire sales. This would require a broad and active lender-of-last resort function, which I do not discuss here. The best that any form of ex ante regulation can hope to do is to reduce the incidence and magnitude of ex post fire-sales damage. Return to text 8. Further discussion on the money-like benefits that are created by near-riskless private assets such as repo can be found in the following: Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), " The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt ," Journal of Political Economy , vol. 120, issue 2 (April), pp. 233-267; Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2012), " Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo ," Journal of Financial Economics , vol. 103, pp. 425-451; and Jeremy C. Stein (2012), " Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation ," Quarterly Journal of Economics , vol. 127, pp. 57-95. Return to text 9. To be more precise, under Basel III capital rules, there is a small risk-based capital requirement on the repo liability. This requirement is driven by counterparty credit risk, not liquidity risk, and is independent of the term of the repo borrowing. The basic idea is that the repo borrower has to hold a little bit of capital because it has sent $102 in Treasury securities over to its counterparty lender and only received $100 cash. If the repo lender defaults, the borrower could be out $2. Return to text 10. A similar comment applies to the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), which requires regulated firms to fund illiquid exposures with some amount of long-term debt or other form of stable funding. Like the LCR, the NSFR effectively treats matched-book repo as creating no net liquidity exposure, and hence imposes no requirement on it. Return to text 11. Even from a microprudential perspective, the LCR can be said to have a flaw in that it is blind to maturity mismatches within the 30-day window. For example, if a dealer borrows on an overnight basis from a money fund, and then makes a 29-day loan to a hedge fund, the LCR deems it to be fully matched, and to have no incremental liquidity exposure. Return to text 12. Tarullo (2013) Return to text 13. A closely related motivation for universal margin requirements is that they might be able to limit procyclicality by leaning against increases in leverage during boom times. Return to text 14. Of course, there is always the potential for other forms of regulatory arbitrage. For example, a hedge fund that faces a minimum margin requirement when it uses repo borrowing to fund a corporate-bond position may instead seek to take a leveraged position in the corporate bond through other means by, for example, engaging in a total-return swap with its prime broker. This is the growing business of "synthetic" prime brokerage. Properly harmonized initial margin requirements on uncleared derivatives may help to level the playing field between traditional and synthetic prime brokerage activities. Return to text 15. Financial Stability Board (2013), Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Addressing Shadow Banking Risks in Securities Lending and Repos (PDF) , August 29. Return to text Last Update: October 04, 2013 Back to Top

Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the National Bureau of Economic Research Conference: Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Monetary Policy, Boston, Massachusetts Share Thank you. The theme of this conference is, "Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Monetary Policy." Given the opportunity to speak about this topic, my first thought was that I should organize my remarks around the familiar "lean versus clean" debate. 1 The traditional, pre-crisis framing of the question went something like this: Should policymakers rely on ex ante measures to lean against potential financial imbalances as they build up, and thereby lower the probability of a bad event ever happening, or should they do most of their work ex post, focusing on the clean-up? Post-crisis, the emphasis in the debate has shifted. I think it's safe to assume that nobody in this room would now argue that we should be putting all our eggs in the "clean" basket. Discussion these days tends to focus instead on which ex ante measures are best suited to safeguard financial stability. Among these, there seems to be widespread support for unconditional, (i.e., time-invariant) tools that increase the overall resiliency of the financial system to shocks. These tools include more robust capital and liquidity requirements, as well as an enhanced capability to resolve a large financial institution that finds itself on the brink of failure. They might also include universal margin requirements on securities financing transactions, as a way of mitigating fire-sales risks. We might argue about various aspects of calibration and implementation, but I don't think there is too much controversy about the basic proposition that strong, comprehensive regulation aimed at enhancing resiliency is essential. There is considerably less agreement about the desirability and effectiveness of ex ante measures that seek to lean against the wind in an explicitly time-varying fashion--that is, measures that can be adapted in response to changing economic or financial conditions. At the risk of caricature, one can distinguish three schools of thought. The first school is generally suspicious of any kind of time-varying lean, be it with macroprudential tools such as time-varying, countercyclical capital buffers or margin requirements, or with monetary policy. This school emphasizes the difficulty of identifying emerging financial imbalances in real time. It also points to the political-economy and regulatory-arbitrage impediments that can frustrate the implementation of discretionary time-varying regulation. 2 The second school is more comfortable with the idea of time-varying leans, but invokes what amounts to a separation principle: It takes the view that any financial-stability-motivated leans should come largely, if not entirely, from time-variation in the application of regulatory and supervisory tools, while monetary policy should stick to its traditional dual-mandate objectives of fostering full employment and maintaining price stability. The third school is more heterodox. Like the first, it acknowledges that there are a variety of practical limitations associated with discretionary time-varying regulation, though the severity of these limitations may vary considerably across different countries, markets, and institutional arrangements. 3 In cases where regulation can be effectively adjusted over time, doing so remains the preferred approach. But in other situations, and especially when the imbalances in question are relatively pronounced or widespread across a range of markets, this school of thought is more open to working on multiple fronts and to formulating monetary policy with one eye on its potential implications for these imbalances. 4 The debate between these three schools gets a lot of attention at venues like this one--and with good reason. It touches on issues that are not only of policy interest, but also connect to deeper and strongly held views about how the world works. In other words, this is paradigm-versus-paradigm stuff, which always helps to liven up an academic exchange. But precisely for these reasons, the whole lean-versus-clean debate runs the risk of drawing attention away from other crisis-derived lessons that do not make as good fodder for academic discussion, but that are no less relevant from a practical policy perspective. Let me focus the remainder of my remarks on one of these: the importance of the in-between. The lean-versus-clean framing suggests a simple model in which there are just two dates: (1) an initial ex ante date that is prior to when a shock is realized--and when we may not even have much of a clue as to the form the shock will take--and (2) an ex post date when the shock has hit, its full effects have been felt, and policymakers are dealing with the aftermath. But this before-and-after dichotomy is misleading. Many financial crises unfold over months or even years, and the choices made during this in-between period can be among the most crucial to the eventual outcome. Recall that problems with subprime mortgages were already surfacing in late 2006. The first serious tremors associated with the crisis were felt in August 2007, with BNP Paribas suspending redemptions on its money funds and investor runs on multiple asset-backed commercial paper programs. At this point, there was no longer any real doubt about the nature of the shock confronting us--even if its precise magnitude was yet to be determined. And yet it was more than a full year until the failure of Lehman Brothers in September of 2008, which ignited the most intense part of the crisis. Moreover, during the interval from the start of 2007 through the third quarter of 2008, the largest U.S. financial firms--which, collectively, would go on to charge off $375 billion of loans over the next 12 quarters--paid out almost $125 billion in cash to their shareholders via common dividends and share repurchases, while raising only $41 billion in new common equity. This all happened while there was a clear and growing market awareness of the solvency challenges they were facing. Indeed, the collective market cap of these firms fell by approximately 50 percent from the start of 2007 through the end of June 2008. There are two points here worth emphasizing. First, it seems indisputable that the severity of the crisis would have been mitigated if policymakers had clamped down on these payouts earlier, and had compelled substantial new equity raises. Second, the conflict between the interests of the firms, acting on behalf of their shareholders, and those of the broader public became particularly acute once the crisis got underway, because of the debt overhang problem. Cutting back on dividends and issuing new shares might have been strong positives for the banks' overall set of stakeholders, as well as for society more broadly, but were clearly negatives for shareholders, given that such actions would have entailed large transfers to underwater creditors. This conflict of interest can make it hard for even the best-intentioned regulators to muster the conviction to take full advantage of either the appropriate legal tools or the resources available under the existing institutional framework. Under what circumstances does one tell a firm that is still well above its regulatory capital requirement that it must do a share issue that will be helpful for the economy as a whole, but highly dilutive to its existing equity holders? This discussion brings us to the role of the now ongoing stress-testing framework for large financial institutions. As you may know, the Federal Reserve has been conducting annual stress tests and capital-planning reviews of the 18 largest banks under the auspices of its Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) program, and is adding 12 more firms this year, consistent with requirements of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. 5 During normal times, when banks are relatively healthy, the CCAR process functions as an important complement to more conventional capital regulation and, like capital regulation, it can be thought of as an ex ante instrument to increase the general resilience of the banking system to as-yet-unknown shocks. 6 I believe that it has been a very valuable addition to our toolkit in this regard, and will continue to be so. However, I also believe that much of the promise of the CCAR framework lies in its potential to help us achieve a better outcome not just in normal times, but also in the important in-between times, in the early stages of a crisis. In other words, when thinking about the design of CCAR, one of the questions I keep coming back to is this: Suppose we were granted a do-over, and it was late 2007. If we had the CCAR process in place, how would things have turned out differently? Would we have seen significantly more equity issuance at this earlier date by the big firms, and hence a better outcome for the real economy? On the one hand, there is some reason for optimism on this score. After all, the original stress tests--the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) in May 2009--provided the impetus for a significant recapitalization of the banking system. More than $100 billion of new common equity was raised from the private sector in the six months after the SCAP, and in many ways it was a watershed event in the course of the crisis. Moreover, the current CCAR framework gives the Federal Reserve both the authority and the independent analytical basis to require external equity issues in the event that, under the stress scenario, a firm's post-stress, tier 1 common equity ratio is below 5 percent, and the ratio cannot be restored simply by suspending dividends and share repurchases. 7 In my view, these features of the program are among its most crucial. At the same time, having the authority to do something is necessary, but not sufficient--there also needs to be the institutional will. And this will is likely to be especially critical in a time of crisis, again because of the increased prominence of the debt-overhang problem. 8 A firm that is told that it needs to improve its capital position will, given the interests of its shareholders, strongly prefer to do so by reducing assets rather than by engaging in a dilutive share issue, even though the latter is more desirable from the perspective of aggregate credit provision. And it can be expected to make its case forcefully. So if we are serious about taking a macroprudential approach to regulation--one which aims to protect not just the solvency of individual firms, but the health of the financial system as a whole and its ability to continue to perform its intermediation role in times of stress--it is incumbent on us as regulators to do all that we can to develop both the intellectual case, and the institutional resolve, to be able to push back with equal force when the time comes. Thank you. I look forward to the rest of our discussion. 1. The thoughts that follow are my own, and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Tim Clark, Andreas Lehnert, Nellie Liang, Ben McDonough, and Lisa Ryu for their input. Return to text 2. For a forceful exposition of this view, see John Cochrane (2013), "The Danger of an All-Powerful Federal Reserve," Wall Street Journal , August 26, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323906804579036571835323800.html Return to text 3. For a fuller discussion of both the potential and limits of time-varying regulation, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Macroprudential Regulation ," speech delivered at the Yale Law School Conference on Challenges in Global Financial Services, New Haven, Conn., September 20. Return to text 4. To be clear: Taking account of financial-stability considerations when formulating monetary policy can be fully consistent with the dual-mandate objectives of fostering full employment and price stability. Consider a traditional setting where the policymaker has a quadratic loss function over deviations of unemployment and inflation from their target levels. Suppose further that high financial-sector leverage or very buoyant credit conditions today increase the probability of a sharp upward spike in credit spreads at some later date, and the latter prospect in turn raises the conditional variance of economic activity. Then the policymaker's risk aversion over unemployment outcomes may make her willing to try to tighten credit conditions, even at the cost of some employment today, so as to reduce the variance of future employment. In other words, financial-stability factors can weigh significantly in the decisionmaking process, without being an end objective in and of themselves. Return to text 5. The Federal Reserve conducts the CCAR annually to help ensure that companies have forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks and that result in sufficient capital to enable the institutions to continue lending to households and businesses during times of economic and financial stress. As part of the CCAR, the Federal Reserve evaluates institutions' capital adequacy, internal capital adequacy assessment processes, and their plans to make capital distributions, such as dividend payments or stock repurchases. The CCAR includes a supervisory stress test to support the Federal Reserve's analysis of the adequacy of the firms' capital. Boards of directors of the institutions are required each year to review and approve capital plans before submitting them to the Federal Reserve. The fourth CCAR will begin soon, with the release of instructions and economic scenarios. For more information, see the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/ccar.htm . Return to text 6. For a more detailed discussion of CCAR design, and of the calibration of stress scenarios, see Nellie Liang (2013), " Implementing Macroprudential Policies (PDF) ," speech delivered at the "Conference on Financial Stability Analysis: Using the Tools, Finding the Data," sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and Office of Financial Research, held in Washington, DC, May 31. Return to text 7. More precisely, the rule underpinning the CCAR states that if the Federal Reserve objects to a firm's capital plan, the firm must resubmit, showing how it will address the causes of the objection. So, in the case where the capital plan is objected to because the firm misses the post-stress target of 5 percent common equity (and assuming this cannot be addressed by simply turning off all planned dividends and share buybacks), the firm's resubmission would have to show how it will get back above this target. This plan might include a mix of asset sales, equity issues, and other measures, but the Federal Reserve, in principle and under appropriate circumstances, has the authority to object to a plan that is overly reliant on asset sales and other measures and withhold its non-objection to a plan unless the firm addresses all the shortfall-via-equity issues, over some defined time frame. Return to text 8. Another complicating factor that may make regulators shy away from pushing for new equity issues in the midst of a crisis is the lack of a government backstop. A number of observers have argued that the availability of a backstop in the form of TARP capital played a key role in the original SCAP stress tests. Return to text Last Update: October 18, 2013 Back to Top

Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and International Monetary Fund Conference, Chicago, Illinois Share Thank you. I thought I would focus my remarks today on one piece of the shadow banking system, namely the market for securities financing transactions (SFTs). In so doing, I want to call attention to the fire-sales problem associated with SFTs, and consider potential policy remedies. 1 I will do so in three parts. First, I will briefly discuss the welfare economics of fire sales. That is, I will try to make clear when a forced sale of an asset is not just an event that leads to prices being driven below long-run fundamental values, but also one that involves a market failure, or externality, of the sort that might justify a regulatory response. Second, I will argue that securities financing transactions are a leading example of the kind of arrangement that can give rise to such externalities, and hence are particularly deserving of policy attention. And third, I will survey some of the recently enhanced tools in our regulatory arsenal (e.g., capital, liquidity, and leverage requirements) and ask to what extent they are suited to tackling the specific externalities associated with fire sales and SFTs. To preview, a general theme is that while many of these tools are likely to be helpful in fortifying individual regulated institutions--in reducing the probability that, say, a given bank or broker-dealer will run into solvency or liquidity problems--they fall short as a comprehensive, marketwide approach to the fire-sales problem associated with SFTs. In this regard, some of what I have to say will echo a recent speech by my Board colleague Daniel Tarullo. 2 The Positive and Normative Economics of Fire Sales In a recent survey paper, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny write that: "…[A] fire sale is essentially a forced sale of an asset at a dislocated price. The asset sale is forced in the sense that the seller cannot pay creditors without selling assets….Assets sold in fire sales can trade at prices far below value in best use, causing severe losses to sellers." 3 Shleifer and Vishny go on to discuss the roles of investor specialization and limited arbitrage as factors that drive the magnitude of observed price discounts in fire sales, and there is, by now, a large body of empirical research that supports the importance of these factors. However, by itself, the existence of substantial price discounts in distressed sales speaks only to the positive economics of fire sales, not the normative economics, and hence is not sufficient to make a case for regulatory intervention. To see why, consider the following example: An airline buys a 737, and finances the purchase largely with collateralized borrowing. During an industry downturn, the airline finds itself in distress, and is forced to sell the 737 to avoid defaulting on its debt. Other airlines also are not faring well at this time, and are not interested in expanding their fleets. So the only two bidders for the 737 are a movie star, who plans to reconfigure it for his personal use, and a private-equity firm, which plans to lease out the plane temporarily and wait for the market to recover so the firm can resell it at a profit. In the end, the private-equity firm winds up buying the plane at half its original price. Two years later, it does indeed resell it, having earned a 60 percent return. This is clearly a fire sale in the positive-economics sense, but is there a market failure here that calls for regulation? Intuition suggests not. The airline arguably caused the fire sale by using a lot of leverage in its purchase of the 737, but it also seems to bear most of the cost, by being forced to liquidate at a large loss. The movie star and the private-equity firm are, if anything, made better off by the appearance of a buying opportunity, and there are no other innocent bystanders. So the airline's ex ante capital structure choice would seem to internalize things properly; the fire sale here is just like any other bankruptcy cost that a firm has to weigh in choosing the right mix of debt and equity. For a fire sale to have the sort of welfare effects that create a role for regulation, the reduced price in the fire sale has to hurt somebody other than the original party making the leverage decision, and this adverse impact of price has to run through something like a collateral constraint, whereby a lowered price actually reduces, rather than increases, the third party's demand for the asset. 4 So if hedge fund A buys an asset-backed security and finances it largely with collateralized borrowing, A's fire selling of the security will create an externality in the conventional sense only if the reduced price and impaired collateral value lower the ability of hedge funds B and C to borrow against the same security, and therefore force them to involuntarily liquidate their positions in it as well. 5 The market failure in this case is not simply the fact that this downward spiral causes a large price decline, it is that when hedge fund A makes its initial leverage choice, it does not take into account the potential harm--in the form of tightened financing constraints--that this may cause to hedge funds B and C. 6 Another key point is that the fire-sales problem is not necessarily caused by a lack of appropriate conservatism on the part of whoever lends to hedge fund A in this example--let's call it dealer firm D. By lending on an overnight basis to A, and with an appropriate haircut, D can virtually assure itself of being able to terminate its loan and get out whole by forcing a sale of the underlying collateral. So D's interests may be very well-protected here. But precisely in the pursuit of this protection, A and D have set up a financing arrangement that serves them well, but that creates a negative spillover onto other market participants, like B and C. It follows that even if policies aimed at curbing too-big-to-fail (TBTF) problems are entirely successful in aligning D's interests with those of taxpayers, this is not sufficient to deal with fire-sales externalities. They are a fundamentally different problem, and one that arises even absent any individually systemic institutions or any TBTF issues. Fire-Sale Externalities in Securities Financing Transactions The preceding discussion makes clear why SFTs, such as those done via repurchase (repo) agreements, are a natural object of concern for policymakers. This market is one where a large number of borrowers finance the same securities on a short-term collateralized basis, with very high leverage--often in the range of twenty-to-one, fifty-to-one, or even higher. Hence, there is a strong potential for any one borrower's distress--and the associated downward pressure on prices--to cause a tightening of collateral or regulatory constraints on other borrowers. I won't go into much detail about the institutional aspects of SFTs and the repo market. Instead, I will just lay out two stylized examples of SFTs that I can then use to illustrate the properties of various regulatory tools. Example 1: Broker-dealer as principal In this first example, a large broker-dealer firm borrows in the triparty repo market--from, say, a money market fund--in order to finance its own holdings of a particular security. Perhaps the broker-dealer is acting as a market-maker in the corporate bond market, and uses repo borrowing to finance its ongoing inventory of investment-grade and high-yield bonds. In this case, the asset on the dealer's balance sheet is the corporate bond, and the liability is the repo borrowing from the money fund. Example 2: Broker-dealer as SFT intermediary In this second example, the ultimate demand to own the corporate bond comes not from the dealer firm, but from one of its prime brokerage customers--say, a hedge fund. Moreover, the hedge fund cannot borrow directly from the money market fund sector in the triparty repo market, because the money funds are not sufficiently knowledgeable about the hedge fund to be comfortable taking it on as a counterparty. So instead, the hedge fund borrows on a collateralized basis from the dealer firm in the bilateral repo market, and the dealer then turns around and, as before, uses the same collateral to borrow from a money fund in the triparty market. In this case, the asset on the dealer's balance sheet is the repo loan it makes to the hedge fund. Clearly, there is the potential for fire-sale risk in both of these examples. One source of risk would be an initial shock either to the expected value of the underlying collateral or to its volatility that leads to an increase in required repo-market haircuts (e.g., the default probability of the corporate bond goes up). Another source of risk would be concerns about the creditworthiness of the broker-dealer firm that causes lenders in the triparty market to step away from it. In either case, if the associated externalities are deemed to create significant social costs, the goal of regulatory policy should be to get private actors to internalize these costs. At an abstract level, this means looking for a way to impose an appropriate Pigouvian (i.e., corrective) tax on the transactions. 7 Of course, the tax must balance the social costs against the benefits that accompany SFTs; these benefits include both "money-like" services from the increased stock of near-riskless private assets, as well as enhanced liquidity in the market for the underlying collateral--the corporate bond market, in my examples. 8 So in the absence of further work on calibrating costs and benefits, there is no presumption that the optimal tax should be large, only that it may be non-zero, and that it may make sense for it to differ across asset classes. Can Existing Regulatory Tools Be Used to Tax SFTs Efficiently? With this last observation in mind, my next step is to run through a number of our existing regulatory instruments, and in each case ask: to what extent can the instrument at hand be used efficiently to impose a Pigouvian tax on an SFT, either one of the dealer-as-principal type or one of the dealer-as-intermediary type? As will become clear, the answer can depend crucially on both the structure of the transaction as well as the nature of the underlying collateral involved. Also, I should emphasize that nothing in this exercise amounts to a judgment on the overall desirability of any given regulatory tool. Obviously, even if risk-based capital requirements are not particularly helpful in taxing SFTs, they can be very valuable for other reasons. I am asking a different question: to what extent can the existing toolkit be used--or be adapted--to deal with the specific problem of fire-sale externalities in SFTs? 1. Risk-based capital requirements Current risk-based capital requirements are of little relevance for many types of SFTs. In my Example 1, where the dealer firm holds a corporate bond as a principal and finances it with repo borrowing, there would be a capital charge on the corporate bond, but this capital charge is approximately independent of whether the corporate bond is financed with repo or with some other, more stable, form of funding. So there is no tax on the incremental fire-sale risk created by the more fragile funding structure. 9 In Example 2, in which the dealer is an intermediary with a matched book of repo borrowing and lending, there is, in principle, a capital requirement on its asset-side repo loan to the hedge fund. However, the Basel III risk-based capital rules allow banks and bank holding companies to use internal models to compute this capital charge for repo lending, and the resulting numbers are typically very small--for all practical purposes, close to zero--for overcollateralized lending transactions, with repo being the canonical example. I'm not arguing that the very low risk-based charges on repo lending in Basel III are "wrong" in any microprudential sense. After all, they are designed to solve a different problem--that of ensuring bank solvency. And if a bank holding company's broker-dealer sub makes a repo loan of short maturity that is sufficiently well-collateralized, it may be at minimal risk of bearing any losses--precisely because it operates on the premise that it can dump the collateral and get out of town before things get too ugly. The risk-averse lenders in the triparty market--who, in turn, provide financing to the dealer--operate under the same premise. As I noted earlier, these defensive reactions by providers of repo finance mean that the costs of fire sales are likely to be felt elsewhere in the financial system. 2. Liquidity requirements Liquidity requirements, such as those embodied in the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), can impose a meaningful tax on certain SFTs in which the dealer acts as a principal. If the dealer holds a corporate bond and finances it with repo borrowing of less than 30 days' maturity, the LCR kicks in and requires the dealer to hold high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) against the risk that it is unable to roll the repo over. In this particular case, there can be said to be a direct form of regulatory attack on the fire-sales problem. However, this conclusion is sensitive to the details of the example. If, instead of holding a corporate bond, the dealer holds a Treasury security that is deemed to count as Level 1 HQLA, there is no impact of the LCR. Moreover, the LCR plays no role in mitigating fire-sales externalities in the important matched-book case in which the dealer acts as an intermediary. 10 If a dealer borrows on a collateralized basis with repo and then turns around and lends the proceeds to a hedge fund in a similar fashion, the LCR deems the dealer to have no net liquidity exposure--and hence imposes no incremental liquidity requirement--so long as the lending side of the transaction has a maturity of less than 30 days. The implicit logic is that as long as the dealer can generate the necessary cash by not rolling over its loan to the hedge fund, it will always be able to handle any outflows of funding that come from being unable to roll over its own borrowing. This logic is not incorrect per se, but it is very micro-focused in nature, and does not attend to fire-sales externalities. It worries about the ability of the dealer firm to survive a liquidity stress event, but does not take into account that the dealer's survival may come at the cost of forcing its hedge fund client to engage in fire sales. 11 3. Leverage ratio If a broker-dealer firm faces a binding leverage ratio, this constraint can act as a significant tax on two types of SFTs that are largely untouched either by risk-based capital requirements or by liquidity regulations. The first is when the dealer, acting as a principal, uses repo to finance its holdings of Treasury securities or agency mortgage-backed securities, assets that generally have only modest risk weights when held as trading positions. The second is when the dealer acts as an intermediary and has a matched repo book. In both cases, the SFTs blow up the firm's balance sheet and, hence, the denominator of the leverage ratio, even while having little impact on risk-based capital or LCR calculations. The crucial issue here, however, is whether the leverage ratio does, in fact, bind. A traditional view among regulators has been that the leverage ratio should be calibrated so as to serve as a meaningful "backstop" for risk-based capital requirements, but that under ordinary circumstances it should not actually be the binding constraint on firms. For if it were to bind, this would put us in a regime of completely un-risk-weighted capital requirements, where the effective capital charge for holding short-term Treasury securities would be the same as that for holding, say, risky corporate debt securities or loans. Recently, U.S. regulators have issued a proposed rulemaking that seeks to raise the BaselIII supplementary leverage ratio requirement to 5 percent for the largest U.S. bank holding companies, and to 6 percent for their affiliated depository institutions. While this increase might be considered a parallel shift that preserves the backstop philosophy in light of the fact that risk-based requirements have also gone up significantly, it does increase the likelihood that the leverage ratio may bind for some of these firms at some times--particularly for those firms with a broker-dealer-intensive business model in which the ratio of total assets to risk-weighted assets tends to be higher. In this event, there would indeed be a significant tax on SFTs undertaken in the affected firms. However, because it is unlikely that the leverage constraint would bind symmetrically across all of the largest firms, my guess is that the effect would be less to deter SFT activity in the aggregate than to cause it to migrate in such a way as to be predominantly located in those firms that--because they have, say, a larger lending business and, hence, more risk-weighted assets--have more headroom under the leverage ratio constraint. Other Possible Approaches To summarize the discussion thus far, the mainstays of our existing regulatory toolkit--risk-based capital, liquidity, and leverage requirements--have a variety of other virtues, but none seem well-suited to lean in a comprehensive way against the specific fire-sale externalities created by SFTs. The liquidity coverage ratio affects a subset of SFTs in which a dealer firm acts as a principal to fund its own inventory of securities positions, but does not meaningfully touch those in which it acts as an intermediary. By contrast, an aggressively calibrated leverage ratio could potentially impose a significant tax on a wider range of SFTs, but the tax would by its nature be blunt and highly asymmetric, falling entirely on those firms for whom the leverage ratio constraint was more binding than the risk-based capital constraint. As such, it would be more likely to induce regulatory arbitrage than to rein in overall SFT activity. These observations raise the question of whether there are other tools that might be better suited to dealing with SFT-related fire-sales externalities. I will touch briefly on three of these. 1. Capital surcharges In his May speech, Governor Tarullo alluded to the possibility of liquidity-linked capital surcharges that would effectively augment the existing regime of risk-based capital requirements. 12 Depending on how these surcharges are structured, they could act in part as a tax on both the dealer-as-principal and dealer-as-intermediary types of SFTs. Accomplishing the latter would require a capital surcharge based on something like the aggregate size of the dealer's matched repo book; this comes quite close to the Pigouvian notion of directly taxing this specific activity. As compared to relying on the leverage ratio to implement the tax, this approach has the advantage that it is more likely to treat institutions uniformly: the tax on SFTs would not be a function of the overall business model of a given firm, but rather just the characteristics of its SFT book. This is because the surcharge is embedded into the existing risk-based capital regime, which should in principle be the constraint that binds for most firms. There are a couple of important qualifications, however. First, going this route would involve a significant conceptual departure from the notion of capital as a prudential requirement at the firm level. As noted previously, a large matched repo book may entail relatively little solvency or liquidity risk for the broker-dealer firm that intermediates this market. So, to the extent that one imposes a capital surcharge on the broker-dealer, one would be doing so with the express intention of creating a tax that is passed on to the downstream borrower (i.e., to the hedge fund, in my example). Second, and a direct corollary of the first, imposing the tax at the level of the intermediary naturally raises the question of disintermediation. In other words, might the SFT market respond to the tax by evolving so that large hedge funds are more readily able to borrow via repo directly from money market funds and securities lenders, without having to go through broker-dealers? I can't say that I have a good understanding of the institutional factors that might facilitate or impede such an evolution. But if the market ultimately does evolve in this way, it would be hard to argue that the underlying fire-sales problem has been addressed. 2. Modified liquidity regulation A conceptually similar way to get at matched-book repo would be to modify liquidity regulation so as to introduce an asymmetry between the assumed liquidity properties of repo loans made by a broker-dealer, and its own repo borrowing. For example, in the context of the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), one could assume that a dealer's repo loans to a hedge fund roll off more slowly than do its own repo borrowings from the triparty market. This assumption would create a net liquidity exposure for a matched repo book, and would thereby force the dealer to hold some long-term debt or other stable funding against it. Although the implementation is different, the end result is quite close to that obtained with the capital-surcharge approach I just described: in one case, there is a broad stable funding requirement for intermediaries against a matched repo book; in the other case, there is an equity requirement. It follows that, whatever its other advantages, going the modified-NSFR route does not eliminate concerns about disintermediation and regulatory arbitrage. 3. Universal margin requirements These sorts of regulatory-arbitrage concerns have motivated some academics and policymakers to think about a system of universal margin requirements for SFTs. 13 In its simplest form, the idea would be to impose a minimum haircut, or down payment requirement, on any party--be it a hedge fund or a broker-dealer--that uses short-term collateralized funding to finance its securities holdings. Because the requirement now lives at the security level, rather than at the level of an intermediary in the SFT market, it cannot be as easily evaded by, say, a hedge fund going outside the broker-dealer sector to obtain its repo funding. 14 This is the strong conceptual appeal of universal margin from the perspective of a fire-sales framework. In this regard, it is worth noting that the Financial Stability Board (FSB) has recently released a proposal to establish minimum haircut requirements for certain SFTs. 15 However, the FSB proposal stops well short of being a universal margin requirement. Rather, the minimum haircuts envisioned by the FSB would apply only to SFTs in which entities not subject to capital and liquidity regulation (e.g., hedge funds) receive financing from entities that are subject to regulation (i.e., banks and broker-dealers), and only to transactions in which the collateral is something other than government or agency securities. In this sense, there is a close relationship between the FSB minimum-haircut proposal and the specific variant of the capital-surcharge idea that I mentioned a moment ago. Both have the potential to act as a restraint on those SFTs that are intermediated by regulated broker-dealer firms, but both are vulnerable to an evolution of the business away from this intermediated mode. The minimum margin levels in the FSB proposal are also quite small, so it is unclear how much of an effect, if any, they will have on market behavior. For example, the minimums for long-term corporate bonds, securitized products, and equities are 2 percent, 4 percent, and 4 percent, respectively. Conclusions Let me wrap up. My aim here has been to survey the landscape--to give a sense of the possible tools that can be used to address the fire-sales problem in SFTs--without making any particularly pointed recommendations. I would guess that a sensible path forward might involve drawing on some mix of the latter set of instruments that I discussed: namely, capital surcharges, modifications to the liquidity regulation framework, and universal margin requirements. As we go down this path, conceptual purity may have to be sacrificed in some places to deliver pragmatic and institutionally feasible results. It is unlikely that we will find singular and completely satisfactory fixes. With this observation in mind, I would be remiss if I did not remind you of another, highly complementary area where reform is necessary: the money market fund sector. Money funds are among the most significant repo lenders to broker-dealer firms, and an important source of fire-sale risk comes from the fragility of the current money fund model. This fragility stems in part from their capital structures--the fact that they issue stable-value demandable liabilities with no capital buffer or other explicit loss-absorption capacity--which make them highly vulnerable to runs by their depositors. I welcome the work of the Securities and Exchange Commission on this front, particularly its focus on floating net asset values, and look forward to concrete action. Another source of fragility arises from money funds investing in repo loans collateralized by assets that they are unwilling or unable to hold if things go bad. This feature creates an incentive for them to withdraw repo financing from broker-dealers at the first sign of counterparty risk, even if the underlying collateral is in good shape. In closing, I just want to acknowledge how much my own thinking about these complicated issues has benefited from the work of so many of you on the program at this conference. I look forward to continuing the conversation. Thank you. 1. A version of these remarks was previously presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Workshop on "Fire Sales as a Driver of Systemic Risk in Triparty Repo and Other Secured Funding Markets" (October 4, 2013). I am grateful for comments from Matt Eichner, Mike Gibson, Nellie Liang, Bill Nelson, and Mark Van Der Weide. The thoughts in this speech are my own, and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability ," speech at the Peterson Institute for International Economics in Washington, D.C., May 3. Return to text 3. Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (2011), " Fire Sales in Finance and Macroeconomics (PDF) ," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 25 (Winter), p. 30. Return to text 4. An alternative mechanism that works similarly is when the third party is a regulated intermediary and mark-to-market losses reduce its capital ratios, and again force it to involuntarily sell assets in the face of falling prices. Return to text 5. The fundamental welfare economics at work here is developed in John Geanakoplos and Heracles M. Polemarchakis (1986), "Existence, Regularity, and Constrained Suboptimality of Competitive Allocations When the Asset Market Is Incomplete," in Walter P. Heller, Ross M. Starr, and David A. Starrett, eds., Essays in Honor of Kenneth Arrow: Vol 3., Uncertainty, Information, and Communication (New York: Cambridge University Press), pp. 65-95. A discussion of the connection of this work to specific aspects of macroprudential regulation is in Samuel G. Hanson, Anil K. Kashyap, and Jeremy C. Stein (2011), " A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation (PDF) ," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 25 (Winter), pp. 3-28. Return to text 6. This is the first-round externality. Adverse spillovers from a fire sale of this sort may also take the form of a credit crunch that affects borrowers more generally. Such a credit crunch may arise as other financial intermediaries (e.g., banks) withdraw capital from lending, so as to exploit the now-more-attractive returns to buying up fire-sold assets. Ultimately, it is the risk of this credit contraction, and its implications for economic activity more broadly, that may be the most compelling basis for regulatory intervention. Return to text 7. Of course, the Pigouvian taxation approach by itself cannot completely eliminate the ex post costs associated with fire sales. This would require a broad and active lender-of-last resort function, which I do not discuss here. The best that any form of ex ante regulation can hope to do is to reduce the incidence and magnitude of ex post fire-sales damage. Return to text 8. Further discussion on the money-like benefits that are created by near-riskless private assets such as repo can be found in the following: Arvind Krishnamurthy and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), " The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt ," Journal of Political Economy , vol. 120, issue 2 (April), pp. 233-267; Gary B. Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2012), " Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo ," Journal of Financial Economics , vol. 103, pp. 425-451; and Jeremy C. Stein (2012), " Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation ," Quarterly Journal of Economics , vol. 127, pp. 57-95. Return to text 9. To be more precise, under Basel III capital rules, there is a small risk-based capital requirement on the repo liability. This requirement is driven by counterparty credit risk, not liquidity risk, and is independent of the term of the repo borrowing. The basic idea is that the repo borrower has to hold a little bit of capital because it has sent $102 in Treasury securities over to its counterparty lender and only received $100 cash. If the repo lender defaults, the borrower could be out $2. Return to text 10. A similar comment applies to the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), which requires regulated firms to fund illiquid exposures with some amount of long-term debt or other form of stable funding. Like the LCR, the NSFR effectively treats matched-book repo as creating no net liquidity exposure, and hence imposes no requirement on it. Return to text 11. Even from a microprudential perspective, the LCR can be said to have a flaw in that it is blind to maturity mismatches within the 30-day window. For example, if a dealer borrows on an overnight basis from a money fund, and then makes a 29-day loan to a hedge fund, the LCR deems it to be fully matched, and to have no incremental liquidity exposure. Return to text 12. Tarullo (2013) Return to text 13. A closely related motivation for universal margin requirements is that they might be able to limit procyclicality by leaning against increases in leverage during boom times. Return to text 14. Of course, there is always the potential for other forms of regulatory arbitrage. For example, a hedge fund that faces a minimum margin requirement when it uses repo borrowing to fund a corporate-bond position may instead seek to take a leveraged position in the corporate bond through other means by, for example, engaging in a total-return swap with its prime broker. This is the growing business of "synthetic" prime brokerage. Properly harmonized initial margin requirements on uncleared derivatives may help to level the playing field between traditional and synthetic prime brokerage activities. Return to text 15. Financial Stability Board (2013), Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Addressing Shadow Banking Risks in Securities Lending and Repos (PDF) , August 29. Return to text Last Update: November 07, 2013 Back to Top
