Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) 'Oil and Gas, Blondes and Over-Accessorized Brunettes, and Ruthless, Hard-Drinking Cowboys' (With Reference to Sheikh Zayed, Diana Natalicio, My Nephew Charles and President Peña Nieto) Richard Fisher's remarks at the University of Texas at El Paso Centennial Lecture April 10, 2013. April 10, 2013 El Paso, TX Speech in PDF I so appreciate being here at the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), my first outing since returning from a trip to the United Arab Emirates. The founder of the Emirates—a collection of former “Trucial States” along the lower coast of the Arabian Sea—was Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, a wise man who had no formal education but knew of its enormous value. He said, “Education is a lantern which lights the dark alleys of ignorance.”[ 1 ] I mention this because I cannot think of an educator who embodies this practical dictum better than Diana Natalicio. President Natalicio is a bright, shining lantern in the world of education. Actually, that’s an understatement: She is a klieg light! We are blessed to have her lead UTEP and move Texas and the nation forward on the frontiers of higher education. I am tremendously honored to be introduced by her. Thank you, Diana. I am going to depart from my usual format today and rely heavily on slides—slides that provide a factual basis for what is going to be a dose of “Texas brag.” With its branches in El Paso, San Antonio and Houston, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas—the Federal Reserve’s Eleventh District—covers about 27 million people over 360,000 square miles stretching from northern Louisiana to southern New Mexico. Over 96 percent of the economic output of the district comes from Texas. I find that when I speak about my district in foreign lands—say, in New York or Washington, D.C.—there is a stereotypical reaction not unlike the image projected by the TV show Dallas . “Of course you are doing well,” they say. “You are rich in oil and gas, blondes and over-accessorized brunettes, and ruthless, hard-drinking cowboys.” Today, I want to set the record straight. Prices Are Presently Stable; Employment Is Far From Optimal; the Efficacy of Quantitative Easing Is as Yet Unclear The road to dignity is through work: Jobs provide the means for economic advancement. As the nation’s central bank, the Federal Reserve is tasked with maintaining price stability—a common monetary policy goal of all responsible central banks. But under the laws created by Congress that govern our franchise and allow it to operate independently, the Fed works under a dual mandate—to conduct monetary policy that keeps prices from inflating or deflating and to achieve full employment. At the moment, and for the foreseeable future, neither inflation nor deflation appears on the forecast horizon. However, the longer-term inflationary consequences of the massive quantitative easing programs we have undertaken—programs I have opposed in our Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings but that have been approved by the majority of the committee—are as yet unclear. Those aftereffects will depend on how artful the committee will be in unwinding that accommodation on a timely basis. Indeed, one of the signal achievements of Federal Reserve policy under Ben Bernanke’s leadership is to have formalized a long-term inflation target of 2 percent, something the FOMC had never before distinctly declared. Presently, the 12-month inflation rate is 1.6 percent, according to our calculation at the Dallas Fed, where we do a “trimmed mean” analysis of 178 items consumers use, including guns and beer (hopefully not enjoyed simultaneously) and the cost of gasoline, food, getting your hair cut or your shoes repaired, or buying an electronic device. Given that the trimmed mean analysis has proven to be an excellent rule-of-thumb predictor of headline inflation one year forward, we can say with some degree of confidence that, at present, we are keeping inflation at or below our 2 percent target. Employment, however, is not at a comfortable level. Pick up any newspaper or go to any news website or broadcast medium and you will read or hear of the still-too-high unemployment rate that bedevils our economy. Monetary policy acts with a lag, including unorthodox monetary policy as it is now being conducted. It would appear from some studies and from anecdotal evidence that companies are starting to use the copious cheap money they have access to for investing in capital projects and employing increasing amounts of workers.[ 2 ] But it is not yet clear that we will achieve a justifiable bang for the trillions of bucks the Fed has flooded the economy with. Only time will tell if the efficacy of quantitative easing we have undertaken was justifiable in regard to job creation and delivering on the second component of our dual mandate. Yet many things do emerge when you examine the entrails of employment data from across the country. One thing is that you learn a lot about Texas, which is the focus of my remarks today. ‘If You Pull Texas Out of the Puzzle, the Country Falls Down’ For the past 22 years, Texas has outgrown the country by a factor of more than 2-to-1. Here is a slide that shows the percentage increase in jobs created by several large states and for the U.S. as a whole since 1990: SOURCES: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. And here is a look at the rate of job creation for those same states and the U.S. as a whole since 2000: SOURCES: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. We were one of the last states to go into the recent recession and one of the first to come out. In terms of jobs, as of now, 10 states have come back to or have exceeded employment levels that prevailed before the crisis: Alaska, Louisiana, Massachusetts, New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, Utah and West Virginia. The Federal Reserve has no index that measures the number of blondes or ruthless cowboys in Texas, but we can account for the influence of oil and gas on our state’s welfare: Oil and gas extraction and mining support directly accounts for 2.4 percent of our workforce—two-point-four percent. And the energy sector’s total contribution to our state’s gross domestic product (GDP) is roughly 10 percent. So yes, the foreigners are correct: We have a strong energy sector in Texas. We are the No. 1 producer of oil and gas in the nation. We produce more oil than Venezuela and more natural gas than Canada. On net, high energy prices do, indeed, benefit Texans. But look at this slide of the number of jobs created by sector in 2012: SOURCES: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. Oil and gas and mining and their support services accounted for 22,100, or less than 7 percent, of the 335,500 jobs created in Texas last year. Professional and business services accounted for 74,200; trade, transportation and utilities 62,000; leisure and hospitality 52,400; educational and health services 41,000; and construction 27,000. Each of these sectors created more jobs than the energy sector. Of course, the oil and gas sector has large multipliers, so the overall economic impact is greater than just these 22,100 jobs. The University of Texas at San Antonio—your sister organization—estimates that the Eagle Ford Shale generated over $61 billion in economic impact in 2012. As this chart shows, however, ours is a diversified economy, creating jobs across the spectrum. “But these jobs are all low paying,” our uninformed friends say. And to that I respond: “You are right. We create more low-paying jobs in Texas than anybody else. Yet look at this breakdown of job creation by income quartile for Texas versus the United States minus Texas for the past 10-plus years”: SOURCE: March CPS, 2001, 2012. We created a lot of low-paying jobs. But we also created far more high-paying jobs. Most importantly, while the United States has seen job destruction in the two middle-income quartiles, Texas has created jobs for those vital middle-income workers, too. The bottom line—we have experienced growth across all sectors and in all income categories. And it continues: In February, job growth in Texas was an annualized 6.9 percent. Year to date, construction, trade and transportation, and professional and business services have led the pack in what we believe will be another year of employment growth that, knock on wood, will approach 3 percent. Here are some other facts that help round out the economic picture of our state. Our banks are more profitable than those in the rest of the nation … SOURCES: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. In the housing sector, we have fewer underwater mortgages … SOURCE: CoreLogic. Robust new-home construction … SOURCES: U.S. Census Bureau; Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi UFJ. And an export sector that has come out of the recession like gee-whiz. In, fact, you can see from this graph that without Texas, the top blue line, exports from the rest of the United States, indicated by the red line, are hovering around the peak level of 2008: SOURCES: Census Bureau; World Institute for Strategic Economic Research; Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas My little nephew, Charles, was playing with a three-dimensional wooden puzzle map of the United States in his preschool class the other day. He came home with the piece that was Texas and a smirk on his face: “Mom,” he said, “guess what? If you pull Texas out of the puzzle of the United States, the rest of the country falls down!” Although little Charles lives in Massachusetts, he gets the picture. It came as no surprise when a recent study by the highly respected Brookings Institution, as reported in the Wall Street Journal last week, revealed that only 14 of the nation’s 100 biggest metropolitan areas have more people employed than they did before the 2007–09 recession and that six of them are in Texas: Austin, San Antonio, McAllen, Dallas, Houston and … El Paso. “Robust employment in the oil and gas industries helped the Texas cities,” the article read, “although data from the Texas Workforce Commission suggests the job recovery has come from a variety of industries.”[ 3 ] Amen to that. El Paso at a Crossroads You’ll note that El Paso was mentioned in the Brookings study. Let’s talk a little about this unique city. It’s no small wonder that of the 23,000 students enrolled at UTEP, 77 percent are Mexican–Americans and another 6 percent commute from Ciudad Juárez, across the border. El Paso is at the very nexus of the cultures and economies of two countries. As Roberto Coronado, our economist and assistant vice president in charge at our El Paso Branch, likes to point out, “Given its unique geographic position, El Paso is very good at importing recessions both from the north and from the south of the Rio Grande.” I would add that it’s also good at drawing from the best of both countries in recoveries. The El Paso labor market has outperformed that of the U.S. for several years. Here is a graph that shows how the El Paso employment picture has changed relative to the U.S. since the onset of the Great Recession: SOURCES: Bureau of Labor Statistics; HAVER Analytics. Now, as the following chart demonstrates, it remains a fact that the local employment picture is less bright in El Paso than in Texas’s other major metro areas. SOURCES: Bureau of Labor Statistics; HAVER Analytics. The unemployment rate here is hovering around 9 percent. El Paso’s unemployment rate has historically been 2 percentage points higher than the U.S. rate and 3.2 percentage points above the Texas rate. In part, this is due to population growth. El Paso had more than 21 million border crossings in 2011 alone. Most of these visitors came to shop, but many stayed and looked for jobs. These visitors increase the number of job seekers in the unemployment equation, driving the rate upward. Of additional concern is that El Paso is more dependent on federal government employment than any other Texas city, with 5 percent of your workforce coming from the public sector. And that is before accounting for the payroll of Fort Bliss itself and the impact it has on private-sector employment and consumption. Clearly, El Paso is quite vulnerable to constriction in the growth of federal spending. This will ultimately present serious challenges as the federal government struggles to right its fiscal imbalances. The Good News But there is good news that offsets that risk: Thanks to the North American Free Trade Agreement, or NAFTA—an agreement that, as Diana mentioned, I played a role in implementing as deputy U.S. trade representative—El Paso is no longer at the edge of the United States but, instead, at a strategic location in the vast North American market. In this context, the maquiladoras of Ciudad Juárez become an important factor determining El Paso’s economic fate. The relationship exists via a ricochet effect that begins with U.S. industrial activity picking up, say in auto manufacturing, followed by new production orders being sent to Ciudad Juárez maquiladora plants and then economic benefits flowing back to El Paso. The flowback to El Paso comes from firms on this side of the border providing logistical support, insurance and other services to the maquiladoras—as well as in the aforementioned form of maquiladora employees shopping and consuming more on this side of the border. And, as this table shows, it results in an increase of high-value-added sales of El Paso-based services into Ciudad Juárez, making up for reductions in manufacturing jobs on this side of the border: Ciudad Juárez Maquiladoras’ Impact on El Paso Percent increase per every 10 percent increase in maquiladora output Total employment 2.8 Transportation employment 5.3 Retail trade employment 1.3 Finance, insurance, real estate employment 2.1 Services employment 1.8 Manufacturing employment -1.3 SOURCE: “The Impact of Maquiladoras on U.S. Border Cities,” by Jesus Cañas, Roberto Coronado, Robert W. Gilmer and Eduardo Saucedo, Growth and Change , forthcoming. ¡ Sigue México ! As the maquiladora example illustrates, Mexico has a significant impact on the fate of the El Paso economy. This is fortunate because the Mexican economy is being transformed to a greater degree than most people here in El Norte understand. On Sunday, the Dallas Morning News kindly ran an op-ed piece I wrote based on the work of our Dallas Fed economists, titled “Mexico Outdoes the U.S. on Fiscal Discipline.”[ 4 ] The article outlines the great progress Mexico has made in transforming its economy and the significant steps taken by President Enrique Peña Nieto in the footsteps of his predecessors, from President Calderon back to President Salinas. Here are the facts: Mexico recovered more quickly from the recession than the United States. Mexico’s 3.3 percent GDP growth in 2012 compares with the U.S.’s 1.7 percent. Mexico, home to 1980s hyperinflation and a poster child of that decade’s Latin American debt crisis, has recorded a core consumer price index annual inflation rate below 3 percent for the last three months. In fact, inflation in Mexico has trended down for two decades following two important reforms: central bank independence in 1994 and adoption of inflation targeting in 2001. Meanwhile, the peso, floating since late 1994, held its own through the global financial crisis. And year to date, the peso has gained 6.9 percent against the dollar. Low and stable inflation, together with a steady peso, has protected the purchasing power of the Mexican consumer and allowed nest eggs to grow. Those nest eggs can now be safely deposited in banks. After a horrific banking crisis in 1994–95 and an ensuing decade of stagnant lending, Mexico’s banking industry is growing again and financial access, while still limited, is expanding quickly. The number of Mexican banks increased 14.3 percent in 2012; in the U.S., the number of institutions contracted 3.1 percent. It may be surprising to you that Mexican banks are also better capitalized than U.S. banks. As of Dec. 31, 2012, equity-to-asset ratios were 11.1 percent at U.S. banks and 15.9 percent at Mexican banks. On the fiscal front, Mexico’s 2012 budget deficit was a respectable 2.6 percent of GDP, which compares with 7 percent here. For all their differences, Mexican lawmakers on the right and the left have a commitment to fiscal discipline. They adopted a balanced-budget rule in 2006 and have chosen to abide by it rather than take the “kick the can down the road” approach of the U.S. Congress. As a result, Mexico’s national debt is stable at 28 percent of GDP, while here it raced past $16 trillion in 2012, about 105 percent of GDP. Mexico has also remained a staunch proponent of free trade. Exports and imports now make up 62 percent of Mexican economic output versus 17.5 percent as recently as 1980. Since Mexico joined the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (the forerunner of the World Trade Organization) in 1986 and ratified NAFTA in 1994, it has forged 12 trade pacts with 44 nations. With all the progress in the macro economy, banking, finance and trade, structural reforms are what Mexico now needs to catapult it to a leadership role among emerging-market economies. If President Peña Nieto’s first 100 days in office are any indication, this critical next step is underway. He has engineered the Pacto por México (Pact for Mexico) with the other political parties; arrested Elba Esther Gordillo, the corrupt leader of the massive national teachers’ union; brought a class-action suit against Carlos Slim’s growth-retarding telecommunications empire; and begun a national conversation about reforming the country’s woefully underperforming, yet potentially rich energy sector. If this effort at structural modernization continues, Mexico’s growth will increase significantly. All of this will be good for El Paso. Just as El Paso suffers when recession afflicts both sides of the border, it will prosper as expansion takes hold here in the U.S. and in Mexico. The Good, the Bad and the Comical Let me give you a pictorial summary of this lecture: We are blessed by a force of nature named Diana Natalicio (a Texas blonde, by the way!) … By UTEP as a symbol of El Paso’s critical place at the crossroads of North America… By having the good fortune to live in Texas … And by sharing a border with an increasingly successful neighbor to our south. But we also have challenges. It would be unbecoming of a central banker to be entirely optimistic—we are a pretty sober species. So here is the bad news. Here’s what is holding back the economic progress of El Paso, Texas, Mexico and America: Yup—Washington. The Federal Reserve has provided plenty of, if not too much, high-octane fuel in the form of cheap and abundant money to propel the economy forward. Our southern neighbor, Mexico, is responsibly managing its fiscal affairs and structural reforms (as is our northern neighbor, Canada). Texas is showing the nation the way to create jobs and encourage prosperity with a highly diversified economy. And yet Congress and executive branch cannot agree on a budget, or on a path forward for taxes and spending, or on a regulatory structure that incentivizes business to put people back to work. This is the subject of an entire separate lecture. But to summarize the root fiscal problem of past Congresses and administrations, Democrat- or Republican-led, my staff found a clip on YouTube that sums it up better than words: That sketch says it all. We must all pray that our president and our congressional representatives will find a way to reverse their spendthrift ways and do what is right by putting us back on the path of fiscal probity. El Paso and Texas have done well despite the disorderly behavior of our nation’s fiscal authorities. Imagine how well we would do if they actually managed to get their act together! As we eagerly await that day, let us be thankful for the exceptional nature of this great state, this great city and this wonderful university. ¡Ándale Pues! Gracias. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. As quoted by Sheikh Nahayan Mabarak Al Nahayan, Minister of Culture, Youth and Community Development and Chancellor, Higher Colleges of Technology, in his speech at Sharjah Women’s College, United Arab Emirates, March 27, 2013. See “Easy Money: Fed Policies Spur Corporate Spending,” by Victoria McGrane, Wall Street Journal , April 9, 2013. See “Hiring Spreads, but Only 14 Cities Top Prerecession Level,” by Amy Schatz, Wall Street Journal , March 31, 2013. See “Mexico Outdoes the U.S. on Fiscal Discipline,” by Richard W. Fisher, Dallas Morning News , April 7, 2013. This article was based on the excellent work of Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas economists Pia Orrenius, Jesus Cañas, Roberto Coronado and Ed Skelton. For information on inflation in Mexico, see “The Conquest of Mexican Inflation,” by Mark Wynne and Edward C. Skelton, in the Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute 2011 Annual Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Fiscal Policy. Oy! (With Reference to Ben Bernanke, Ken Arrow, Thomas Jefferson, William Shakespeare and the Oracle of Omaha) Richard Fisher's remarks at 2013 NABE Industry Conference May 16, 2013. May 16, 2013 Houston, TX Speech in PDF Thank you, Ken (Simonson). I am delighted that the National Association for Business Economics (NABE) has chosen the Dallas Fed’s Houston Branch as the venue for this meeting on the oil and gas boom as a possible engine for “Reigniting the Economy.” As you will shortly hear from my Dallas Fed colleague, Mine Yücel; my wise old colleague from my days at Treasury in the 1970s, Phil Verleger; the incoming chairman of our San Antonio Branch, Curt Anastasio; and others, this is an intriguing proposition. The technical and entrepreneurial genius of Houston and Texas is playing a key role in unlocking our nation’s energy potential. Indeed, there are many here in Texas and abroad—in places as distant as Illinois, Michigan and New York—who argue that reigniting their local economies and the nation’s economy calls for more “Texification,” above and beyond the frontiers of energy. But I am not here today to discuss oil and gas or engage in “Texas brag.” I have been asked to provide a broader perspective on the nation’s economic and monetary policy. Current Predicament of Monetary Policy: A Grand Experiment I’ll begin with a summary of the current predicament of monetary policy. The Federal Reserve has undertaken a grand experiment to reignite the economy through unprecedented monetary accommodation. We cut to zero the base rate that anchors the yield curve and have pursued a policy aimed at driving rates throughout the curve to historic lows by buying Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Our portfolio totals about $3 trillion, which we have recently been expanding at a rate of $85 billion per month. Here is a picture of the domestic securities of the current System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio. [ 1 ] The sea change in the balance sheet in recent years is immediately visible: In sharp contrast to the past, we now hold almost no Treasury notes of less than three years’ duration—the dark blue space. We have purchased in the secondary markets some $1.7 trillion in longer-term Treasuries—the light blue area—and, as denoted by the green, more than $1.1 trillion of securities backed by the Federal National Mortgage Association (commonly known as Fannie Mae), the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. (Freddie Mac) and the Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae). We live in an age of big numbers when I can say, “Ignore the purple space, for it is only $70 billion in remaining Fannie and Freddie debentures, aka ‘agency debt.’” Before the crisis, when we didn’t have any agency debt, $70 billion would have represented 8 percent of our balance sheet. As to the duration of these purchases, here is a picture from year-end 2012: Including securities purchased since then, the total SOMA portfolio has an average duration of seven years, with Treasury securities at eight years and MBS having risen to four years. According to dealers’ forecasts at year-end and as of March, the probability distribution of the expected size of the SOMA portfolio is as follows: So, you now have a snapshot of where we are. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has cut the short-term rate to zero. Being “zero bound,” we instructed our traders to embark on a buying spree of Treasuries and MBS, and they have done so, ballooning our balance sheet from its precrisis level of less than $900 billion to about $3.3 trillion. Presently, the committee is adding to its holdings at a rate of $85 billion in longer-term securities each month, in addition to reinvesting principal payments from holdings of agency MBS and agency debt securities into agency MBS. And the predominant sentiment of the “market,” as measured by our dealer surveys, presently posits that we will build our holdings further, to between $3.5 trillion and possibly $5 trillion by the end of 2014. The Economy’s Dashboard As to the status of the economy, here is the dashboard our Research Director (and former NABE President) Harvey Rosenblum uses as a simple graphic to describe the current economic predicament: You will note that the data compiled at the end of the first quarter on real gross domestic product (GDP) growth and inflation—as measured by the Trimmed Mean Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE) Index, the Dallas Fed’s preferred indicator—show that both increased less than 2 percent year over year. The dashboard also indicates that at quarter’s end, we were cruising along at near stall speed—note the “Engine stall” red warning light. The unemployment-rate gauge is not red because it declined to 7.5 percent in April. And, as indicated by the odometer box, we have traveled some distance in job creation, even though we have not seen the job creation we might have hoped for in a typical recovery: 70.4 percent of jobs lost in the recent recession have been recovered, up from about 50 percent only a year ago. The indicator for the yield curve, if anything, is robust. Junk-bond spreads are below 5 percent; nominal yields for even the lowest-grade bonds (CCC-rated credit that is one notch above default) have fallen to below 7 percent from double digits only a year ago. Further, covenant-light lending is on a tear. The “oil gauge” indicates the Fed has supplied plenty of lubrication for the engine of job creation. Professional Forecasters Have Been Disappointed Thus Far… Over the four years since the recession ended in June 2009, GDP growth has averaged just 2.1 percent, hewing to a narrow year-over-year range of 1.5 to 2.8 percent. It is noteworthy that the fraternity of professional economic forecasters has been consistently disappointed: Forecasts made at the beginning of 2010, 2011 and 2012 all overpredicted growth. At the onset of this year, the median forecast for 2013 called for 2.4 percent GDP growth, and that, too, has been challenged by first-quarter data that came in below expectations, raising fears of “déjà vu all over again.” …But April Could Signal Improvement However, the April jobs report and revisions of previous jobs data have put some spring back in economists’ steps. Initial claims for unemployment insurance are now back on a downward trend, retreating to prerecession levels, and Monday’s retail sales numbers were a nice upside surprise. This indicates that consumers may have digested delayed tax rebates and the increase in payroll taxes, and are reaping the benefits of lower gasoline and food prices. So the recovery presently appears to be strong enough to propel hopes that employment growth will continue improving over the near term. As to Inflation… Of course, the Fed’s most sacred duty is to see to the maintenance of price stability. Today, inflation is benign. With a jobless rate still well north of 7 percent, labor compensation rising at less than 2 percent per year, an outlook for abundant food crops and expanding energy sources, and near-record profit margins among operating businesses, there appears to be little risk that we will see significant cost-push pressures in 2013. In addition, slower growth around the globe is putting the damper on demand-pull inflation. Provided that the public remains confident in the Fed’s commitment to long-run price stability, anchored by the FOMC’s stated commitment to a target of 2 percent, my reading of the entrails of the Trimmed Mean PCE inflation rate currently indicates we will likely end this year somewhere between 1.5 percent and our 2 percent long-run goal. [ 2 ] As a hawk in the aviary of policymakers, I have for some years now said that the issue at present is not a meaningful threat to price stability in the immediate future. The issue is job creation. And the questions I keep raising at FOMC meetings regard our ability to affect it. Time to Reset the Fed’s Sails? Having spent the happiest of my formative years preparing for and attending the U.S. Naval Academy, then paying my way through Harvard sailing oceangoing yachts as a hired hand, I am given to seafaring analogies. Here is how I would summarize our most recent journey: The current chairman, Ben Bernanke, took the wheel at the Fed just as we sailed into a tempest that nearly capsized our economy. He and his able crew kept the ship of the economy from floundering and navigated it past the rocks of depression and deflation. The Bernanke-led FOMC steered clear of the shoals of economic collapse by jury-rigging the vessel of monetary policy in an unconventional and unprecedented manner. Now the ship of the Fed is in more benign waters and is sailing forward. The question before us is this: Are we moving forward at sufficient speed to allow the Fed to reset our rigging and our sails, eventually going back to a more conventional configuration? The answer lies in the economic outlook. I am wary of giving pinpoint forecasts of economic growth. As I mentioned earlier, professional forecasters, including the very capable staff of the Federal Reserve, have fallen short on this front, time and again, during the recovery and on numerous occasions before that. I am always mindful of the memorable comments of Ken Arrow. You may recall them: During World War II, Arrow served as a weather officer in the Army Air Corps. He and his team were charged with producing month-ahead weather forecasts. Being a disciplined analyst, Arrow reviewed the record of his predictions and, sure enough, confirmed statistically that the corps’ forecasts were no more accurate than random rolls of dice. He asked to be relieved of this futile duty. Arrow’s recollection of the response from on high was priceless: “The commanding general is well aware that the forecasts are no good. However, he needs them for planning purposes.” With that caveat in mind, my staff and I think there is a better-than-even chance that the present GDP growth consensus forecast of 2.4 percent by professional economists may be underestimating the underlying pace of growth. The housing market is in resurgence, contributing significant impetus to the economy. The Fed’s senior loan officer surveys indicate that commercial banks are becoming more accommodative lenders, albeit remaining cautious. [ 3 ] The snapback in housing and the harnessing of cheap and abundant money by the business sector have made for more manageable financial obligations. State and local governments, not just in Texas but elsewhere in the nation, are on a better financial footing and no longer appear to be a major drag on growth. As this audience knows better than anybody, new technologies are providing for cheaper and more abundant energy. Consumers continue consuming. Monetary policy is hyper-accommodative, driving interest rates to historic lows and equity markets to historic highs; if anything, it may be giving rise to excessive speculation and risk taking. (In addition to the pricing of CCC debt and the surge in low-covenant lending, margin debt is climbing rapidly.) I have advocated that we begin to reef in the sails, beginning with our MBS purchase program. In my view, the housing market is on a self-sustaining path and does not need the same impetus we have been giving it. In recent months, under its balance-sheet expansion program, the Fed has bought about 50 percent of gross issuance of agency MBS, partly to replace prepayments of our MBS holdings. When refinancing activity eventually shifts down, the Fed could soon be buying up to 100 percent of MBS issuance if the current purchase program continues. I believe buying such a high share of gross issuance in any security is not only excessive, but also potentially disruptive to the proper functioning of the MBS market. I have never been comfortable with our investing in anything but Treasuries, being wary of a central bank engaging in credit allocation and favoring specific sectors of the economy. It brings to mind the fears Thomas Jefferson and James Madison had about the slippery slope of Alexander Hamilton’s First Bank of the United States, recently recalled in Jon Meacham’s brilliant book on Jefferson: “They feared that the Hamiltonian program would enable financial speculators to benefit from commercial transactions made possible by government funds.”[ 4 ] Yet I admit that given the crucial role housing plays in our economy and the dire straits the housing market was in at the time, I did hold my nose and vote for the first tranche of MBS purchases. I believe that initiative was helpful in jump-starting the housing market. But now I believe the efficacy of continued purchases is questionable. And I consider holding $1.1 trillion and counting of MBS as a possible impairment to our ability to maneuver our balance sheet with the nimbleness and alacrity we might need. I think we can rightly declare victory on the housing front and reef in (or dial back) our purchases, with the aim of eliminating them entirely as the year wears on. Enter Fiscal Policy. Oy! Even if we at the Dallas Fed are right and the overall outlook for the economy is better than the current dashboard or the conventional prognostications of economists, there exists a formidable brake on growth. It was referred to point-blank in the last statement issued by the FOMC: “…fiscal policy is restraining economic growth.”[ 5 ] Fiscal policy is inhibiting the transmission of monetary policy into robust job creation. As it is early in the morning and a little levity is always helpful in making a point, here is my favorite spoof on the historical behavior of fiscal policy makers: This would be funny if it were not so sad. The propensity of members of Congress has been to spend in excess of revenues to give pleasure to their constituents and garner their affection. They just didn’t get the memo that Jefferson wrote to Madison:“We are ruined, Sir, if we do not overrule the principles that ‘the more we owe, the more prosperous we shall be,’ [and] ‘that a public debt furnishes the means of enterprise.’” [ 6 ] The good news is that, some 200-plus years later, the memo seems to have finally been received; there are numerous plans to rein in Congress’ spendthrift ways and there have been improvements that have brightened the short-term outlook for the level of federal debt. [ 7 ] But, as yet, there has been little more than passive action. Until the Congress and the president provide a clear road map as to how fiscal rectitude will be implemented, this lack of credible details for limiting the debt-to-GDP ratio and reengineering fiscal policy to stimulate rather than constrain growth is creating undue uncertainty about future tax rates, future government purchases, future retiree benefits and all manner of factors that impact employment and economic growth. Meanwhile, the divisive nature and petty posturing of those who must determine the fiscal path of the nation is further undermining confidence and limiting the effectiveness of monetary policy. Here is the rub: Even if the arguments of those who wish for greater fiscal stimulus prevail, expansion in government purchases will have reduced effectiveness if it is thought that those purchases will be financed with higher future marginal tax rates. If you are an operating business, you have to discount this risk before adding significantly to payrolls and before undertaking capital expansion. In a similar vein, you need to consider how the opposite approach of cutting government expenditures might impact your top line if the cuts are in areas that affect the markets you sell into. Add to that the enormous uncertainty about how health care reform will impact your cost structure. And add to that the fact that community bankers—providers of the lifeblood of loans to small businesses, which are the impetus for new job creation and economic rejuvenation—are hamstrung by burdensome regulations and fees imposed in response to the misbehavior of their too-big-to-fail brethren. If you consider the economy from this perspective, you can see where brakes of our own government’s making are being applied to a realization of our growth potential. Decisionmaking under conditions of uncertainty is always a challenge for businesses; decisionmaking in a thick fog of uncertainty is well-nigh impossible. It negates the power of hyper-accommodative monetary policy to propel our economic vessel forward. The restraining influence of rudderless fiscal policy is readily seen in the piling up of excess reserves on the balance sheets of banks and in the coffers of operating businesses. I argue that the Fed has no hope of moving the economy to full employment unless our fiscal authorities get their act together. Those economic agents with the wherewithal to expand payrolls and put the American people back to work must have confidence that our fiscal authorities and regulation makers—the legislative and the executive—will reorganize the tax code, spending habits and the regulatory regime so that the cheap and abundant money we at the Fed have made available to invest in job-creating capital expansion in the United States is put to use. Until then, I argue that the Fed is, at best, pushing on a string and, at worst, building up kindling for a massive shipboard fire of eventual inflation. All the World’s a Stage (and All the Policymakers Merely Players) It is thus as-yet unclear whether the benefits of the strategy the Fed has taken outweigh its costs. Only time will tell. The Federal Open Market Committee will have to wait for the verdict of history. Scholars know that Shakespearian plays all have five acts. I would suggest that we are but in the third act of a play—we had the tempest in Act 1; the jury-rigging of monetary policy and radical maneuvers by the Fed to save the ship in Act 2; and in the present act, we are back on course but somewhat becalmed, sailing at less-than-desired cruising speed even as we have cranked up an auxiliary motor of large-scale asset purchases. Act 4 will involve the travails and challenges of adjusting our policy course, fine-tuning the motor and rearranging the rigging. And not until the final act will we know whether we have achieved the felicitous outcome that is the hallmark of most romantic plays, or whether the melancholy that defines a tragedy awaits us. The romantic outcome ends, as most all Shakespearian comedies do, in a marriage—in this case, a marriage of sensible fiscal and monetary policy that lifts employment and carries the American economy to new heights. The tragic outcome is one in which the fiscal authorities—the Congress and the president—are unable to provide incentives for risk takers to make use of the cheap and abundant capital the Fed has made available, and the play ends in a debasement of the central bank and the ruination of our economy and lifestyle. The former outcome is that envisioned by the theoreticians that lead the Fed: According to this plot, by driving rates to historical lows along the entire length of the yield curve, investors will rebalance their portfolios and reach out to riskier assets, providing the financial wherewithal for businesses to increase capital expenditures and reengage workers, expand payrolls and regenerate consumption. Rising prices of bonds, stocks and other financial instruments will bolster consumer confidence. The CliffsNotes account of this play has the widely heralded “wealth effect” paving the way for economic expansion, thus saving the day. The latter outcome posits that the wealth effect is limited, for two possible reasons. One is that our continued purchases of Treasuries are having decreasing effects on private borrowing costs, given how low long-term Treasury rates already are. Another is that the uncertainty resulting from fiscal tomfoolery is a serious obstacle to restoring full employment. Until job creators are properly incentivized by fiscal and regulatory policy to harness the cheap and abundant money we at the Fed have engineered, these funds will predominantly benefit those with the means to speculate, tilling the fields of finance for returns that are enabled by historically low rates but do not readily result in job expansion. Cheap capital inures to the benefit of the Warren Buffetts, who can discount lower hurdle rates to achieve their investors’ expectations, accumulating holdings without necessarily expanding employment or the wealth of the overall economy. I hold no vendetta against the Buffetts of the world, having once been a junior member of that class—I made a nice living during the 1980s and ’90s buying operating assets for nickels and dimes and turning them into dollars by rationalizing and downsizing them. And like legions of others, I have for countless years read the Oracle of Omaha’s annual statement with admiration for his prowess as an investor and profit-seeker. But my role as a policymaker is different from my previous role as an investor: I have sworn fealty to a dual mandate of conducting monetary policy so as to maintain price stability AND create the monetary conditions for full employment and prosperity for all, not just for the rich and the quick. This, I fear, we will fail to do unless Congress and the president develop and deliver on a strategy that complements ours at the Fed. This may be a sour ending to a somber song, but, after all, economics is not called “the dismal science” for nothing. Have a nice day! Now, in the best tradition of central bankers, I would be happy to avoid answering your questions. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. For more information, see the New York Fed’s website at www.newyorkfed.org/markets/soma/sysopen_accholdings.html For the latest reading of the Dallas Fed’s alternative measure of core inflation, see www.dallasfed.org/research/pce/index.cfm . For more information regarding the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, see www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/SnLoanSurvey/201305/default.htm . See Thomas Jefferson: The Art of Power , by Jon Meacham, New York: Random House, 2012, p. 248. The latest statement by the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors on the stance of monetary policy can be found at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20130501a.htm . See note 4, p. 241. See “Our Debt Problems Are Still Far from Solved,” Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, May 15, 2013. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) The Status of the U.S. Economy and a Perspective on 'The Modern Monetarism' (With Reference to Sheila Copps, Thomas Jefferson, Paul Volcker and William Shakespeare) Richard Fisher's remarks before the C.D. Howe Institute Directors' Dinner, June 4, 2013. January 16, 2013 Toronto Speech in PDF Thank you, Hugh (MacKinnon). I am honored to speak to this annual directors’ dinner of the C.D. Howe Institute and on the second day of Stephen Poloz becoming the governor of the Bank of Canada. Evan Siddall, his special adviser, is here tonight to keep an eye on me! Thank You, Canada Before getting to my formal remarks, I want to say something about Canada that has nothing to do with monetary policy. On Sept. 11, 2001, I was on a flight, returning from the celebration of the opening of the Jewish Museum in Berlin two days earlier. On the morning of that fateful day, my flight was en route to New York City when we were suddenly redirected to Toronto. We had been prevented from landing in New York, the pilot announced, because of “severe headwinds.” We were told nothing more. After landing and deplaning at Pearson and going through an extensive screening process, we were ushered into a briefing room and only then learned what little was known at the time of the horrors that had occurred. Your government and our consular officials said that we were to remain in Toronto until order in America was restored, adding they were confident we would be well cared for as guests of a very compassionate Canada. Sure enough, when we exited the airport, we found a line of cars driven by private citizens who had spontaneously come to the airport to take any and all of their American brethren into their homes and care for us while we waited anxiously to learn more of what had happened and why. From the home of my Canadian host, I somehow managed to get through by cell phone routed through Dallas to my wife, Nancy. She was hiding with our two youngest children in the basement of our house in Washington, D.C. With the passage of time, it is easy to forget how chaotic and frightful that day was. It was unclear if all of Washington was under attack; rumors abounded that the Capitol and the White House were targeted. Our son had seen the images from Flight 77’s crash into the Pentagon and had run home from school with his frightened little sister in tow. I wanted to make sure my wife and children were safe. She reported they were and then asked if I was. I remember saying, “I am safe in the hands of our Canadian brothers and sisters.” Every chance I get, I thank Canadians for the caring and unconditional friendship you and your countrymen showed the United States on that infamous day. For the rest of my life, Canada will hold a special place in my heart. Indeed, I love this country so much that I have even found it possible to forgive Sheila Copps for forcing me to listen to endless re-loops of songs by Gordon Lightfoot when I was deputy U.S. trade rep and negotiated with her during her reign as minister of Canadian heritage![ 1 ] The Predicament of the U.S. Economy: Growth … Now, on to the status of the U.S. economy and monetary policy—of special interest to you because we account for three-quarters of Canada’s goods exports and a substantial amount of Canadian direct and portfolio investment. Here is a handy graphic we use at the Dallas Fed as a simple indicator of the current predicament of the U.S. economy: As shown, the most recent data for real gross domestic product (GDP) and inflation—as measured by the Trimmed Mean Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) Index, the Dallas Fed’s preferred indicator—have both increased less than 2 percent year over year after first-quarter GDP growth was revised to 2.4 percent and the 12-month run rate for Trimmed Mean PCE inflation came in at 1.3 percent at the end of April. The dashboard indicates that the U.S. economy is cruising along at what appears to be near-stall speed—note the “Engine stall” red warning light. The unemployment rate gauge is not red because it declined to 7.5 percent in April. As indicated by the odometer box, we have traveled some distance in job creation, even though we have not seen the job creation we might have hoped for in a typical recovery: 70.4 percent of jobs lost in the recent recession have been recovered, up from about 50 percent only a year ago. The warning light for the yield curve should be pink, if not yet red, for, if anything, it is robust to the point of possibly becoming problematic in giving rise to speculative impulses. Despite the most recent widening, junk-bond spreads are below 5 percent, as shown; nominal yields for even the lowest-grade bonds (CCC-rated credit that is one notch above default) have fallen to below 7 percent from double digits only a year ago. This is of interest because, according to Dealogic, we have had $187 billion of junk bonds issued in the U.S. so far this year, a record.[ 2 ] Further, covenant-light lending is on a tear. And unless you’ve been living on another planet, you know we have experienced a roaring bull market for equities. Thus the “oil lamp,” shown in the lower left corner of the dashboard, depicts that the Fed has supplied plenty of lubrication for the engine of job creation. Over the four years since the recession ended in June 2009, GDP growth has averaged just 2.1 percent, hewing to a narrow year-over-year range of 1.5 to 2.8 percent. It is noteworthy that the fraternity of U.S. professional economic forecasters has been consistently disappointed: Forecasts made at the beginning of 2010, 2011 and 2012 all overpredicted growth. At the onset of this year, the median projection of professional forecasters called for 2.4 percent GDP growth for all of 2013, and that, too, has been challenged by first-quarter data that came in below expectations, raising fears of “déjà vu all over again.” However, the April jobs report, revisions of previous jobs data, and reports concerning consumer behavior in May have put some spring back in economists’ steps despite the malaise in manufacturing that has persisted for some time (long before yesterday’s Institute for Supply Management manufacturing numbers were released). Initial claims for unemployment insurance are now back on a downward trend, retreating toward prerecession levels, and recent retail sales numbers and indicators of consumer activity have surprised to the upside. This would appear to indicate that consumers may have digested delayed tax rebates and the increase in payroll taxes, and are relishing the benefits of lower gasoline, food and other prices. So the recovery presently appears to be strong enough to propel hopes that consumption will help employment growth gradually improve over the long term. I know audiences like this always want to be given some forecast of economic growth, especially by someone who they assume has some inside knowledge. I’ll stick my neck out in a moment, after a brief discourse on where we are on the inflation front. But I ask that you treat any forecast from any source with what I like to call “Arrow’s Caveat.” During World War II, future Nobel laureate Ken Arrow served as a weather officer in the Army Air Corps. He and his team were charged with producing month-ahead weather forecasts. Being a disciplined analyst, Arrow reviewed the record of his predictions and, sure enough, confirmed statistically that the corps’ forecasts were no more accurate than random rolls of dice. He asked to be relieved of this futile duty. Arrow’s recollection of the response from on high was priceless: “The commanding general is well aware that the forecasts are no good. However, he needs them for planning purposes.” … and the Outlook for Price Stability The Fed’s most sacred duty is to see to the maintenance of price stability. Today, inflation is benign. With a jobless rate still well north of 7 percent, a high rate of underemployment, labor compensation rising at less than 2 percent per year, an outlook for abundant food crops and expanding energy resources, and near-record profit margins among operating businesses, there is little likelihood of cost–push pressures in 2013. Slower growth around the globe is putting the damper on demand–pull inflation. Provided the public remains confident in the Fed’s commitment to price stability, anchored by the stated 2 percent long-term target of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the chances of inflation rearing its ugly head in 2013 are presently extremely low. I am sticking my neck out for the next six months! Indeed, the latest Trimmed Mean PCE inflation calculation done by the Dallas Fed for April posted a negative reading—minus 0.1 percent—for the first time since the raw data became available in 1977, with 44 percent of the basket of 178 components measured declining in price.[ 3 ] This is all subject to revision, but the drift is that the underlying inflation rate as we see it at the Dallas Fed, as mentioned, is running at a pace of 1.3 percent. The Efficacy of Current Monetary Policy As a hawk in the aviary of policymakers, I have for some years now said that the issue of the moment is not a meaningful threat to price stability. The issue is job creation. And the questions I keep raising at FOMC meetings regard our limited ability to affect it with our über-accommodative monetary policy. With the Arrow Caveat in mind, my staff and I think there is a better-than-even chance that the present GDP growth consensus forecast of 2.4 percent by professional economists may be underestimating the underlying pace of growth. The housing market is in resurgence, contributing significant impetus to the economy. The Fed’s senior loan officer survey indicates that commercial banks are becoming more accommodative lenders, albeit remaining cautious. The snapback in housing and the harnessing of cheap and abundant money by the business sector have made for more manageable financial obligations. State and local governments, not just in my home power-state of Texas but elsewhere in the nation, are on a better financial footing and no longer appear to be a major drag on growth. New technologies are providing for cheaper and more abundant energy. Consumers continue consuming, an important component that represents 71 percent of the U.S. economy (compared with Canadian consumption accounting for 54 percent of national output). Monetary policy has helped drive interest rates to historic lows and equity markets to historic highs; if anything, as noted, it may be giving rise to excessive speculation and risk taking. In addition to the pricing of CCC debt and the surge in low-covenant lending, margin debt is climbing rapidly. Even if we at the Dallas Fed are right and the overall outlook for the economy is better than the current dashboard or the conventional prognostications of economists, there exists a formidable brake on growth. It was referred to point-blank in the last statement issued by the FOMC: “…fiscal policy is restraining economic growth.”[ 4 ] Fiscal policy is inhibiting the transmission of monetary policy into robust job creation. As this is an after-dinner speech and a little levity is always helpful in making a point at this time of night, here is my favorite spoof on the historical behavior of fiscal policy makers in Washington, D.C.: This would be funny if it were not so sad. The propensity of members of Congress has been to spend in excess of revenues to give pleasure to their constituents and garner their affection. They just didn’t get the memo that Jefferson wrote to Madison over two centuries ago: “We are ruined, Sir, if we do not overrule the principles that ‘the more we owe, the more prosperous we shall be,’ [and] ‘that a public debt furnishes the means of enterprise.’”[ 5 ] The good news is that, some 200-plus years later, the memo seems to have finally been received; there are numerous plans to rein in Congress’ spendthrift ways, and there have been improvements that have brightened the short-term outlook for the level of federal debt.[ 6 ] But, as yet, there has been little more than passive action. Until the Congress and the president provide a clear road map to restoring fiscal rectitude, economic growth will continue to be impeded by undue uncertainty about future tax rates, future government purchases, future retiree benefits and all manner of factors that prevent the U.S. from achieving its long-run potential. Meanwhile, the divisive nature and petty posturing of those who must determine the fiscal path of the nation are further undermining confidence, hindering the upward momentum needed for a full recovery and limiting the effectiveness of monetary policy. Here is the rub: Even if the arguments of those who wish for greater fiscal stimulus prevail, expansion in government purchases will have reduced effectiveness if it is thought that those purchases will be financed with higher future marginal tax rates, or the broadest tax of all, higher inflation. If you are an operating business, you have to discount this risk before adding significantly to payrolls and before undertaking capital expansion. In a similar vein, you need to consider how the opposite approach of cutting government expenditures might impact your top line if the cuts are in areas that affect the markets you sell into. Add to that the enormous uncertainty about how health care reform will impact your cost structure. And add to that the fact that community bankers—providers of the lifeblood of loans to small businesses, which are the impetus for new job creation and economic rejuvenation—are hamstrung by burdensome regulations and fees imposed in response to the misbehavior of their too-big-to-fail brethren. If you consider the economy from this perspective, you can see where brakes of the government’s own making are being applied, impeding the realization of our growth potential. Decision-making under conditions of uncertainty is always a challenge for businesses; decision-making in a thick fog of uncertainty is well-nigh impossible. It negates the power of hyperaccommodative monetary policy to propel our economic vessel forward. The restraining influence of rudderless fiscal policy is readily seen in the piling up of excess reserves on the balance sheets of banks and in the coffers of operating businesses. I argue that the Fed has no hope of moving the economy to full employment, despite having pulled out all the stops on the monetary front, unless our fiscal authorities get their act together. Those economic agents with the wherewithal to expand payrolls and put the American people back to work must have confidence that our fiscal authorities and regulation makers—the legislative and the executive—will reorganize the tax code, spending habits and the regulatory regime so that the cheap and abundant money we at the Fed have made available to invest in job-creating capital expansion in the United States is put to use. Until then, I argue that the Fed is, at best, pushing on a string and, at worst, building up kindling for speculation and, eventually, a massive shipboard fire of inflation. I note that in his speech of last Wednesday to the Economic Club of New York, former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker highlighted that managing the supply of money and liquidity “to accommodate misguided fiscal policies, to deal with structural imbalances, [or] to square continuously the hypothetical circles of stability, growth and full employment” was a risky proposition for the Federal Reserve and warned that in attempting to do so, the Fed “will inevitably fall short.” He even referenced “pushing on a string.” And he added that, “The risks of encouraging speculative distortions and the inflationary potential—[note the word “potential,” not “present instance”]—of the current approach plainly deserve attention.” I am in complete agreement with Mr. Volcker. I urge you to read his speech if you wish to understand my personal concerns about the present course of monetary policy.[ 7 ] A Shakespearean Scenario Only time will reveal the efficacy of current policy and whether the risks that I and more experienced observers like Paul Volcker fret over are as substantial as we surmise, or whether we have made much ado about nothing. If the Fed’s monetary policy were the stuff of Shakespearean drama with a prototypical five acts, one might say we are in the last scene of the third act of a play titled “The Grand Experiment in Modern Monetarism.” We will not know until the next two acts whether the play will end felicitously or otherwise. Here is the CliffsNotes summary of the play thus far: The play opened with the great financial tempest of 2008–09, during which it appeared the ship of the mighty American economy would founder. A humble, once unassuming but suddenly daring captain named Ben Bernanke took firm control of the nation’s monetary helm in Act II, contriving innovative ways to keep the economy afloat by jury-rigging monetary policy and adopting radical maneuvers. These efforts succeeded in steering the ship of the economy away from the shoals of depression and deflation and into more tranquil waters.[ 8 ] Act III began with a recovering economy heading on a more promising course. But the headway being made was substandard, hindered by the flotsam and jetsam of fiscal incompetence and rising fears of a new storm brewing in Europe. In an effort to propel the economy forward at a better clip, the FOMC commanded that unprecedented amounts of monetary fuel be provisioned for the financial system through large-scale asset purchases, colloquially known as QE2 and 3. These purchases pumped almost $1 trillion into the stores of reserves of banks. As yet, however, the banks have for the most part not shoveled that fuel into their boilers, lending only a small fraction of it to job-creating businesses and hoarding the remainder. Other members of the financial fleet, however, have been heartened by the turn of events, especially those who finance themselves through the issuance of stocks and bonds rather than through bank loans. Yet they, too, have been reluctant to transform their renewed means into robust job creation. Thus, the economy remains weaker than desired, and the ship of the economy is making less-than-desired headway. The plot now thickens. Act IV, just beginning, will involve the drama of introspection, with the FOMC evaluating the utility of its navigational tactics, and, perhaps, fine-tuning them, if not altering the course. Not until the final act will we know whether we have achieved the felicitous outcome of arriving at the desired port of an economy that grows sufficiently to bring about full employment without giving rise to inflation. With Shakespeare, the most pleasant plays typically end in marriage. The happy outcome to our economic predicament would entail a coupling of sensible fiscal policy with prudent monetary policy, carrying the American economy to new horizons, allowing the Fed to emerge a hero. One can envision less-pleasant outcomes, however, some of them tragic. If the fiscal authorities—Congress and the president—are unable to provide tax, spending and regulatory incentives for job creators to use the cheap and abundant capital the FOMC has made available, the economy might remain endlessly becalmed. Should the FOMC try to compensate for fiscal authorities’ inability to act by provisioning still more monetary fuel, it may risk an explosion of speculative excess, or worse: an eventual inflationary conflagration, the debasement of money and the ruination of our economy and lifestyle. Should this prove the outcome, the Fed will be transmogrified from hero to villain. To thicken the plot further, there is the uncertainty about whether command of the Fed will change hands during Act IV or V—whether the skipper who set us on the present course will stay (which I have personally advocated in other speeches) or be replaced by someone who wishes to remain on the course he set or change it. And whether in commissioning a new captain of the Fed’s fleet, if that is what the playwright decides, the Congress will introduce new dramatic themes that might steer the plot in new directions. Even now, the chorus is chanting about a Sound Dollar Act and other initiatives from behind the curtain. All of which means that despite the mighty efforts of Captain Bernanke and his crew, present company included, we do not know how this play will end. Will “The Grand Experiment” prove an inspiring history, a tragedy or simply a comedy of errors? We will not know for some time. We will not know until the curtain drops on Act V. I am tempted to end with a slightly adapted, trite reminder that “All the world’s economy is a stage and we policymakers are merely players upon it,” but I shan’t. Instead I’ll end by thanking you for listening to me and, again, expressing my gratitude for the solidarity you and your fellow Canadians have shown the United States through thick and thin. And now, Hugh, time and patience permitting, I would be happy to avoid answering any questions you and your colleagues might have. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. As deputy U.S. trade representative, I was dispatched to Ottawa by President Clinton to negotiate away the legislation Minister Copps was proposing that would make it a criminal offense for U.S. companies to advertise in Canadian magazines, a clear violation of the North American Free Trade Agreement. See “Bond Investors Break Pattern, Dump ‘Junk,’” by Katy Burne, Wall Street Journal , May 31, 2013. For the latest reading of the Dallas Fed’s alternative measure of core inflation, see www.dallasfed.org/research/pce/index.cfm . The latest statement by the Federal Open Market Committee and the Board of Governors on the stance of monetary policy can be found at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20130501a.htm . See Thomas Jefferson: The Art of Power , by Jon Meacham, New York: Random House, 2012, p. 251. See “Our Debt Problems Are Still Far from Solved,” Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, May 15, 2013. If you wish to view a measure of this good man, read “The Ten Suggestions,” speech by Ben S. Bernanke at the Baccalaureate Ceremony at Princeton University, Princeton, N.J., June 2, 2013, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20130602a.htm . Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.
