Governor Jerome H. Powell At "Making Markets Fair and Effective for All," Sponsored by The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Share Watch live I want to thank the Brookings Institution for inviting me to comment today on Martin Wheatley's presentation on the Fair and Effective Markets Review (Review). 1 The Review is an ambitious and important initiative. Although London is perhaps the leading center for many fixed-income, currency, and commodities (FICC) markets, these markets are global, and the United States and the largest U.S. firms play key roles in them. So the Review addresses issues that affect our markets as well. The Review looks to identify further steps that should be taken to restore public confidence in FICC markets in the wake of the depressingly numerous instances of serious misconduct in these markets in recent years. That misconduct has been, and will continue to be, addressed through substantial fines and criminal prosecution of the firms and individuals involved. The Federal Reserve continues to take part in these enforcement actions in cooperation with other U.S. agencies. The design of the Review is not only to advance the enforcement process, but also to look carefully at markets and firms and ask whether there are structural vulnerabilities or incentives for bad conduct that have not been well addressed by reforms to date. I will offer comments on a few specific areas and discuss some of our parallel efforts here in the United States. First, as the Review notes, there is a perception that FICC markets and their participants are highly sophisticated and do not need protection. While that may be generally true, the perspective is too narrow, because the importance of these markets extends far beyond the largest participants in them. The market mechanism allocates credit and determines the borrowing costs of households, companies and governments. Proper market functioning is really a public good that relies on confidence and trust among market participants and the public. Bad conduct, weak internal firm governance, misaligned incentives, and flawed market structure can all place this trust at risk. One of the ways we have to influence incentives is through compensation practices at supervised institutions. Many have argued that pre-crisis compensation practices at the largest financial firms allowed or created misaligned incentives. In response, many firms have changed their compensation practices since the crisis to better align incentives between individuals and firms, particularly through enhanced deferral of incentive compensation, with delayed vesting and the possibility of more robust forfeiture in a broader set of circumstances. We have strongly encouraged these reforms in our supervision of these institutions. In my view, the reforms are both essential and generally on target. The U.S. financial regulators, including the Federal Reserve, are also preparing for public comment a proposed new rule on incentive compensation that will codify and strengthen these initiatives. As the Review notes, greater transparency can also help curb market abuses and strengthen competition. In the United States, we have had over a decade of experience with the Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) in over-the-counter corporate bond, MBS and ABS markets. The Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board provides similar data for municipal bonds. The Dodd-Frank Act also imposed rules requiring greater transparency in over-the-counter derivatives markets through the use of central clearing, trade repositories, and swap execution facilities. Given the issues around OTC derivatives during the recent crisis, these clearly are important initiatives. But despite significant progress, there are still a number of impediments to sharing trade report data across regulatory agencies and jurisdictions, leaving us with only a piecemeal picture of the overall market rather than the full transparency that we desire. The issues around foreign exchange (FX) benchmarks serve to illustrate one of the important challenges discussed in the Review-‑the difficulty of managing the potential conflicts of interest associated with the traditional market-maker model. In FX markets, a wide range of end users seek to guarantee trade execution at the WM Reuters fixing at 4:00 p.m. U.K. time each day. This practice results in dealers having advance information about flows, and at the same time places them at some risk, as they are agreeing to execute these orders at an unknown future price. This advance information can create a perception that dealers are trading ahead of their clients, and it certainly created incentives to attempt to influence the fixing price. The recent Financial Stability Board (FSB) report on foreign exchange benchmarks 2 made a number of recommendations designed to address these issues in this specific market, including use of trading platforms to maximize the netting of fixing orders, encouraging dealers to charge a transparent bid-asked spread or other fee to compensate them for the risk they take, and strengthening dealers' internal systems and controls to better manage potential conflicts of interest. Of course, similar challenges exist with market-making in other FICC markets. Many firms have taken up these challenges with their own reforms, and their efforts serve to emphasize how complicated these issues can be. Dealers must communicate with other firms, within their own firms and with their clients, and must execute their clients' trades. The challenge is to identify and preserve the legitimate benefits of such communication and trading while safeguarding against improper uses of information. It may be that these challenges can be addressed through coordinated private efforts; for example, through such bodies as the Foreign Exchange Committee and the Treasury Market Practices Group, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. These groups are actively working on industry best practices in their markets and have often played a constructive role on market practices that enhance market functioning. It may also be that further supervisory or regulatory action is needed. Turning to our work on interest rate benchmark reform, it is worth recalling that, before the scandal broke, the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) was not regulated. U.K. authorities have now addressed this shortcoming by making both the submission and administration of LIBOR regulated activities. The process by which firms make their LIBOR submissions is now subject to careful monitoring. The new LIBOR administrator, ICE Benchmark Administration, now regulated by the Financial Conduct Authority, is evaluating changes to LIBOR so that it can be based as much as possible on actual arm's-length transactions from a broader base of funding transactions. With surveillance and penalties in place, and a new administrator, one might be excused for thinking that there is nothing more to be done. In fact, some people do think that. That is emphatically not the view of the FSB Official Sector Steering Group that I now co-chair with Martin, which concluded that it is essential to develop one or more risk free (or near risk free) alternatives to LIBOR for use in financial contracts such as interest rate derivatives. The reasons are related to the structure of both LIBOR and the market that underlies it. Unsecured interbank borrowing has been in a secular decline for some time, and there is a scarcity, or outright absence in longer tenors, of actual transactions that banks can use to estimate their daily submission to LIBOR or that can be used by others to verify those submissions. LIBOR is huge--there are roughly $300 trillion in gross notional contracts that reference it--so the incentives to manipulate it still remain in place. And the structural problems go much further than the incentives for manipulation. Markets need to be fair, effective, and also safe . If the publication of LIBOR were to become untenable because the number of transactions that underlie it declined further, then untangling the outstanding LIBOR contracts would entail a legal mess that could endanger our financial stability. For these reasons, the Federal Reserve has convened a group of the largest global dealers to form the Alternative Reference Rates Committee. We have asked them to work with us in promoting alternatives to U.S. dollar LIBOR that better reflect the current structure of funding markets. As the Review's consultation document notes, issues of this kind are really global in nature; U.S. dollar LIBOR contracts are traded throughout the world, not simply in the United States. For this reason we are working in close consultation with our foreign regulatory counterparts in this endeavor. One of the reasons that I emphasize structural issues such as the market-maker model or the secular decline in unsecured interbank borrowing is that FICC markets are undergoing rapid changes that seem likely to have far-ranging consequences. Issues that a few years ago concerned equity markets now arise in FICC markets as well. As the consultation document notes, broker-dealers are curtailing some of their market-making activities and their appetite for providing liquidity in response to regulatory changes and their own assessment of the risks and returns of these activities. At the same time, other players such as mutual funds, exchange traded funds, algorithmic and high-frequency traders, and electronic exchanges are taking more prominent roles. These changes will affect market liquidity and functioning in ways that are difficult to foresee. It is possible that some of these factors played a role in the sharp swing in Treasury yields last October 15, and we are working with other regulators to understand exactly what happened that day and to determine whether there are implications for regulatory or supervisory policy. The Review raises the right questions in considering the troubling patterns of market abuse, and also in considering the structural changes that we are now seeing. It is important that market participants, end users, and regulators collectively take a step back and consider, as the Review invites us to do, whether the changing structure of FICC markets will result in markets that are fair, effective, and safe. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/2014/09/r_140930/ Return to text Last Update: January 20, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Outreach Meeting, Dallas, Texas Share Watch live On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, I am pleased to be here at the second in a series of outreach meetings designed to hear your comments and suggestions about reducing regulatory burden on insured depository institutions. Thank you all for taking the time to participate in this important process, and I'd also like to extend my thanks to the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas for hosting today's meeting. The Federal Reserve takes seriously its obligations under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). The EGRPRA review provides our agencies with the opportunity to consider whether our regulations are necessary and current in keeping up with the financial services and regulatory environments. Well-conceived regulations help to ensure the safety and soundness of our banking system as well as the fair treatment of consumers. But unnecessary, outdated, or unduly burdensome regulations can exhaust the resources of insured depository institutions and reduce the important services that those institutions provide to households and businesses. Creating balanced regulations that are effective and thoughtfully calibrated to avoid undue burden requires input from stakeholders. In-person meetings, like the one we are holding today, help us gather information that is critical to our understanding of how regulations affect not only the banking industry but also the consumers and communities they serve. They also allow stakeholders to learn from one another and provide us with different perspectives on the complex issues that our regulations address. Outside of these meetings, we also look forward to receiving written comments in which you can elaborate on how to improve our regulations in more detail than we can cover in the time we have today. We understand that the sizes of depository institutions vary, that they operate through different business models, and that they manage different risks. This is why one focus of the EGRPRA review is considering the potential burden imposed by our regulations on community banks and other small insured depository institutions, so that we may carefully consider whether our regulations are appropriately adjusted for smaller institutions. We think it's important to tailor rules whenever possible to clearly distinguish requirements for different portfolios of depository institutions and reduce unnecessary burden on community banks. Of course, tailoring regulations may be more challenging in some areas, such as rules that provide transparency and fairness in consumer transactions because those are standards that apply throughout the financial system. We also recognize that, apart from changes in the regulatory and supervisory landscape, the banking industry itself has undergone major changes. For example, improvements in technology and changes in the financial industry's composition between depository institutions and nondepository companies have altered the types of financial products and services that are offered by depository institutions, as well as how those services and products are accessed. We welcome your views on how these types of industry changes have impacted the effectiveness of our regulations. Today I look forward to hearing your views on our agencies' regulations, especially in the categories of banking operations, capital, and the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). For the Federal Reserve, these topics include regulations on the availability of funds; the collection of checks and other items by the Federal Reserve Banks and fund transfers through Fedwire; prompt corrective action procedures; and the disclosure and reporting of CRA-related agreements. I'd like to conclude by saying that we will consider your comments carefully as the agencies coordinate to discuss and consider the appropriate action that is likely to best serve our financial system and the interests of depository institutions and consumers. And when possible, the agencies will act to implement regulatory burden relief before the end of the EGRPRA review period. For example, in December of last year, Congress passed legislation--which was supported by the Federal Reserve Board--that would increase the consolidated asset limit for small bank holding companies from $500 million to $1 billion under the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and that extends the same treatment to savings and loan holding companies of less than $1 billion. Last Thursday, the Federal Reserve issued for public comment both proposed and interim final rules for public comment that would implement that legislation. 1 The rules would reduce regulatory burden on small entities by excluding many bank holding companies and savings and loan holding companies with total consolidated assets of less than $1 billion from the consolidated capital requirements. Of course, regulatory capital requirements will continue to apply to the depository institution level. The rules also would reduce the burden of regulatory reporting for these companies. The Federal Reserve currently estimates that the proposed revisions to the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement would impact over 4,200 organizations. The final results of our EGRPRA review will be contained in the agencies' report to Congress that summarizes the issues raised and the agencies' conclusions about the need for regulatory or legislative changes. Thank you for coming today. 1. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), " Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on proposed rules to expand the applicability of Board's Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement, " press release, January 29. Return to text Last Update: February 04, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Catholic University of America, Columbus School of Law, Washington, D.C. Share Watch live It is a pleasure and a particularly personal honor for me to speak to you today as a guest of this institution. 1 I am proud to say that my grandfather, James J. Hayden, earned his doctorate of law from Catholic University and later served as dean of the law school. He was an early scholar of the regulation prompted by a technological innovation that would change the world--aviation. He was, in that sense, someone who looked to the future and wanted to be a part of it. In his years leading the law school, I hope my grandfather could also glimpse the great institution that it would become. It has been a little more than six years since the fall of 2008, when the peak of a severe financial crisis presented the very real threat of a second Great Depression. The damage was extensive, and for some time, the recovery was frustratingly slow. But the economy has improved considerably over the past two years, and I am optimistic that that this improvement will continue. The financial system is also stronger and more resilient after improvements in regulation and oversight by the Federal Reserve and other agencies and better management by banks and other financial firms. The Fed acted boldly during and after the financial crisis in the face of great uncertainty. The full effects of these policies will become clearer with the passage of time. Indeed, the Federal Reserve's role in the Great Depression of the 1930s is still actively debated. That said, as I will show, the evidence as of today is very strong that the Fed's actions generally succeeded and are a major reason why the U.S. economy is now outperforming those of other advanced nations. Other central banks are now embracing some of the same bold steps undertaken much earlier by the Fed. Against that background, I am concerned about several troubling proposals that would subject monetary policy to undue political pressure and place new limits on the Fed's ability to respond to future crises. My remarks will address three such proposals. The first goes by the somewhat misleading name of "Audit the Fed," and would subject the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy to unlimited congressional policy audits (not to be confused with financial audits, which are already conducted regularly.) 2 The second is a proposal to require the Fed to adopt and follow a specific equation in setting monetary policy and to face immediate congressional hearings and investigation by the Government Accountability Office (GAO) whenever it deviates from the policy dictated by that equation. 3 And, third, there are discussions about imposing new limitations on the Fed's long-held powers to provide liquidity during a financial crisis. I think these proposals are misguided for three reasons. First, they are motivated by the belief that the Fed's response during the crisis was both ineffective and outside the bounds of its traditional role and responsibilities. In fact, the Fed's actions were effective, necessary, appropriate, and very much in keeping with the traditional role of the Fed and other central banks. Second, these proposals are based on the assertion that the Federal Reserve operates in secrecy and was not accountable for its actions during the crisis, a perspective that is in violent conflict with the facts. The Fed has been transparent, accountable, and subject to extensive oversight, especially during and since the crisis. We have also taken appropriate steps since the crisis to further enhance that transparency. Third, and most importantly, I believe these proposals fail to anticipate the significant costs and risks of subjecting monetary policy to political pressure and constraining the Fed's ability to carry out its traditional role of providing liquidity in a crisis. Appropriate and Effective There is no dispute that the Fed's actions after the onset of the financial crisis were unprecedented in scale and scope. To help stabilize the financial system and keep credit flowing to households and businesses, the Federal Reserve lent to banks through the discount window and to financial institutions and markets through numerous new broad-based lending facilities it created using emergency lending authority granted by the Congress during the Great Depression. 4 In a limited number of cases, the Fed also extended liquidity support to individual institutions whose imminent failure threatened to bring down the global financial system. At the same time, the Federal Reserve used monetary policy to help stabilize the economy. After cutting our target for the overnight interest rate on loans between banks--our usual monetary policy tool--as low as it could go, the Fed took further action using unconventional policy tools. These policies involved communication, providing "forward guidance" that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) expected to keep rates low for longer than had been expected, and also purchasing large amounts of longer-term Treasury debt and other securities to put downward pressure on long-term interest rates. While these actions were extraordinary and in some respects unprecedented, they were taken because the threats posed by the crisis were also without precedent, even in the events that led to the Great Depression. 5 For the first time, cutting the Fed's policy rate to near zero proved insufficient to halt a plummeting economy; so the Fed took further action. For the first time since the Great Depression, our nation faced a financial panic so severe that the Fed's normal overnight lending to banks was not enough; so the Fed did more, using congressionally granted powers it had held but not used since the 1930s that were intended to deal with just such rare emergencies. As the Congress considers proposals that will affect the conduct of monetary policy and the Fed's ability to respond in a crisis, I believe it is also important to recognize how effective the Fed's response has been. With respect to monetary policy, the unconventional policies were designed to stimulate the economy in the same way as traditional monetary policy, by lowering interest rates. These actions helped deliver highly accommodative policy, which was essential given the depth of the recession. Without these steps, the slump in the labor market and the broader economy surely would have been even deeper and more prolonged, and the low wage and price inflation we are still experiencing might have turned into outright deflation. Critics warned that these policies would unleash uncontrollable inflation, fail to stimulate demand, and court other known and unknown risks. After I joined the Federal Reserve Board in May 2012, I too expressed doubts about the efficacy and risks of further asset purchases. But let's let the data speak: The evidence so far is clear that the benefits of these policies have been substantial, and that the risks have not materialized. Inflation has continued to run well below the Committee's 2 percent objective. Indeed, some argue today that low inflation should cause the Committee to hold off from raising interest rates. As I noted at the outset, due in part to the Fed's effective response to the crisis, the recovery in the United States has been stronger than that of other advanced economies, with more rapid job creation, lower unemployment, and faster growth. That is one reason why a number of central banks around the world have adopted forward guidance and asset purchase programs similar to the policies adopted by the Fed. 6 The Federal Reserve's lending in the crisis was also successful. There is little dispute today that the crisis threatened a global financial collapse and depression, and that these liquidity policies were instrumental in arresting the crisis. Warnings about the Fed's lending also have not been borne out. Critics claimed the Fed had been reckless, throwing money ineffectively at problems and making loans to uncreditworthy borrowers. On the contrary, the Fed's lending was targeted to institutions, markets, and sectors that proved central to arresting the crisis. Loans were extended based on the same terms that the Federal Reserve has always applied—the borrowers must be solvent, the loans must be secured, and an appropriate interest rate must be charged. As a result, every single loan we made was repaid in full, on time, with interest. 7 Traditional Oversight of the Federal Reserve Was Extensive and Effective The Federal Reserve, like other parts of our democratic system of government, must be accountable to the public and its elected representatives. Given the scale of the Fed's actions during the Crisis, it has been not only appropriate but essential that these actions be transparent to the public and subject to close and careful scrutiny by the Congress. And that is exactly what happened. So it is jarring to hear it asserted that the Fed carries out its duties in secret and is unaccountable to the public and its elected representatives. The Federal Reserve is highly transparent and accountable to the public and to the Congress. First, the Fed does not set its own goals for monetary policy. Congress assigned us the goals of price stability and maximum employment--that is, the highest level of employment achievable without threatening price stability. Federal Reserve Board members are nominated by the President and must be confirmed by the Senate. The Chair of the Fed appears before both the House and Senate oversight committees twice every year to report on monetary policy, and, in practice, to respond to questions about anything and everything related to the Fed's activities. The Chair and other Board members routinely make additional appearances before the Congress and meet frequently with members. More generally, the Fed is open and transparent in its operations, including those related to monetary policy, accounting for itself in timely postmeeting FOMC statements, minutes, broadcast press conferences, and speeches. 8 Details about the Fed's balance sheet are on the public record; in fact, every security owned by the Fed is identified individually on the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 9 The FOMC's plans to normalize the balance sheet have been the subject of exhaustive discussion--in FOMC meetings, in speeches by policymakers, and among the many journalists and academics who analyze and discuss Fed policies. Last September, the FOMC published its Normalization Principles, which set forth its plans to reduce the balance sheet to a more normal level over time. 10 The Fed's financial statements are also a matter of public record, and are audited annually by independent, outside auditors under the watchful eye of the Fed's independent Inspector General. 11 I am well aware of this because I chair the committees that have oversight responsibility for the audits of the Board and the Reserve Banks. I worked for many years in the financial markets, and I can tell you that the Federal Reserve's financial statements, though they contain very large numbers, are relatively straightforward--much simpler than those of a typical regional bank. The Fed's operations, including its role regulating and supervising banks, are subject to extensive review by the GAO. If you visit the GAO's website, you'll find more than 70 reports since the crisis that are wholly or partly dedicated to reviewing the Fed's operations, including the emergency lending facilities I mentioned earlier. 12 The GAO works closely with the Fed's Office of Inspector General, which is involved in both financial audits and other oversight of our operations. The extensive oversight I describe intensified--appropriately so--as the Federal Reserve responded to the financial crisis. Our lending facilities were also the subject of review by the Fed's Inspector General, the Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the Congressional Oversight Panel, the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission established by the Congress, and numerous congressional hearings and reviews. The Fed's actions were also fully transparent. As always, monetary policy decisions were debated and voted on by the FOMC and announced immediately, with detailed explanations provided in the minutes of these deliberations. The Fed provided public guidance on its plans to purchase assets and made those purchases in open, competitive transactions that were disclosed as soon as they occurred. The terms and conditions for every lending facility were publicly disclosed. The amounts lent under each program were published on the Fed's weekly balance sheet report. The Fed created a website and issued a monthly report to the Congress disclosing details on all loans, such as the quantity and quality of collateral posted by borrowers. 13 The Significant Costs of Restrictions on the Fed's Independence As I said at the outset, I believe these proposals under consideration by the Congress fail to anticipate the significant costs and risks of subjecting the Fed's conduct of monetary policy to political pressure and of limiting the ability of the Fed to execute its traditional role of keeping credit flowing to American households and businesses in a financial crisis. Let me first address "Audit the Fed," which would repeal a narrow but critical exemption, adopted by the Congress in 1978, to limit GAO policy reviews of the Fed's conduct of monetary policy. The Congress granted this exemption because the costs of involving the GAO in monetary policy, including the substantial risk of political interference, far outweigh the potential benefits. It is important to note that GAO investigations are not the financial audits that many assume them to be. They extend beyond mere accounting to examine strategy, judgments and day-to-day decisionmaking. Indeed, by statute, the GAO is charged with making recommendations to Congress about the areas they have reviewed. This could put the GAO in the position of reviewing the FOMC's policy decisions and recommending its own course for monetary policy. With these features in mind, the potential benefits of GAO policy audits would be small, even before considering the potential costs. Unlike the programs that are typically the subject of GAO policy audits, such as procurement decisions that may be brought to light only by the GAO's attention, monetary policy decisions occur with all of the world watching. They are announced immediately, described in an FOMC statement, often elaborated on in a press conference, and the subject of endless same-day-analysis and debate. With all of this transparency and analysis, very little would be revealed by GAO policy audits that would help evaluate the effectiveness of monetary policy. The benefits of frequent GAO policy audits would also be low because the effects of monetary policy are felt with a considerable time lag and are often only clear years later. Audit the Fed also risks inserting the Congress directly into monetary policy decisionmaking, reversing decades of deliberate effort by the Congress to insulate the Fed from political pressure in carrying out its day-to-day duties. Indeed, some advocates of the bill have expressed support for complete elimination of the Federal Reserve. Long experience, in the United States and in other advanced economies, has demonstrated that monetary policy is most successful when decisions are rendered independent of influence by elected officials. As recent U.S. history has shown, elected officials have often pushed for easier policies that serve short-term political interests, at the expense of higher inflation and damage to the long-term health and stability of the economy. 14 After World War II and as recently as the early 1970s, political pressures likely influenced Federal Reserve decisionmaking in a way which helped cause excessive inflation and related bouts of economic weakness. In 1977, as what came to be called the Great Inflation neared its peak, the Congress passed legislation that spelled out the goals for monetary policy--maximum employment and stable prices--but left it to the Fed to precisely define those goals and the means by which they would be achieved. 15 To preserve the Fed's independence in implementing policy to reach these goals, the Congress exempted monetary policy from the GAO investigations it was then authorizing for other Fed operations. This independence has served the nation well. Over the 20 years or so prior to the crisis, the Federal Reserve was able to maintain low and stable inflation, and recessions were brief and mild. 16 That is not to say that the Fed got everything just right during this period. But it seems to me that any pre-crisis shortcomings were in regulation and supervision by the Fed and other agencies, rather than in monetary policy. And there are other costs from subjecting monetary policy to GAO investigations. Frequent GAO investigations would likely inhibit the debate and flow of information and ideas at FOMC meetings among staff and policymakers, which would lead to poorer decisions. Market participants would have to wonder whether the FOMC would react to GAO criticism, and they could lose confidence in the Fed's independence, reducing its credibility. To those who may doubt that GAO investigations would be used by the Congress to try to influence monetary policy, let me briefly describe another proposal which envisions exactly that. This bill would require the FOMC to carry out monetary policy according to a simple equation and require immediate congressional hearings and a GAO audit whenever monetary policy deviates from this equation. 17 Simple policy rules of this nature are used by the FOMC and by central banks around the world as a guide to policy. No central bank applies them in such a mechanical fashion, and there is very little support among economists for doing so. 18 Based on my own experience in business, in government service, and in life, I doubt that important decisions can be reduced ultimately to such an equation. The most such a rule might do is get you 80 percent of the way there; that last 20 percent makes all the difference. Finally, there has been discussion in the Congress of imposing new restrictions on the ability of the Fed to respond as it did with liquidity facilities during the financial crisis. Although I am not aware of a specific bill at this point, the idea is to limit the Fed's authority under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, under which the Fed is empowered to lend "in unusual and exigent circumstances" to firms beyond banks for the purpose of containing a financial crisis. The Fed used this emergency lending authority to provide liquidity in the face of a systemwide panic that threatened the financial system. As the crisis receded, the Congress took two related actions. First, it gave the regulators what they had badly needed during the crisis, which was a means of resolving the largest financial institutions without threatening the financial system. Second, the Congress prohibited emergency loans to individual firms but retained the Fed's ability to establish broadly available lending programs during a crisis, with the prior approval of the Secretary of the Treasury and timely notification of the Congress. This tradeoff came after extensive consultation between the Congress and the Federal Reserve. And I believe that it struck a reasonable balance. I also believe it would be a mistake to go further and impose additional restrictions. One of the lessons of the crisis is that the financial system evolves so quickly that it is difficult to predict where threats will emerge and what actions may be needed in the future to respond. Because we cannot anticipate what may be needed in the future, the Congress should preserve the ability of the Fed to respond flexibly and nimbly to future emergencies. Further restricting or eliminating the Fed's emergency lending authority will not prevent future crises, but it will hinder the Fed's ability to limit the harm from those crises for families and businesses. Conclusion In our democratic system, the Federal Reserve owes the public and the Congress a high degree of transparency and accountability. The Congress has wisely given the Fed the tools it needs to implement monetary policy and respond to future crises as well as crucial independence to do its work free from short-term political influence. I would urge caution regarding current proposals that threaten just such political influence and place restrictions on the very tools that so recently proved essential in preventing a new depression. Congressional oversight of the Federal Reserve, including its conduct of monetary policy, is extensive, but no doubt could be improved in ways that do not threaten the Fed's effectiveness. I would welcome discussions with the Congress about ways to aid its important oversight of monetary policy. There may be differing views of how Congress can best carry out this responsibility, but there can be no disagreement about the purpose of such oversight, which is to help the Federal Reserve succeed in promoting a healthy economy and a strong and stable financial system. Those are the goals Congress assigned the Federal Reserve a century ago, and I am optimistic that Congress and the Fed will continue to work together to pursue them on behalf of the American people. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015, H.R. 24, 114 Cong. (2015); and Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015, S. 264, 114 Cong. (2015). Return to text 3. See Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015 in note 2. Return to text 4. See Banking Act of 1935, ch. 614, 49 Stat. 684 (1935). Return to text 5. See Ben S. Bernanke (2010), statement before the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Washington, D.C., September 2; and Ben Bernanke (2009), closed session (PDF) of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, Washington, D.C., November 17. Return to text 6. On the effectiveness of the Fed’s unconventional monetary policy, see Eric M. Engen, Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015), " The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policy Actions (PDF) ," Finance and Economic Discussion Series 2015-005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January); Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011), " The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases ," International Journal of Central Banking , vol. 7 (March), pp. 3-43; Stefania D'Amico and Thomas B. King (2013), " Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 44 (February, issue supplement s1), pp. 3-46. Return to text 7. On the effectiveness of the Fed's emergency lending, see Sean D. Campbell, Daniel M. Covitz, William R. Nelson, and Karen M. Pence (2011), " Securitization Markets and Central Banking: An Evaluation of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility ," Journal of Finance , vol. 68 (April), pp. 715-37; and Tao Wu (2011), "The U.S. Money Market and the Term Auction Facility in the Financial Crisis of 2007-2009," Review of Economics and Statistics , vol. 93 (May), pp. 617-31. Return to text 8. For example, see Statistical Release H.6, "Money Stock Measures," on the Board's website . Return to text 9. See the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's webpage " System Open Market Account Holdings " . Return to text 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans ," press release, September 17. Return to text 11. See "Federal Reserve System Audited Annual Financial Statements" on the Board's website . Return to text 12. The reports are available on the GAO's website . Return to text 13. See "Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet" on the Board's website . Return to text 14. The seminal research establishing a link between central bank independence and macroeconomic performance is Alberto Alesina and Lawrence H. Summers (1993), " Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 25 (May), pp. 151-62. More recent research finds the relationship to be less solid, however, in part because independent central banks have in several cases been instituted precisely because economic performance has been subpar; for example, see Christopher Crowe and Ellen E. Meade (2007), " The Evolution of Central Bank Governance around the World ," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 21 (4), pp. 69-90; Christopher Crowe and Ellen E. Meade (2008), " Central Bank Independence and Transparency: Evolution and Effectiveness ," European Journal of Political Economy , vol. 24 (4), pp. 763-77; and N. Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen (2014), " Central Bank Transparency and Independence: Updates and New Measures ," International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 10 (1), pp. 189-259. Return to text 15. See Robert J. Samuelson (2008), The Great Inflation and Its Aftermath: The Transformation of America's Economy, Politics, and Society (New York: Random House). Return to text 16. See the figure " Annualized 12-Month PCE and Core PCE Inflation " that shows inflation and core inflation over time. Return to text 17. See Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015 in note 2. Return to text 18. As part of its ongoing Initiative on Global Markets (IGM) poll, the University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, asked 44 prominent economists to respond to the following statement: "Legislation introduced in Congress would require the Federal Reserve to "submit to the appropriate congressional committees…a Directive Policy Rule," which shall describe "the strategy or rule of the Federal Open Market Committee for the systematic quantitative adjustment of the Policy Instrument Target to respond to a change in the Intermediate Policy Inputs." Should the Fed deviate from the rule, the Fed Chair would have to "testify before the appropriate congressional committees as to why the [rule]…is not in compliance." Enacting this provision would improve monetary policy outcomes in the U.S." None of the participants agreed with the statement, and almost all disagreed or strongly disagreed. The results of the poll are available on the Booth School's IGM Forum website at www.igmchicago.org/igm-economic-experts-panel/poll-results?SurveyID=SV_doNZ9FbNq7tDi97 . Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible version Last Update: February 09, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, New York Share It has now been over six years since the most acute phase of the financial crisis. Over the intervening years, market structures have evolved, and financial firms have changed their business models in important respects. Authorities around the world are implementing reforms that address the painful lessons of the crisis, while at the same time keeping the evolution of markets and firms in mind. 1 Today, I will briefly summarize this sweeping reform program as it relates to large, global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), critical financial market infrastructure, and money markets. In my view, the basic agendas in these areas are, to different degrees, well developed, although a great deal of implementation remains. In contrast, I will argue that thinking about financial stability in the context of credit markets is less advanced and presents difficult challenges for supervisors. I will consider a range of factors that may address those challenges, illustrated with a discussion of recent developments in the syndicated leveraged loan market. And I will argue that the standard for regulatory intervention in the credit markets should be higher than for the other three areas. Financial Institutions: Even before the financial crisis ended, it was clear that reforms to strengthen the most systemically important firms and their regulation and supervision needed to be the first order of business. I will mention four critical elements of that program. First, these institutions are required to hold, and now do hold, much higher levels of higher-quality capital, as measured by both risk-based ratios and a much more comprehensive leverage ratio. Under the "enhanced prudential standards" of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank), the fully phased-in capital requirements will be meaningfully higher for these institutions because of the greater threat their failure would pose to the financial system and to the broader economy. Second, these institutions are for the first time becoming subject to rule-based liquidity regulation, including the Liquidity Coverage Ratio, the Net Stable Funding Ratio, and liquidity stress testing. 2 These innovations are in part designed to address the firms' vulnerabilities to damaging runs on their short-term financing, runs that occurred repeatedly during the crisis and clearly increased its severity. Third, we now have rigorous, forward-looking capital stress testing that recognizes the dynamic nature of the financial system and guards against the excessive optimism that can build during a credit boom. These three reforms are well advanced and, in my view, have left the G-SIBs far stronger than they were before the crisis. Together, they significantly reduce the probability of a large bank failure. But they would leave us short of meeting the overriding objective of eliminating the too-big-to-fail conundrum without a fourth reform--a viable resolution mechanism that could handle the failure of these institutions without severe damage to the economy. Until recently, no nation has had a way of handling such failures without that degree of damage. Authorities around the world have been working to develop an approach to resolving large financial firms that credibly imposes losses on shareholders and debt holders consistent with the basic tenets of our capitalist system, but does so in a way that protects the rest of the financial system and the real economy from severe damage. The single-point-of-entry approach developed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in conjunction with other U.S. supervisors is a promising innovation, especially in combination with the recent proposal of the Financial Stability Board to increase the "total loss absorbency capacity" of systemically important firms in terms of their total levels of equity and long-term debt. When fully worked out, these new regulatory regimes should permit a large, consolidated entity that owns banks or broker-dealers to continue to function even if the ultimate holding company ceases to be viable and must be recapitalized or wound down. As I said at the outset, these reforms directed at the G-SIBs are well advanced. But much implementation remains, including, most notably, addressing cross-border issues associated with the failure of complex global firms. It will take time and continued international cooperation to complete this task. 3 Infrastructure: The crisis exposed a number of important weaknesses in the infrastructure of the financial markets--what might be more plainly called the plumbing. Reforms aimed at addressing these weaknesses receive less public attention than those focused on the G-SIBs, and are in some respects less advanced in their conception and execution. But they are, in my view, of great importance. I will mention two important sets of reforms in the U.S. context, one well advanced and the other still under development. The first concerns the triparty repurchase agreement (repo) market, which is a principal source of overnight financing for the largest securities dealers. Before the crisis, the functioning of this market was critically dependent on the extension of large volumes of discretionary intraday credit by two clearing banks. When confidence in Bear Stearns collapsed in March 2008, the vulnerability of this market and its settlement procedures in particular became very clear. Today, almost seven years later, in no small measure thanks to the leadership and persistence of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the triparty repo settlement process has been substantially reengineered, with reliance on discretionary intraday credit essentially eliminated. 4 In addition, a smaller fraction of the market now involves the financing of lower-quality collateral, and far less of the overall funding is provided overnight and thus subject to daily rollover risk. 5 Dealers in general manage their short-term funding risk far more conservatively than before the crisis, including by carrying substantially higher levels of liquidity, in part because of the introduction of prudential liquidity standards that I mentioned earlier. Second, as I have discussed at some length in other venues, in the run-up to the crisis, the highly opaque and fast-growing market for over-the-counter derivatives gave rise to an underappreciated and largely invisible buildup of risk, which proved a major source of instability when the crisis broke. 6 In light of this experience, authorities around the world agreed in 2009 that standardized derivatives should be cleared through central counterparties (CCPs), and that noncentrally cleared derivatives should be subject to minimum margin requirements. Central clearing holds the promise of enhancing financial stability through the netting of counterparty risks, creating greater transparency, and applying stronger and more consistent risk-management practices. But this reform program will only succeed if CCPs, in which counterparty credit risks are concentrated, are strong enough to withstand severe but plausible stress scenarios, including, for example, the failure of multiple clearing members. Achieving this degree of resiliency will require robust liquidity risk-management practices, including the maintenance of substantial buffers of liquid resources that can quickly be tapped. In addition, adequate loss absorption capacity is essential, including through substantial initial margin requirements and default funds. A framework for such requirements has been agreed upon at the international level through the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures. 7 Vigorous implementation at the national level is essential. There is also a need for greater transparency for clearing members and the public regarding the risk-management practices of CCPs, for heightened stress testing, for consideration of "skin-in-the-game" requirements, and for credible recovery and resolution plans. A great deal of work remains to be done to finalize and implement these additional reforms in all of the important CCPs around the world. Money Markets: Money markets involve money-like investments such as commercial paper and repo. Investors in these markets include money market funds, corporations and other large holders of excess cash seeking a safe return in the short term, frequently no longer than overnight. Borrowers in money markets include banks, securities dealers and other financial companies, nonfinancial corporations, and governments. By linking investors seeking a safe return with borrowers needing short-term credit, money markets do what commercial banks have always done, but without deposit insurance and other aspects of the safety net provided for regulated depository institutions. After Lehman failed and the Reserve Fund "broke the buck," money market fund investors realized that their investments were not as safe and liquid as "money" after all. There were widespread runs in these markets, and it took a U.S. Treasury guarantee, augmented by a number of unprecedented liquidity facilities established by the Federal Reserve, to stabilize the money market fund industry and, more importantly, stave off a sudden stoppage of the flow of credit to households and businesses. This experience tells us clearly that disruptions in the money markets can threaten the broader financial system. Regulation to increase the resilience of the money markets needs to reflect their systemic importance. Some important steps have been taken to address the most immediate risks--for example, through the liquidity standards for large institutions I mentioned earlier. But the risks associated with dislocations in the money markets go far beyond the large banks. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) has taken some important steps to address the money market fund issue, notably through its 2014 rule amendments. 8 To address so-called repo runs, the Financial Stability Board is in the final phases of developing a framework of margin rules designed to be applied uniformly across nations for securities financing transactions involving nongovernmental securities. These minimum standards should increase the resiliency of those markets and mitigate the pressures on terms that inevitably emerge during benign periods. We expect to propose regulations implementing these rules in the United States in due course. Credit Markets: That brings me to the credit markets, where households, businesses and governments engage in borrowing to fund their purchases and operations. These markets figured importantly in the crisis, most notoriously through securities collateralized by subprime mortgages. The story is by now well known. Lenders offered these loans to retail borrowers, often with negligible or simply fraudulent underwriting. Many of our largest financial institutions packaged the loans into marginally capitalized securitization structures that were rated highly by the credit rating agencies and thus generally viewed as suitable for purchase by a range of investors--including the most risk averse. As conditions in the housing market deteriorated, the threat of significant mortgage defaults emerged in 2007. The panic began in earnest when it became apparent that exposure to subprime mortgages was ubiquitous, from the balance sheets of key financial intermediaries and their supposedly "off balance sheet" vehicles to the investment portfolios of other institutional investors around the world. Although the total losses were initially thought to be not so large as to threaten the system, some of these toxic mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were financed with the types of short-term, confidence-sensitive funding mechanisms I have just described, which amplified the dislocations once the run in funding markets began and caused great harm to the broader economy. As the crisis has receded, supervisors--not to mention market participants, commentators, and the general public--have eyed financial markets with a heightened sensitivity to anything that resembles the buildup of risks that occurred in the run-up to the crisis--a natural and useful exercise in pattern recognition. In that spirit, the Fed, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the FDIC have focused significant attention on the origination activities of depository institutions in the syndicated leveraged loan market, where some of the troubling patterns that were evident in subprime MBS have been observed. These conditions prompted policymakers first to ask questions and then to act. Fed officials raised concerns publicly as early as 2011. 9 The Fed, the OCC, and the FDIC issued supervisory guidance emphasizing these concerns in 2013. 10 In 2014, the agencies clarified the guidance through published FAQs and began to exercise intensive supervision at the largest regulated banks emphasizing the need to improve underwriting standards and credit risk management on safety and soundness grounds. 11 The case of the leveraged loan market is an interesting one, because it sits at the intersection between core financial institutions and credit markets and illustrates the challenges supervisors face in thinking about intervention in credit markets. I will turn to that market now in some detail. The term portions of leveraged loans are typically not held in the arranging banks' portfolios, but rather sold to a wide range of institutional investors--collateralized loan obligations (CLOs), retail loan funds, pension funds, insurance companies, hedge funds, and others ( figures 1 and 2 ). This "originate-to-distribute" model is now dominant across a range of markets and reflects the movement over several decades of credit intermediation from portfolio lending (from the firm's perspective, the "storage business") to the capital markets (the "moving business"). This practice transfers and disperses credit and liquidity risks from the core of the financial sector to capital market investors that are willing to bear such risks for what they deem appropriate compensation. While the risks do not disappear, the system can, in principle, be safer if the ultimate institutional investors pose lower risk to the system than banks. For example, movement of credit exposure to speculative grade firms from a bank's balance sheet to a vehicle that is stably funded by sophisticated, deep-pocket institutional investors could be a net gain to financial stability. Movement of such loans to a highly leveraged, runnable vehicle beyond the regulatory perimeter could have the opposite effect. Pre-crisis conditions in leveraged finance markets were, with the benefit of hindsight, clearly in bubble territory. Deal leverage was at historically high levels ( figure 3 ), and spreads were at historic lows ( figure 4 ). Interest coverage ratios were quite low ( figure 5 ). Unusually large leveraged buyouts were common. Banks entered into very large, long duration commitments to fund deals that faced significant regulatory and other requirements before they could close. Estimates vary, but when the crisis emerged and liquidity in these markets evaporated, large dealers were left holding roughly $350 billion in loans and commitments in their pipelines that they could not sell, and these positions remained on banks' balance sheets for a time. As loan values declined an unprecedented 40 percent ( figure 6 ), there were significant mark-to-market losses on these assets, which may have contributed to doubts about the condition of institutions at the core of the system. Subsequent default rates were not outsized by historical standards, and recovery rates were in line with past averages ( figure 7 ). Of course, the Fed's monetary policy eased financial conditions across the economy and enabled the refinancing of many of these loans at lower rates and with issuer-friendly terms. Because leveraged loans were generally not held in investment structures that used short-term, confidence-sensitive funding, these investments were not a principal focal point of runs such as those that plagued MBS funding structures. CLOs were the largest institutional investors in leveraged loans, holding over 50 percent of loans outstanding. These structures are funded with stable capital, with both equity and debt tranches committed for several years--a longer duration than that of the underlying loans. This picture of the pre-crisis leveraged lending market is one of a sharp decline in underwriting standards and a breakdown of risk management, resulting in a large risk buildup involving many of the G-SIBs--something the Fed and other regulators want to avoid. Leveraged loans may not have been a material cause of the crisis, and leveraged lending alone would likely not have threatened the overall health of the large institutions. But caution on the part of supervisors is certainly understandable here. It is worth remembering that the destructive potential of the subprime mortgage market was not obvious in advance and not fully reflected in real-time measures of balance sheet exposure. In light of that demonstrated uncertainty, since the crisis, supervisors have opted to react earlier and more aggressively to the buildup of risk. Let's now turn to post-crisis market conditions, which exhibit both similarities and differences compared with the pre-crisis period. Borrowing through leveraged loans by speculative-grade companies has been brisk since 2010, with about $800 billion of institutional loans now outstanding ( figure 8 ). Over much of the post-crisis low interest rate period, demand for higher-yielding assets has been very strong, often outstripping supply. Price and nonprice terms in the syndicated leveraged loan market have been highly favorable to borrowers, as credit spreads declined, albeit not to particularly low levels (figure 4), and leverage multiples increased (figure 3). The share of loan agreements that lack traditional maintenance covenants increased to historic highs ( figures 9 and 10 ). 12 CLOs and other stably funded investors continue to be the primary owners of leveraged loans. But in recent years, mutual funds that invest in fixed income assets have seen large inflows and have become more significant investors in this market. Some of these funds, including those holding syndicated leveraged loans and high-yield bonds, provide investors with what is called "liquidity transformation"--providing daily liquidity even when the underlying assets are relatively illiquid. The risk is that, in the event of a shock or a panic, investors will demand all of their money back at the exact time when the liquidity of the already illiquid underlying assets deteriorates even further. Investors may not anticipate or recognize this problem until it is too late--the so-called liquidity illusion. Bank loan funds, which attract retail investors and offer daily liquidity, now total about $150 billion, or 20 percent of institutional leveraged loans outstanding ( figure 11 ). The liquidity transformation provided by these funds has not created problems so far despite recent outflows from bank loan funds, but supervisors and market participants have raised valid concerns that stressful times could well bring large-scale redemptions and threaten runs ( figure 12 ). Chair Mary Jo White has made liquidity concerns regarding open-ended mutual funds a priority for the SEC. 13 While it is possible to observe the characteristics of cash market investments, it is far more challenging to assess comparable positions in the derivatives and secured lending markets. Investors may take highly leveraged positions in leveraged loans through total return swaps and secured funding transactions, and a substantial buildup of these positions could present run and fire-sale risks if asset values started to fall. Today, the evidence suggests that such positions are fairly limited, but challenges in measurement and data make it hard to get a clear picture. While some of these conditions evoke the pre-crisis bubble period and thus raise red flags, there are important differences as well. The large institutions that arrange these loans have significantly reduced both the size and duration of their leveraged loan commitments ( figure 13 ). Thus, they are not exposed to the large "pipeline risk" they faced as the crisis broke. In addition, banks now routinely limit their risk by including "flex" provisions that, among other things, enable them to increase the interest rate on a loan offered for sale by 150 basis points or more, at the borrower's expense. So far, we have not seen the very large transactions of the pre-crisis period. In these and other respects, the leveraged finance markets have evolved, probably because of supervision as well as lessons learned by the banks themselves. Given these changes, banks at the core of our financial system seem less likely to experience stress should conditions in leveraged lending deteriorate. Of course, the guidance now stands in the way of a return to pre-crisis conditions. Let's now step back from the leveraged loan market to ask the broader question of how supervisors should address a clear deterioration of credit market conditions. I will consider three factors that are often discussed in considering the broader question of when and how to intervene in the credit markets to promote financial stability through institution-specific supervisory policy. 14 First, do conditions present a threat to the safety and soundness of financial institutions at the core of the system? It hardly needs saying that we must to be alert to the buildup of risks in the credit markets that could undermine the safety, soundness, or solvency of the G-SIBs or the broader system. If deterioration in one or more of the key credit markets would credibly raise such threats, the Fed and the other supervisors should react preemptively. An object lesson in this regard is the damage done by the accumulation of excessive exposures to high-risk MBS and other mortgage-related assets in the years leading up to the crisis. The originate-to-distribute model of mortgage lending on its face promised a social-welfare-enhancing distribution of mortgage credit risk away from banks and toward stable capital market investors. But the banks remained profoundly exposed through contractual putback rights, mortgage and MBS litigation, residual balance sheet holdings, and implicit support to sponsored investment vehicles. Since the crisis, there have been significant and eminently justified legislative and regulatory actions to assure that mortgage originators follow minimum underwriting standards and that banks are better protected from exposure to high-risk mortgages. These efforts include the Dodd-Frank risk retention rules and ability-to-pay standards, much higher capital and liquidity requirements, stricter accounting rules that limit off-balance-sheet treatment for sponsored vehicles, and a much greater supervisory focus on litigation and reputational risk. Second, is there use of run-prone financing by other investors that can lead to damaging fire sales? Supervisors should be highly alert to the reemergence in the markets--that is, not on the balance sheets of the large banks--of structures that are prone to runs and damaging fire sales triggered by sharp declines in asset values. As I mentioned earlier, two different features can create vulnerability to runs and fire-sale risk. The first involves funding of volatile assets with high leverage that includes short-term, confidence sensitive debt. These structures were widely used before the crisis in the funding of MBS. The second involves "liquidity transformation," in which the investment structure provides investors daily liquidity, but the underlying assets are far less liquid and prone to becoming quite illiquid in times of stress. Either or both of these features can be replicated in the derivatives or securities lending markets, which provide less visibility to market participants and supervisors. Financial markets evolve constantly in response to market conditions, financial engineering, and regulation. It will be important to keep up with trends in these markets that may give rise to this threat. Third, if left unaddressed, is it likely that conditions will risk meaningful damage to the real economy when the credit cycle turns? A positive answer on either of the first two questions should raise red flags for supervisors. Let's say, for the sake of argument, that the answers to these questions were negative. One might still try to make the case for supervisory intervention into the credit markets to avoid the risk of meaningful damage to the economy down the road. History shows that excesses that occur at the height of a credit boom can result in substantial losses not just to financial firms and market investors, but also to households and businesses, when that boom turns to bust. 15 The question of whether to "lean against" the credit cycle through supervisory policy--and when, and with what tools--is a difficult one. 16 An important threshold question is whether supervisors will be able to correctly and in a timely manner identify "dangerous" conditions in credit markets, without too many false positives and without unnecessarily limiting credit availability by interfering with market forces. Interesting recent research seeks to identify observable variables that could be used to monitor credit conditions and detect trends that could threaten the performance of the real economy in the future. 17 This research is promising, and it could be used by supervisors to inform their thinking as it develops further. In the meantime, unless there is a plausible threat to the core of the system or potential for damaging fire sales, I would set a high bar for supervisory interventions to lean against the credit cycle. Such interventions would almost surely interfere with the traditional function of capital markets in allocating capital to productive uses and dispersing risk to the investors who willingly choose to bear it. Finally, another issue to consider when contemplating such intervention is that, particularly in the United States, activity is free to migrate outside the commercial banking system into less regulated entities. As supervisory scrutiny has increased in recent years, a growing number of nonbanks have become involved in the distribution of leveraged loans. Migration of this activity could be either a net positive or a net negative for financial stability, depending on whether it actually transfers risk irrevocably from the core of the financial system, and whether the institutions to which activity migrates rely on funding that is stable and robust to fire sale dynamics. Conclusion To wrap up, I believe that sustaining financial stability requires supervisors to consider financial markets, in addition to financial institutions and infrastructure. That is most obviously so when conditions threaten the safety and soundness of the financial system through leverage, liquidity transformation, or deterioration of credit underwriting or other risk-management standards. At the same time, financial stability need not seek to eliminate all risks. We need to learn, but not overlearn, the lessons of the crisis. I believe there should be a high bar for "leaning against the credit cycle" in the absence of credible threats to the core or the reemergence of run-prone funding structures. In my view, the Fed and other prudential and market regulators should resist interfering with the role of markets in allocating capital to issuers and risk to investors unless the case for doing so is strong and the available tools can achieve the objective in a targeted manner and with a high degree of confidence. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. For more information, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), " Liquidity Regulation ," speech delivered at the Clearing House 2014 Annual Conference, New York, November 20. Return to text 3. For a more complete treatment of these issues, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2015), " Advancing Macroprudential Policy Objectives ," speech delivered at "Evaluating Macroprudential Tools: Complementarities and Conflicts," a conference cosponsored by the Office of Financial Research and the Financial Stability Oversight Council, held in Arlington, Va., January 30. Return to text 4. For more on this topic, see William C. Dudley (2014), " Welcoming Remarks at Workshop on the Risks of Wholesale Funding ," speech delivered at "Workshop on the Risks of Wholesale Funding," sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, August 13. Return to text 5. There have also been reforms to the money market funds that provide most of the funding in this market, as discussed later. Return to text 6. See Jerome H. Powell (2013), " OTC Market Infrastructure Reform: Opportunities and Challenges ," speech delivered at the Clearing House 2013 Annual Meeting, New York, November 21; and Jerome H. Powell (2014), " A Financial System Perspective on Central Clearing of Derivatives ," speech delivered at "The New International Financial System: Analyzing the Cumulative Impact of Regulatory Reform," a conference cosponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the Bank of England, Chicago, November 6. Return to text 7. See Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2012), Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements and International Organization of Securities Commissions, April). Return to text 8. The 2014 SEC rule amendments are available at www.sec.gov/rules/final/2014/33-9616.pdf . Return to text 9. See, for example, Janet L. Yellen (2011), " Assessing Potential Financial Imbalances in an Era of Accommodative Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at "Real and Financial Linkage and Monetary Policy," an international conference sponsored by the Bank of Japan, June 1. Return to text 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2013), " Interagency Guidance on Leveraged Lending (PDF) ," March 13. Return to text 11. Along with the Shared National Credit results, the Fed, along with the OCC and the FDIC, released on November 7, 2014, an FAQ document (PDF) regarding the guidance. Also see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2014), " Credit Risk in the Shared National Credit Portfolio Is High; Leveraged Lending Remains a Concern ," joint press release, November 7. The guidance covers a wide range of risk-management issues and generally aims tighter scrutiny at deals with leverage over six times pre-tax cash flow, or with forecast debt paydown of less than 50 percent over a five-to-seven-year period; differences across industries and companies are also to be taken into consideration. Return to text 12. Highly accommodative monetary policy, while far from the only cause of ebullient credit market conditions, is designed to support economic activity by creating incentives to take credit and duration risk. See Ben S. Bernanke (2013), " Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress ," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, February 26. Return to text 13. See Mary Jo White (2014), " Enhancing Risk Monitoring and Regulatory Safeguards for the Asset Management Industry ," speech at the New York Times DealBook Opportunities for Tomorrow Conference, New York, December 11. Return to text 14. This approach is consistent with the financial stability framework in Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013), and emphasizes the importance of leverage, maturity transformation, and common risks and behaviors in the financial system that can amplify credit losses and harm the real economy. See Tobias Adrian, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2013), " Financial Stability Monitoring ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-21 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System). Return to text 15. See, for example, Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor (2012), "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008," American Economic Review, vol. 102 (2), pp. 1029-61. Return to text 16. The U.S. banking agencies, following the lead of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, created a countercyclical capital buffer that could be activated during periods of excess aggregate credit growth. The Basel proposal can both "lean against the cycle" and create a capital cushion to absorb losses from the likely increase in defaults. Return to text 17. See Robin Greenwood and Samuel G. Hanson (2013), "Issuer Quality and Corporate Bond Returns," Review of Financial Studies, vol. 26 (June), pp. 1483-525; and David López-Salido, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek (2014), " Credit-Market Sentiment and the Business Cycle (PDF) ," slide presentation. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: February 18, 2015 Back to Top
