The ‘New Normal’ for Growth - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech The ‘New Normal’ for Growth April 04, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Community Bankers Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Note: These remarks are based on those delivered at the Economic Club of New York on March 6, 2019. Introduction Good morning, everyone. It’s a pleasure to be hosting this conference, and I’d like to start by welcoming you all to the New York Fed. I know there’s an opportunity to tour the gold vault later, and I definitely recommend it. There’s something very exciting about our more traditional approach to storing money… even though the gold bars pose certain logistical and practical challenges. If you drop one on your foot you’ll definitely know about it. Community Banks I’m going to start today by talking a bit about community banks. Aside from a short period running a pizza restaurant, I’ve spent all of my career in the Federal Reserve System. And I’ve had the opportunity to travel extensively throughout the United States. When you visit communities in more rural or remote parts of the country, away from big urban centers like New York and San Francisco, you really see the value of community banks. In many places you’re the only game in town when it comes to banking services and credit. You know the customers in your community because you are an integral part of the community. You represent an essential part of our financial system and economy. But I know you didn’t come here today to hear me tell you what an important job you do. What I hope is that I can give you some insights that will be useful going forward. I know interest rates play a vital role in your businesses, so I’d like to spend a bit of time talking about the outlook and what that means for monetary policy. But before I do, I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Where Things Stand For the last decade we’ve all had our focus on recovery from the Great Recession. The path to getting back on track has been a long one, and there is a sense that the economy has now fully recovered. GDP growth came in at 3 percent in 2018 and I expect it to be around 2 percent this year. The difference between last year’s numbers and this year’s forecast has caused some concern, and that’s where I’m going to keep my focus. Many people are hoping for GDP growth of 3 or 4 percent, similar to what we saw in the late 1990s. Less optimistic forecasts for 2019 growth are therefore, understandably, a source of worry. But it’s key to remember that this GDP growth is taking place on a backdrop of historically low unemployment, and low, stable inflation. Unemployment is at 3.8 percent and inflation continues to run just under 2 percent. The Fed is tasked with two goals: Low and stable inflation and maximum employment. From the perspective of monetary policy things are going very well. And the economic fundamentals indicate that slower growth is—far from a sign of doom and gloom—what we should expect. The Economic Fundamentals The 3 percent growth of 2018 was boosted by a number of tailwinds. Strong global growth, fiscal stimulus, and accommodative financial conditions all helped drive GDP growth and a tight labor market. These tailwinds have calmed, and in fact reversed in some cases. Three developments contribute to this view: a downturn in global growth, heightened geopolitical uncertainty, and the effects of tighter financial conditions. If you strip away these factors you’re left with the underlying drivers of potential growth, which are demographics and productivity growth. Both of these have slowed significantly. Baby boomers are retiring and fertility rates have come down, which has significantly slowed labor force growth relative to past decades. Productivity growth has also fallen considerably from the boom years of the late 1990s and early 2000s. I put the potential growth rate of the U.S. economy at about 2 percent, which is in line with the forecasts we’re seeing for this year. Of course, a number of different scenarios could play out. Geopolitical uncertainty and other factors holding back growth may recede, and the U.S. economy could resume the robust trajectory of last year. Or GDP growth could continue closer to trend, which is my own forecast. Finally, there’s always a chance that downside risks could knock GDP growth off course. But what the data’s telling us is that this period of slow growth isn’t an aberration—it’s the “new normal” we should expect for the foreseeable future. Monetary Policy So what does all this mean for interest rates? With the economy running close to our dual mandate goals, monetary policy is in the right place. Looking ahead, the Fed will watch the data and use monetary policy to keep the expansion on track. When growth is well above trend, raising interest rates to keep the economy on a sustainable path is the right decision. Equally, when faced with a crisis like the Great Recession, it’s incumbent upon policy makers to use every tool at their disposal to get the economy back on course. It’s important to remember the change in the long-run economic fundamentals means that interest rates are likely to be lower than what we saw in the 1990s, for example. In addition, the slope of the yield curve is unlikely to return to levels typically seen in the past. This “new normal” clearly has implications for banks, large and small. Conclusion In conclusion, the outlook is positive. GDP growth is on track, unemployment remains low, and there are no signs of inflationary pressures building. And while many of you will miss the heady days of the 1990s when growth rates were at 4 percent, the economic fundamentals indicate that these are fundamentally different times. But I’m optimistic for bankers like you because of your relationships with customers and the role you play in your communities. Please enjoy the conference. I look forward to joining you later for the luncheon. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

April 11, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Association for Neighborhood & Housing Development 2019 Annual Conference, New York City As prepared for delivery Introduction Thank you for that warm welcome. As you may be aware, last year I moved from San Francisco to take on the role of President of the New York Fed. In many ways California and New York are like different countries—the weather is a big adjustment, for starters! But through my meetings with community leaders and visits to the Bronx and Brooklyn, I’ve come to appreciate that we’re facing a lot of the same issues in my new home that I saw in the San Francisco Bay Area. The main topics of discussion—displacement as a result of gentrification, inequitable growth, and a critical shortage of affordable housing—are all ones we were grappling with on the West Coast as well. These issues are complex and challenging, and there are no easy answers, so I want to start by saying thank you for all the important work you do. There are a couple of topics I want to talk about today. The first is why the work you do is so important, and the second is the role I see the Federal Reserve Bank of New York can play in supporting you today, and going forward. Before I go any further I’ll give the usual Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Dual mandate Apart from a stint running a pizza shop, I’ve worked in the Federal Reserve System for my whole career, nearly 25 years. And I’m not alone. When you ask people at a Federal Reserve Bank how long they’ve worked there, their response is often measured in decades, not years. What makes them stay? Working for a mission-driven institution. And speaking of our mission, the Federal Reserve has two goals: maximum employment and price stability. We want our economy to reach its potential in terms of jobs and growth and we want low, stable inflation. While these two goals are critically important, they are broad and high-level. The monetary policy decisions we make have important effects on the overall number of jobs and wages, but they don’t determine what economic growth looks like across communities, or who benefits from it. That’s why our outreach and community-based work is a key priority. It’s an opportunity for us to take all of the data, all of the things we know about the economy, and help one another as we tackle the very real issues that shape the everyday lives of Americans. Equitable Growth We’re closing in on the longest economic expansion on record, unemployment is at historically low levels, and inflation is close to our 2 percent target. From a pure monetary policy perspective, this is a healthy economy. But I’m acutely aware that not everyone is feeling the benefits of the economy’s good performance. Recent work by my colleagues at the New York Fed crystalized the economic challenges faced by some of those living in New York City. Since the early 1980s wage inequality has increased in the United States, but that increase in inequality has been particularly sharp in large urban areas like this one. In New York City and Northern New Jersey, someone near the top of the income distribution earns seven times that of someone closer to the bottom. This contrasts with other parts of New York State, where the number is somewhere between four or five times. 1 That’s not to say things are necessarily easier in areas with less inequality. In fact, many of the areas with less inequality are also challenged by limited job opportunities and declining populations. It does mean that not everyone is benefiting from growth equally. One of the reasons for this is that the type of growth in the city has disproportionately benefited one type of worker. Growth in New York has generated demand for highly skilled workers, who are often more highly paid and highly mobile. This drives up housing prices and contributes to gentrification, which often goes hand in hand with displacement. Words like “gentrification” and “displacement” sometimes can feel impersonal or cliché. For some, gentrification conjures images of fancy coffee shops and high-priced fashion boutiques. But the reality can be heartbreaking. Families who’ve lived in a home for generations are driven out, communities break up, and the social fabric of a neighborhood is irreparably damaged. We seek growth that enables everyone to fulfill their economic potential. We want enterprise that supports communities, and communities that have the tools to flourish through investment. This is good for families, good for communities, and good for the economy. Of course, you don’t need me to tell you this. You face the challenges of inequitable growth every day through your work. And that’s why I’d like to talk about the role we can play to support you create a New York City that benefits every part of the community. When I think about our work at the New York Fed, both today and going forward, it boils down to three things: We connect organizations with data and research to amplify the power of their work, we convene stakeholders to share experiences and best practices, and we are a catalyst for initiatives and approaches that help tackle some of the most complex challenges confronting our communities. Connect Some of our greatest assets are our data, analysis, and research. And I don’t say that only because I am an economist by training! Data is at its best when it leads to meaningful action. I just came back from a trip to Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, which are part of the New York Fed’s district. The overwhelming feedback I received from community leaders there was how useful they found our research reports for thinking about how to strengthen their local economy. An example closer to home is the work we do looking at the credit behavior of households at the zip code level. Analysis from the New York Fed is used by Financial Empowerment Centers across New York City to support people on low and middle incomes get out of financial trouble and build a credit profile. It also acts as a barometer for the success of programs, which helps practitioners learn which interventions are most effective. Convene As well as connecting people with research and data, we play an important role creating spaces where different stakeholders convene, discuss the challenges and opportunities facing their communities, and share best practices. This is where our workforce development program comes in, and it’s an area where Federal Reserve Banks from across the country have been collaborating to share knowledge among key stakeholders. The work we’re doing bringing together schools and local employers is also in this vein. We owe it to young people to ensure that their investments in education pay off and that there’s a job at the end of all their hard work and study. Fostering connections between community colleges and employers is one way we can help to make sure the next generation is ready for the opportunities our economy has to offer. We’ve published loads of research on this subject, and we’re putting some of our findings into practice with a series of roundtables, collaborating with colleges, workforce development organizations, and employers across the state. Displacement and equitable growth are areas where we can do more. I’m pleased to share that later this year we’ll be hosting a series of listening sessions on these topics. We plan to bring together community development experts and nonprofits to better understand what’s happening across the district. We want to know what’s worked in the communities that have seen equitable growth, the challenges for those that haven’t, and what we can do about it. We hope the findings from these sessions serve as a tool for those areas on the cusp of gentrification to ensure every part of the community benefits from local investment. Catalyze Finally, I’m going to turn to this idea of how we can be a catalyst for action. Our desire to create change is the reason we created resource guidebooks—publications that collate data, information, and contacts about specific communities. We’ve published guidebooks for parts of New York State and New Jersey, and we have another one in the works for Puerto Rico. They act as a starting point for local stakeholders and investors looking to support equitable growth in underserved areas. Another example where we’ve acted as a catalyst is our Small Business Credit Survey. The findings revealed the challenge small businesses face accessing loans for expansion. The cost of originating smaller loans is often so great that banks won’t take them on. But as a result of the gap being identified, one bank is now partnering with the Community Reinvestment Fund to refer small businesses to the Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) Fund. 2 Small businesses are vital to job creation and play an important role in our communities, so it’s essential we support them to get access to the credit they need to grow. I don’t want to talk about access to credit without saying a few words about the Community Reinvestment Act, or CRA. Our work supervising CRA compliance supports efforts to make sure credit gets to where it’s needed most. A large amount of work has been going on at the Board of Governors to review the modernization of the CRA, and we held two roundtables here in New York City to better understand what’s working and where we need change. What’s important is that efforts to modernize CRA maintain and strengthen the emphasis on ensuring all communities in our nation have access to affordable credit. These principles—connect, convene, and catalyze—will continue to guide us forward as we grow our outreach programs and drive progress. They are the ways we contribute to an economy that works for everyone, above and beyond the high-level levers of interest rates and asset purchases. Conclusion I’ll conclude where I began. As a policymaker I’m constantly weighing up the dual mandate, thinking about how we keep the economy on track, and balance maximum employment with low, stable inflation. But these decisions don’t affect the kinds of jobs that are created or who benefits from growth. The type of growth we have, where it manifests, and who benefits from it play a huge role in shaping both the fabric of society and the lives of New Yorkers. That’s why our community and outreach programs are so important to me. I’d like to close by reemphasizing my gratitude for your commitment to this city. Community development work is complex, challenging, and never done. But it’s essential for building healthy communities that support everyone to reach their full economic potential. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. 1 See Economic Press Briefing on Wage Inequality in the Region , August 10, 2017. 2 See Community Reinvestment Fund, USA and U.S. Bank Partner to Expand Access to Credit for Small Businesses , Business Wire, January 8, 2018. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 10, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the 21st Annual Bronx Bankers Breakfast, Bronx, New York As prepared for delivery It’s an honor to be kicking off Bronx Week, and I’d like to thank Borough President Ruben Diaz, Jr., for the kind invitation. I first visited the Bronx—and first met Ruben—back in November, when I also spent time with students discussing their plans for the future. I was particularly impressed by their talent, energy, and enthusiasm, which is a true reflection of this vibrant and proud community. Today I’m going to share some brief remarks on the national and global economy. I’ll then discuss what that means for monetary policy today and going forward. For me, the most interesting part of this event is hearing and responding to your questions, so please, don’t be shy when I open the floor for discussion. I’ve warned you that monetary policy is on the agenda, so before I go any further, I have to give the usual Fed disclaimer that everything I say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The U.S. Economy With that out of the way, let me start by saying the U.S. economy is in a very good place. Late last year, as the long, dark winter closed in, there were considerable jitters in financial markets, with some observers fretting that the economy may be on the verge of a hard landing. Indeed, there was a lot of talk about the possibility of a recession looming. I am happy to report that the economy has emerged from the New York freeze. The sun is out, the tulips and the cherry blossom are now in full bloom and the picture of the economy is similarly rosy. In the first four months of the year, the U.S. economy added over 800,000 jobs, and the unemployment rate is now 3.6 percent—the lowest level in nearly 50 years. The latest GDP numbers indicate that the economy remained in high gear through the first quarter, with growth clocking in at an impressive 3.2 percent annual rate. Despite this very strong economy, we are not seeing any signs of inflationary pressures. In fact, the latest inflation data have come in lower than expected, with core inflation over the past 12 months dipping to 1.6 percent. Now, most people don’t seem that bothered by inflation that is a touch too low, but at the Federal Reserve we have set a long-run inflation goal of 2 percent. When inflation runs persistently above or below that goal, we take that very seriously. So far, the recent downward movement appears mostly to reflect normal volatility in inflation statistics. For example, if you look at my preferred measure of underlying inflation, called trimmed-mean inflation—which removes the most volatile price movements—it’s been running at 2 percent. This measure of inflation hasn’t shown any signs of trending up or down. That said, I will be watching developments closely for signs of a persistent shift away from our 2 percent long-run goal. As I mentioned, the economy started the year with a lot of momentum. But there are reasons to believe that the surge in growth won’t persist through the remainder of the year. Taking into account of all the indicators we follow, I anticipate a step-down of economic growth, from the 3 percent growth recorded last year to a still-solid pace of about 2-1/4 percent in 2019. This is good news. It’s above the economy’s underlying potential, but not unsustainably so. Healthy economic growth should in turn fuel solid job gains, higher wages for workers, and some further declines in unemployment. The strong economy and labor market should also support inflation returning to 2 percent, the Federal Reserve’s long-run goal. The Global Picture In addition to the positive data we’ve been getting for the U.S., we’ve also seen encouraging signs that risks from global economic and financial markets are abating. Last year there were worries that the global growth slowdown centered in China and Europe would spill over onto our shores. This was one factor contributing to a more downbeat assessment of U.S. growth and the stock market sell-off. Since then, we’ve seen more positive readings on China’s economy, in part due to steps the authorities have taken to reignite growth. And financial markets have definitely rebounded from their winter doldrums. Still, we’re not entirely out of the woods regarding risks from a global growth slowdown. Signs of weakness in Japan, South Korea, and some regions of Europe continue, so I am particularly vigilant about monitoring the international data. Trade tensions and ongoing uncertainty regarding Brexit continue to present downside risks. Monetary Policy What does this mean for monetary policy? At last week’s meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee decided to leave the target range for the federal funds rate unchanged, between 2-1/4 and 2-1/2 percent. We also reiterated our patient approach to assessing the need to adjust interest rates in the future. In a nutshell: The economy remains on a path of healthy growth, with a very strong labor market and without the emergence of inflationary pressures. The current setting of policy positions us well to keep it that way. Although my view that we are in the right place in terms of monetary policy has not changed of late, the reasons for it have evolved in line with the economic and financial developments I sketched out earlier in my remarks. The strength of recent data on economic activity, the rebound of growth in China, and the reversal in the tightening of financial markets all imply that near-term risks to growth have receded somewhat. This has increased my confidence that the economy remains on track for moderate growth going forward. At the same time, recent price data reaffirm that inflationary pressures remain muted. Conclusion Looking ahead, although the baseline forecast I laid out looks very good, the situation can change. We need to remain vigilant in responding to evolving economic conditions and the outlook, with our eye on sustaining the expansion, keeping the labor market strong, and fostering price stability. Thank you. I look forward to your questions. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 14, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the 9th High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System, Zürich, Switzerland As prepared for delivery Introduction John Maynard Keynes is credited with saying, “When the facts change, I change my mind. What do you do, sir?” Over the past decade, policymakers across the globe have been focused on getting their economies and financial systems back in order. But at the same time, a sea change in supply-side realities has taken place. These changes have redefined what is achievable, and challenged conventional wisdom on monetary policy. Shifting demographic trends and a slowdown in productivity are driving slower trend growth and historically low levels of real interest rates across the globe. This new set of facts requires us to rethink what we once knew, reassess how to best foster strong and stable economies, and ready ourselves for the future. With that start, it’s time I remind everyone that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. The Road to Recovery Following the global financial crisis, central banks took bold and decisive actions to right their economies and bring them back to health. Short-term interest rates were brought to near zero—in some cases below zero—and held there for many years ( Figure 1 ). The combination of low short-term rates and asset purchase programs has driven yields on long-term sovereign debt to historically low levels ( Figure 2 ). In large parts of Europe and Japan, short- and long-term yields remain near zero, a full decade after the onset of the financial crisis. Economic developments since this unprecedented monetary stimulus provide valuable insights into the efficacy and limitations of monetary policy. On the positive side of the ledger, advanced economies have seen steady growth and significant declines in unemployment, with rates today near, or in many cases well below, those seen before the crisis ( Figure 3 ). Bold monetary policy actions surely played an important role in averting far greater catastrophes and aided economic recovery. However, this success was achieved only after a disappointingly slow recovery and many years of economic hardship. And, despite the improvement in the real side of economies, inflation rates have persistently been below central banks’ goals ( Figure 4 ). The fact that inflation has been running below target in most advanced countries—the United Kingdom being the most prominent outlier—suggests that this challenge is not due to factors specific to a single country. Instead, there are more systemic factors at play. Investors view these low inflation readings not as an aberration, but rather a new normal. This is evidenced by a broad-based decline in market-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations since the mid-2000s, with the UK again providing the exception ( Figure 5 ). This experience of slow recovery and persistently low inflation is a symptom of a deeper problem afflicting advanced economies—the root cause of which is a combination of low neutral interest rates and the lower bound on interest rates, a topic to which I now turn. What’s Past Is Prologue Underlying these events has been a sea change in the supply side of economies, owing to fundamental shifts in demographics and productivity growth. Two demographic trends are evident: People are generally living longer and population growth is slowing. Overall life expectancy in member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has increased from about 65 years in the 1950s to nearly 80 years today, and is projected to exceed 90 years by the end of this century ( Figure 6 ). 1 Despite this increase in longevity, dwindling birth rates are bringing population growth to a standstill. In OECD countries, population growth averaged over 1 percent back in the 1950s and 1960s, but is now running at half a percent per year, and is expected to gradually fall before dipping into negative figures by 2070 ( Figure 6 ). 2 When it comes to productivity, the changes are no less dramatic. In OECD economies, growth in labor productivity—the amount produced per worker hour—has averaged a little over 1 percent per year since 2005, about half the pace seen over the prior decade ( Figure 7 ) * . A major factor driving the slowdown is a dramatic decline in the growth rate of “total factor productivity,” or TFP, a measure of innovation and technological change. 3 As Bob Gordon has taught us, U.S. productivity growth tends to cycle between periods of high growth in decades following fundamental breakthroughs in science and technology, and relatively fallow periods of steady, incremental improvements. All the evidence indicates that we are in one of the latter periods of “normal” productivity growth of 1 - 1.5 percent per year, and that things will likely stay that way until the next scientific or technological revolution. 4 R-star Descends These global shifts in demographics and productivity have two important implications for the future of our economies and for monetary policy. First, slower population and productivity growth translate directly into slower trend economic growth. Second, these trends have contributed to dramatic declines in the longer-term normal or “neutral” real rate of interest, or r-star. Slower trend growth reduces the demand for investment, while longer life expectancy tends to increase household saving. 5 This combination of lower demand for and higher supply of savings, along with other factors, has pushed down r-star. With open capital markets, these global changes in supply and demand affect r-star globally. The evidence of a sizable decline in r-star across economies is compelling. The weighted average of estimates for five major economic areas—Canada, the euro area, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States—has declined to half a percent ( Figure 8 ). 6 That’s 2 percentage points below the average natural rate that prevailed in the two decades before the financial crisis. A striking aspect of these estimates is that they show no signs of moving back to previously normal levels, even though economies have recovered from the crisis. Given the demographic waves and sustained productivity growth slowdown around the world, I see no reason to expect r-star to revert to higher levels in the foreseeable future. The global decline in r-star will continue to pose significant challenges for monetary policy. Given the limited policy space for interest rate cuts in future downturns, recoveries will be slow and inflation below target. The limitation in the ability of central banks to offset downturns results in an adverse feedback loop, whereby expectations of low future inflation drag down current inflation and further reduce available policy space. 7 New Facts, New Approaches Policymakers around the globe need to prepare for the challenges of navigating the new realities of slow global growth and low r-star. This necessitates new thinking and approaches to monetary, fiscal, and other economic policies. Starting with monetary policy, central banks should revisit and reassess their policy frameworks, strategies, and toolkits, to maximize efficacy in a low r-star world. The Bank of Canada already regularly does this, and the Federal Reserve is currently undergoing a review of its framework and strategy. 8 Absent such changes, central banks will be severely challenged to achieve stable economies and well-anchored inflation expectations. Outside of monetary policy, there are a number of avenues by which fiscal authorities can enhance the resilience of economies to negative shocks. One is to strengthen the “automatic stabilizers” that provide a boost to the economy during a downturn. A second is to align debt management decisions more with monetary policy. For example, during a downturn, the fiscal authority could choose to shorten the duration of debt issuance to reinforce the effects of central bank quantitative easing. Third, regulatory and supervisory policies that support the resilience of the financial system can limit the economic effects of negative shocks. Finally, fiscal and other economic policies can attack directly the sources of slow growth and low r-star. This includes raising public and private investment in human and physical capital, infrastructure, science and technology, and policies aimed at removing barriers to participation in the labor force and the economy more broadly. Conclusion The facts have changed, and so it is time to change our minds also. It is often said that change is hard. But, experience teaches us that it is better to prepare for the future than wait too long. Ultimately, failure to prepare often means preparation for failure. Figures * Correction (May 23, 2019): An earlier published version of these remarks referred to an incorrect time frame for recent growth in labor productivity. Growth in labor productivity has averaged a little over 1 percent per year since 2005. The sentence in question has been corrected. 1 This is not true for all population groups. See Anne Case and Angus Deaton, Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2017, in which they document declining life expectancy for middle-aged, less-educated non-Hispanic whites in the United States since the year 2000. 2 United Nations, World Populations Prospects: Key Findings and Advance Tables , 2015 Revision. 3 Antonin Bergeaud, Gilbert Cette, and Rémy Lecat, Productivity Trends in Advanced Countries between 1890 and 2012 , Review of Income and Wealth, Volume 62, Issue 3, pp. 420-44 (September 2016). 4 Robert J. Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War , Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 2016. 5 Carlos Carvalho, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism , European Economic Review, Volume 88, pp. 208–26, 2016; Etienne Gagnon, Benjamin K. Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido. Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics . Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2016; and Gauti B. Eggertsson, Neil R. Mehrotra, and Jacon A. Robbins, A Model of Secular Stagnation: Theory and Quantitative Evaluation , National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 23093, 2017. 6 Shigeaki Fujiwara, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo Fujiwara, Developments in the Natural Rate of Interest in Japan , Bank of Japan Review, October 2016; Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams, Measure the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants, Journal of International Economics, Volume 108, Supp. 1, pp. S59-S75. (2017). 7 Thomas M. Mertens and John C. Williams, Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates , Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper Series, May 2019. 8 Richard H. Clarida, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools and Communications Practices , speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, April 9, 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 31, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Conference Celebrating the 50th Anniversary of the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery John Maynard Keynes quipped, “Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist.” I wonder whether Keynes would see this as a feature rather than a bug in light of his enduring influence on the profession more than 70 years after his death. The theme of my talk today is that during my quarter century as a researcher and policymaker at the Fed, we have not been overly beholden to defunct economists. Quite the contrary. A quick scan of FOMC memos, briefings, and meeting minutes provides ample evidence that a wide range of economic research—new and old, conventional and outside the box—regularly enters into our debates and influences our decisions. This represents a rich two-way dialogue between researchers and policymakers, with both sides probing for new answers to old questions. I could list a long catalog of examples of the synergistic relationship between research and policymaking at central banks. Instead, I will focus my comments today on one specific topic: the zero lower bound on interest rates, or ZLB for short. This topic has obvious importance to central bank practice past, present, and future. In addition, the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking ( JMCB ), the 50th anniversary of which we are recognizing today, played a very important role in shaping how we think about the ZLB. Today I’d like to highlight how this work has influenced my own thinking, as a researcher and policymaker. Before I proceed any further, I should give the usual disclaimer that everything I say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the FOMC or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The Zero Lower Bound Emerges Although the ZLB was not a new idea by any means, three circumstances—two empirical, one theoretical—came together to reignite interest in this topic by researchers and policymakers in the 1990s. 1 The first was the achievement of low inflation in the United States, which, all else equal, implied lower interest rates. The second was Japan’s lengthening period of deflation and near-zero interest rates. 2 The third was renewed curiosity about the theory of monetary policy as decision rules for interest rates, following the publication of John Taylor’s “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice.” 3 Although that paper did not mention the ZLB, it fundamentally transformed how many economists, including one impressionable Stanford grad student, thought about monetary policy. Indeed, the very logic of the Taylor rule—that interest rates systematically move up and down with changes in economic conditions—forced macroeconomists to come to terms with the presence of the ZLB. Put simply, if you run macroeconomic model simulations with a Taylor rule, you will eventually encounter the ZLB and face the decision of what, if anything, to do about it. This tension is evident in research papers on monetary policy rules from this era, in which authors either sidestepped the ZLB or ignored it altogether. In fact, I’ll plead guilty as charged when it comes to my own research during this period. At the same time, a small cadre of researchers at the Fed and in academia started to take the ZLB head-on and explore its effects in macro models. 4 Research on the ZLB quickly made its way to policymakers. The ZLB was analyzed in a note to the FOMC in the summer of 1998 and discussed at the subsequent FOMC meeting in July. 5 That discussion led to interest at the Fed in having a research conference to provide a broad set of views and perspectives on the ZLB. This convergence in interest between researchers and policymakers resulted in a Federal Reserve conference on “Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment” held in Woodstock, Vermont, in October 1999. The conference proceedings were subsequently published in a special issue of the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking in November 2000. The goal of the conference was to bring together academic and Fed researchers and policymakers to study the implications of low inflation and the ZLB from a variety of perspectives. 6 Looking back, what stands out the most from this conference was the richness and diversity of thought brought to a topic that had lain mostly dormant for many decades. There were papers on the historical experience with very low inflation and interest rates, and on financial market functioning in such an environment. The conference concluded with an international policymaker panel. Three of the conference papers were directly related to conducting monetary policy in relation to the ZLB. Specifically, Ben McCallum’s paper examined the use of the exchange rate as an additional instrument for monetary policy in the context of a model where a “portfolio balance” channel allowed for deviations from uncovered interest parity. 7 In my paper with Dave Reifschneider, we explored the effects of the ZLB on the macro economy and evaluated alternative monetary policy strategies, including versions of average-inflation and price-level targeting. 8 To his credit, Marvin Goodfriend went outside the box and considered three avenues to overcome the ZLB: charging negative interest rates on reserves and cash; conducting large-scale purchases of long-term securities to reduce the external finance premium; and outright monetary transfers to the public. 9 What is striking rereading these papers today is how all authors took for granted that the ZLB was a real problem that needed addressing, and how they approached it in novel and different ways. This despite the fact that the economy was in the midst of a productivity-driven boom, the longest expansion on record, and the prevailing federal funds rate was 5.25 percent. These papers and the ensuing discussions and debates planted seeds that would germinate in research and policymaking. Central banks across the globe ultimately used variations of nearly all of the tools discussed at the conference. Indeed, the topics of interest rate policies, targeting asset prices, asset purchases, and negative interest rates are among the most prominent discussions in monetary economics today. Importantly, this research made its way straight to policymakers within a few years—a quick turnaround by central bank standards! In January 2002, Marvin, Dave, and I reprised our roles from the conference in briefings to the FOMC. 10 And in June 2003, Vince Reinhart briefed the FOMC on alternative monetary policy approaches—including asset purchases and forward guidance—to mitigate the effects of the ZLB. 11 This was followed by a flurry of further research by academics and central bank economists that delved deeper into these topics. 12 Putting Research into Practice This research had important practical lessons for policymakers in the United States and abroad following the global financial crisis. One lesson was that short-term rates should be cut aggressively when deflation or a severe downturn threatens. 13 That is, do not “keep your powder dry.” A second lesson is that short-term rates should be kept “lower for longer” as the economy recovers. 14 A third is that large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) can complement conventional policy actions by making financial conditions more favorable for growth even when short rates are constrained by the ZLB. 15 Armed with these insights, policymakers were prepared and able to act quickly and decisively when the financial crisis hit. A great deal was learned about the ZLB and unconventional policy tools along the way. 16 Indeed, another conference organized by the Boston Fed was held in October 2010 to assess lessons learned, and the proceedings of that conference were published in a special issue of the JMCB in February 2012. For me, the most interesting aspect of that conference was that participants took the ZLB as a defining feature of the landscape: what was once viewed as primarily theoretical had become grounded in practice and experience. The ZLB in 2019 This brings me to today. The Federal Reserve has embarked on a review of its monetary policy strategic framework. As was the case 20 years ago, the question is how to best achieve our monetary policy goals in the context of low inflation and the ZLB. Indeed, the policy questions we are grappling with today are exactly the ones laid out in Woodstock. The one fresh wrinkle is that with estimates of the neutral real interest rate much lower than those that prevailed 20 years ago, the ZLB is likely to be an even more powerful force than was imagined in 1999. 17 In approaching this question today, we should take lessons from the conference held in Woodstock 20 years ago: Bring together leading researchers and policymakers, draw out the best and most creative thinking, and take a long-run view of how we can navigate the environment before us. I am happy to say that this process is already in train, with the Fed’s framework review incorporating perspectives from a wide range of stakeholders, culminating in an academic conference next week in Chicago. Conclusion In closing, I want to add a personal thanks to Ken West for all he has done to promote outstanding research that is both innovative and relevant to the real-world problems that central banks face. And my best wishes for the JMCB , which I hope may continue its illustrious record for the next 50 years. As a researcher and policymaker, the one thing I am certain about is that fostering an open and active dialogue between researchers and policymakers is the best way for us to succeed in our work. Thank you. 1 For references to the early literature, see James Clouse, Dale Henderson, Athanasios Orphanides, David H. Small, and P. A. Tinsley, Monetary Policy When the Nominal Short-Term Interest Rate Is Zero , The B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, De Gruyter, Volume 3, Issue 1, pp. 1-65, September 2003. 2 Paul Krugman, It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, The Brookings Institution, Volume 29, Issue 2, pp. 137-206, 1998. 3 John B. Taylor, Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice , Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Volume 39, pp. 195–214, 1993. 4 For an early example, see Jeffery C. Fuhrer and Brian F. Madigan, Monetary Policy When Interest Rates Are Bounded at Zero , The Review of Economics and Statistics, Volume 79, Issue 4, pp. 573-85, November 1997; for further references see Reifschneider and Williams (2000), and Clouse et al., 2003. 5 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC transcript , June 30-July 1, 1998. 6 Jeffrey C. Fuhrer and Mark S. Sniderman, Conference Summary , Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Volume 32, Number 4, Part 2, pp. 845-69, November 2000. 7 Bennett T. McCallum, Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates , Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 870-904, November 2000. 8 David Reifschneider and John C. Williams, Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era , Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 936-66, November 2000. 9 Marvin Goodfriend, Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy , Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Volume 32, No. 4, Part 2, pp. 1007-35, November 2000. 10 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC transcript and presentation materials , January 29-30, 2002. 11 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC transcript and presentation materials , June 24-25, 2003. 12 See, for example, Lars E. O. Svensson, The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of Escaping from a Liquidity Trap , Monetary and Economic Studies, Volume 19, Issue S1, pp. 277-312, February 2001; Günter Coenen, Athanasios Orphanides, and Volker Wieland; , Price Stability and Monetary Policy Effectiveness When Nominal Interest Rates Are Bounded at Zero , Advances in Macroeconomics, Volume 4, Issue 1, 2004; Ben S. Bernanke and Vincent R. Reinhart. 2004. Conducting Monetary Policy at Very Low Short-Term Interest Rates , American Economic Review, Volume 94, No. 2, pp. 85-90, May 2004; Klaus Adam and Roberto M. Billi, Optimal Monetary Policy under Commitment with a Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates , Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Volume 38, No. 7, pp. 1877-1905, October 2006. 13 Reifschneider and Williams 2000; Board of Governors 2002. 14 Gauti B. Eggertsson and Michael Woodford, The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Volume 34, No. 1, pp. 139-211, 2003; Reifschneider and Williams 2000. 15 Ben S. Bernanke, Vincent R. Reinhart, and Brian P. Sack, Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, The Brookings Institution, Volume 35, No. 2, pp. 1–100, 2004. 16 John C. Williams, Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Unconventional Monetary Policy , Presentation at National Bureau of Economic Research Conference, Cambridge, Mass., October 18, 2013; John C. Williams, Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice , The Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, The Brookings Institution, January 16, 2014. 17 Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux , Business Economics, Volume 51, No. 2, pp. 57-67, April 2016. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

June 04, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Building Cultural Capital in the Financial Services Industry: Emerging Practices, Risks and Opportunities, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning, everyone. I’d like to begin by welcoming you to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and to the fifth conference on culture in financial services that we’ve hosted. Before I launch into my remarks, it’s time I remind everyone that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. When I took on the role as President of the New York Fed last year it so happened that my first day coincided with this conference. In my remarks that day, I emphasized that culture is a long-term project, a constantly evolving one, which is never done. The trouble with long-term projects with no distinct finish line is that they can lack a sense of urgency. The pressure to make real progress is often missing, especially when there are so many other priorities competing for our time. Headlines in the financial news illustrate the lack of progress. In the year since our last conference, stories of money laundering and fraud have been an all-too-frequent feature. Culture is at the heart of many of these issues, and addressing the root causes of misconduct must remain a high priority for the industry and regulators. The Supervisory Approach Given this imperative for change, the question is, what can we do to improve culture in financial services? Culture is like many of the risk management issues challenging businesses. Cyber threats, digital transformation, and climate change are all facts of life that companies face today, and will be facing 10 years from now. But I don’t hear any CEOs saying that securing their servers is a project that can wait until 2029. Nor does anyone think that there are “once and done” fixes for these problems. Indeed, one important lesson from cybersecurity is that this is not purely a technology problem, but one that requires a fundamental shift in mindset and culture over the long term. So the first thing is the industry, the regulatory agencies, and the banks need to take culture seriously, now. A major and essential part of this is that there must be meaningful consequences for firms and people when things go wrong. We have learned that simply levying large fines on companies is not enough to create lasting change. More is needed. Regulators must hold management and boards of directors to account. The legal element of supervision will always remain paramount. And a scandal often spurs change. But if leaders wait until things have gone wrong to think about culture, they’re leaving it too late. What Do We Do to Get to a “Good” Culture? The second thing is we need to understand what contributes to a good culture, and what allows a bad one to flourish. What fosters an organizational culture where people feel empowered to speak up? And what leads to a work environment where employees feel emboldened to commit fraud? That’s one of the things I’m most looking forward to in today’s conference. I can’t wait to hear the insights from such a variety of voices. Looking beyond our own narrow frame of reference to other fields of study, like organizational psychology, will help us understand how to achieve the progress that’s so desperately needed. Behavioral science really gets to the root of how human nature interacts with an organization’s processes. Everything from how we set goals to how we motivate our staff to achieve those goals has an effect on culture, for better or for worse. This is where the rubber hits the road for most organizations, in the financial services industry, and beyond. We’re also going to hear from experts on the role technology plays, including the ethics of data handling, and what artificial intelligence means for relationships with customers. And I’m particularly looking forward to hearing about how diversity, something that’s a strategic priority for me and this Bank, affects cultural norms. This includes diversity not only in terms of race and gender, but diversity of thought and experience, which also affects an organization’s culture and decision-making. As an academic at heart, I have a self-confessed bias toward research. But in this case, there’s real value in understanding the full breadth and depth of these issues. One of the most important reasons is that we can debunk some of the myths that have acted as a security blanket to the industry. Too often, when things go wrong, business leaders blame a single “bad apple” as the cause of the problem. But focusing on an individual bad actor can obscure a culture in which people feel that misconduct in the pursuit of profit is tolerated, or even condoned. The “bad apple” theory acts as an excuse for not doing the hard work of cultural reform. In this process of blaming bad apples, leaders fail to look at what’s happening to the rest of the barrel. What kind of environment has let the rot set in? Understanding the full complexity of what forms a culture is important, but our unique position within the financial system means the Federal Reserve Bank of New York must do more. Our Role in Achieving Progress Three principles—“connect,” “convene,” and “catalyze”—guide my thinking in this area. Connecting people with the latest data and research—and sharing experiences—gives them the insights and tools they need to make change. Conferences like this one are critical—as is our online research hub, which acts as a clearing house for the latest information and initiatives from a wide range of organizations. But, that’s not enough. In this regard, we recently announced the Education and Industry Forum on Financial Services Culture to support these efforts. The Forum, which kicked off in April, brings together business schools and industry representatives. Participants will research and design case studies for business school students. This will mean that students planning to enter the industry will have the tools to handle the ethical challenges that can arise in real-life work situations. “Convene” means bringing together stakeholders to share best practices. And that’s where our Supervisors Roundtable comes in. The Roundtable brings together supervisors from around the world to share their jurisdictions’ approach and what they’ve learned from it. Participants have developed a shared set of tools for supervisors that can be leveraged in cultural assessments. Finally, let me turn to this principle of “catalyze,” and how we can use our position in the heart of the Financial District, to create change. As well as talking the talk—we’re walking the walk. This year, for the first time, this Bank is taking the Banking Standards Board (BSB) Assessment. The BSB Assessment measures the extent to which nine characteristics are demonstrated by an organization, and it includes things like honesty, accountability, and respect. The assessment started in the UK, and the Irish Banking Culture Board now takes a similar approach. I would love to see firms in the United States adopt an industrywide survey that can measure culture and benchmark banks against their peers. Data gathering is the first step of understanding the nature of organizational culture. These three concepts—“connect,” “convene,” and “catalyze”—will continue to be our guiding principles on the issue of culture as we build on our current work and explore new initiatives. Like addressing cyber risks and climate change, the journey toward reforming culture in the banking and financial services industry is a long one. And there’s no single action that a regulator or a bank can take to make it happen. Getting it right is going to require the will and expertise of regulators, financial services firms, academics, and practitioners. And while changing organizational culture is a long-term, complex, and challenging task, I’m optimistic that we can and we will make progress. And the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is committed to being a partner on that journey. Thank you. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

June 06, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Council on Foreign Relations, New York City As prepared for delivery Note: These remarks are based on those delivered at the 9th High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System on May 14, 2019 . Introduction Thank you for that kind introduction and for the opportunity to speak again at the Council on Foreign Relations. I’m going to keep my remarks brief so that there’s plenty of time for Steve to grill me on interest rates, followed by some thoughtful questions from the audience. With the mention of interest rates, it’s time I remind everyone that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. John Maynard Keynes is credited with saying, “When the facts change, I change my mind. What do you do, sir?” The economic era we’ve experienced for the last 11 years has been defined by the Great Recession. There’s the world before, and the world after, the subprime mortgage crisis, the collapse of Lehman Brothers, and the ensuing financial crisis. The Road to Recovery Governments and central banks have spent the intervening years working to get their economies growing, create jobs, and put regulation in place to prevent another such catastrophe. Central banks instituted huge asset purchase programs and brought short-term interest rates to near zero—in some cases below zero—to stimulate economic recovery. The good news is that, for the most part, monetary policy did its job. Advanced economies have seen steady growth and significant declines in unemployment. But the recovery has been slow. And despite low unemployment, inflation rates have been running persistently below central banks’ goals. The Federal Reserve, like many central banks, has a goal of keeping inflation at 2 percent. In the pre-2008 era, inflation was a major concern for the public and central banks alike. And, while I will always be vigilant about inflation that’s too high, inflation that’s too low is now a more pressing problem. The experience of a slow recovery and persistently low inflation is a symptom of deeper problems afflicting advanced economies. Two changes, unrelated to the crisis, have been taking place, causing a shift in economic conditions and quietly shaping the trajectories of advanced economies. These are the “the facts” that have changed. Today I’m going to discuss them in more detail, and explore our options for dealing with the challenges they present. “The Facts” Shifts in demographics and productivity growth have fundamentally altered the economic environment in which we operate. Starting with demographics, two changes have taken place: People are generally living longer, and population growth is slowing. Dwindling birth rates are bringing population growth to a standstill. In OECD countries, population growth averaged over 1 percent back in the 1950s and 1960s, but it is now running at half a percent per year, and is expected to gradually fall before dipping into negative figures by 2070. 1 Slowing birth rates mean fewer consumers and fewer workers. People planning on longer retirements will tend to save more. And while this is undoubtedly good news in many respects, an abundance in the supply of savings also has a big effect on the global economic picture. When it comes to productivity, there has also been a stark step-down in growth. Rapid changes in the kinds of technology we use in our daily lives—robotic vacuum cleaners, self-driving cars, and facial recognition technology in our phones—may make this seem counterintuitive or plain wrong. 2 But the data are clear. In OECD economies, growth in labor productivity—the amount produced per worker hour—has averaged a little over 1 percent per year since 2005, about half the pace seen over the prior decade. Falling R-star So what does all this mean for the future? Two things: First, slower population and productivity growth translate directly into slower trend economic growth. Second, an abundance of savings, and a decline in demand for savings resulting from slower trend growth, together lead to lower interest rates. All of these factors combined have contributed to dramatic declines in the longer-term neutral rate of interest, or r-star. While a central bank like the Fed sets short-term interest rates, r-star is a result of longer-term economic factors. It’s the rate expected to prevail when interest rates are neither giving the economy a boost, nor slowing it down. That’s why it’s called the “neutral” rate. The evidence of a sizable decline in r-star across economies is compelling. The weighted average of estimates for five major economic areas—Canada, the euro area, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States—has declined to half a percent. 3 That’s about 2 percentage points below the average natural rate that prevailed in the two decades before the financial crisis. A striking aspect of these estimates is that they show no signs of moving back to previously normal levels, even though many advanced economies have fully recovered from the crisis. This poses significant challenges for monetary policy. When interest rates are low, central banks don’t have much room to maneuver to deal with a crisis. They will only be able to cut interest rates by a small amount before they hit zero—or as economists call it, the “zero lower bound.” Of course, central banks can, and have, used negative rates to stimulate growth, but they bring with them a separate set of challenges. The result is that future recoveries will be slow, and slow growth is usually characterized by low inflation. Persistently low inflation creates a vicious circle, where expectations of low inflation drag down current inflation. If inflation falls, central banks will have even less room to maneuver when faced with a slowdown. 4 A Fresh Approach All this begs the question: what can we do to prepare ourselves and our economies for the next crisis? There’s no single silver bullet that can solve these challenges. But changes to monetary, fiscal, and other economic policies could all help us become more resilient. Starting with monetary policy, central banks should reassess their strategies, goals, and the tools they use to achieve them. 5 This might include things like reassessing how we achieve our 2 percent goal. Outside of monetary policy, there are a number of ways fiscal policy can support an economy. One is to strengthen the “automatic stabilizers,” which, in a downturn, reduce taxes without legislation to stimulate growth. Another is to use regulation to enhance financial stability. Finally, fiscal and other economic policies can attack the sources of slow growth and low r-star directly. Demographics are not an area where most economists, or policy makers, want to meddle—and I’m certainly not going to stand here and say people should stop living so long! But there are things we can do to improve long-run growth. These include raising public and private investment in human and physical capital, infrastructure, and science and technology, as well as removing barriers to participation in the labor force and the economy more broadly. It’s impossible to predict the future. But we can deal with the present. The economic environment in which we operate today is a direct consequence of the demographic and productivity shifts taking place. Low neutral interest rates are very real, and they’re here to stay. Conclusion The facts have changed, and so it is time to change our minds also. It is often said that change is hard. But, experience teaches us that it is better to prepare for the future than wait too long. Ultimately, failure to prepare often means preparation for failure. 1 United Nations, World Populations Prospects: Key Findings and Advance Tables , 2015 Revision. 2 Antonin Bergeaud, Gilbert Cette, and Rémy Lecat, Productivity Trends in Advanced Countries between 1890 and 2012 , Review of Income and Wealth, Volume 62, Issue 3, pp. 420-44, September 2016. 3 Shigeaki Fujiwara, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo Fujiwara, Developments in the Natural Rate of Interest in Japan , Bank of Japan Review, October 2016; Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants , Journal of International Economics, Volume 108, Supp. 1, pp. S59-S75, May 2017. 4 Thomas M. Mertens and John C. Williams, Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates , Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Working Paper Series, May 2019. 5 Richard H. Clarida, Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices , speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, April 9, 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
