January 18, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the New Jersey Bankers Association's Economic Leadership Forum, Somerset, New Jersey As prepared for delivery Introduction Good morning everyone. I wish every conference I went to had such an incredible opening—Joe’s certainly a hard act to follow. I have a son who’s a very talented artist, but he didn’t get those genes from me. So I’m going to stick to what I know—monetary policy. Today I’ll talk about the economy, how I’m assessing the outlook, and what that means for monetary policy. It’s early in the day, so I’ll try and keep the recitation of facts and figures to a minimum. But I know there are a lot of bankers in the room and that the direction of interest rates plays a vital role in your business, so, rest assured, I won’t skimp on that topic. Given that I’ve promised to talk about interest rates, before I say another word I’ll give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The Dual Mandate I want to start this morning by reminding everyone what the goals of the Federal Reserve are. It’s easy to think of the Fed as just setting interest rates, and of course that’s a major part of what we do. But we do so in order to achieve two goals set by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. In Fed-speak it’s called the dual mandate. There are serious debates taking place amongst economists and policymakers about what maximum employment actually looks like, and they probably deserve another speech of their own. But I promised not to deluge you with numbers, so I’ll focus on a few highlights. The unemployment rate last year averaged just under 4 percent, the lowest such annual figure since 1969. The latest jobs numbers also showed very strong growth, with over 2.6 million jobs added last year. The ongoing strength in the labor market has led to encouraging gains in wages. No matter how you cut it, the labor market is strong, consistent with our maximum employment goal. When we say price stability, our goal is to keep inflation around 2 percent. 1 Those of you who are of my generation will remember the runaway inflation of the 1970s and early 1980s. Obviously that’s something we must avoid repeating. But the challenge of more recent years actually hasn’t been too high inflation. Instead, it’s been inflation that’s persistently too low . Over the past decade, inflation has more often than not come in below our goal. But things are looking better. Underlying measures of inflation have been running just below 2 percent over the past 12 months, and I expect them to be right at 2 percent this year. And I don’t see any worrying signs of inflationary pressures building. So, from the perspective of the Fed’s dual mandate as a whole, things are looking very good. Of course, for this healthy jobs market and low and stable inflation to persist, we need solid growth in the economy. While GDP growth in 2018 looks to have been a robust 3 percent, we’re hearing anxiety both in the markets and the commentary, about what’s to come in 2019. I wish I could now tell you with certainty what will happen to the economy, but anyone who promises they can see into the future is a charlatan. However, what I can do is provide you with some insight into how I assess the health of the economy and what that means for my view on the monetary policy decisions before us. Data Dependent I often say I’m data dependent, and I’ve talked about the major economic indicators, GDP growth, inflation, and employment. But these headline numbers aren’t the only things that inform my view on monetary policy, or the economy more broadly. I’m looking at a whole raft of information about what’s going on and where risks may be lurking. Employment and unemployment numbers provide a useful summary measure of what’s happening in the labor market. But “data” doesn’t stop there. There are many sources of information on labor market conditions that I regularly consult. They range from very granular data that zero in on individuals’ experiences in the labor market, to indices of job openings, how many people are quitting their jobs, and labor market participation, to name a few. But it’s not just these hard numbers that matter. I also find surveys of households and businesses provide valuable and timely perspectives about economic conditions. For example, there’s a questionnaire that asks people whether jobs are “hard to get.” It’s helpful because it gives the perceptions of normal people (and not economists!) about whether there are a lot of open positions. This survey continues to report that it’s relatively easy to find work, which is a very good sign about the strength of the economy. 2 Beyond the economic data and surveys, financial market indicators are a critical source of up-to-the minute information on how investors view the economy. In addition, stock prices and interest rates affect the spending decisions of households and businesses, and the value of the dollar affects demand for exports and imports, so these are important factors shaping the economy’s trajectory. More broadly, I look at a wealth of data on international financial market developments and banking conditions, which feed into my understanding of the global outlook. Finally, and perhaps least well known, I spend a great deal of time speaking with members of the public, at our Board and Advisory Group meetings, community and business leader forums, and events like today’s. I get immense value from their insights, whether it’s the challenges they face in filling positions, their plans for capital investments, or how global developments are influencing their decisions. These discussions provide a huge amount of detail and texture to the economic picture. One of the great strengths of the Federal Reserve System is our extensive networks of contacts in our communities, and we share what we learn from these conversations when we meet at the FOMC. Being "data dependent" means taking this holistic view when thinking about the economy and monetary policy. Not all of these types of data draw headlines the way shifts in the stock market do, but together they provide a much richer and more complete depiction of what’s happening. And they also tell me whether the signals we’re getting from the markets are reflected in the economy as a whole. 2018 Tailwinds In thinking about where the economy is heading, it’s worth reflecting on where we were 12 months ago. At the start of last year the message I was getting—from business leaders, economic data, and the markets—was one of overwhelming positivity. This reflected three tailwinds: strong global growth, fiscal stimulus, and quite accommodative financial conditions. Each of these was giving the economy an extra boost. Indeed, these tailwinds provided even more of a boost over most of 2018 than forecasters had anticipated. Fast forward 12 months and indicators in Europe and Asia point to less optimism about global growth. The initial lift from the fiscal stimulus will likely wane over the course of this year. And financial conditions have become less accommodative over the past several months. In addition, we are now seeing some emerging headwinds to growth from the partial government shutdown in the United States and elevated geopolitical uncertainties abroad. Other “data” confirm that the winds in our sails have calmed. The headlines have been about investors’ concerns around growth, which have contributed to volatility in markets. This is also showing through in surveys of households and businesses, who say that they are somewhat less confident about future economic prospects. For example, the latest Empire State Manufacturing Survey and New York Fed Business Leaders Survey both point to slowing growth in the region. And there is no doubt that my colleagues and I are hearing the same thing directly from our business and financial market contacts, who are more focused on the possibility of a weaker economic outlook this year. 3 But let me be clear: a softer economic outlook doesn’t mean we should prepare for doom and gloom. On the contrary, it’s likely we’ll see GDP growth somewhere between 2 and 2½ percent this year. That’s a step down from 2018, but still consistent with a healthy, growing economy. Supporting a Strong Economy So, how should the Fed respond to an outlook of slowing growth and one that’s less certain than, say, this time last year? In a word: carefully. At the start of 2018, when the economy was growing well above trend and interest rates still were still quite low, gradually raising rates was the obvious and necessary choice. Twelve months later, the tailwinds have lost their gust, interest rates are closer to normal levels, and inflation is tame. The approach we need is one of prudence, patience, and good judgment. The motto of “data dependence” is more relevant than ever. If growth continues to come in well above sustainable levels, somewhat higher interest rates may well be called for at some point. However, if conditions turn out to be less robust, then I will adjust my policy views accordingly. I assure you that I have my eyes wide open and my ear to the ground when it comes to thinking about how the economic outlook will unfold in the year ahead, and as ever I’ll be guided by the data in all its forms. The Balance Sheet Aside from my views on interest rates, the other issue I get asked about is the normalization of the balance sheet. When we first announced our plans in June 2017, I was poised to expound on them in great detail. 4 But when I raised the topic I was sorely disappointed to be met with glazed eyes and general indifference. Sadly, nobody seemed to care! Now that’s changed, and I’m getting more interest on this topic. It’s important to remember why the Fed took unconventional monetary policy actions in the first place. Large-scale asset purchases, forward guidance on the future path of interest rates, and seven years where the federal funds rate hovered close to zero, were all measures necessary for the full recovery from the Great Recession. A decade later and the FOMC has slowly but surely been moving monetary policy “back to normal.” We’ve moved interest rates closer to neutral, scaled back on forward guidance, and are over a year into the process of winding down the balance sheet. 5 Our goals throughout the policy normalization process have been twofold. First and foremost, to support a strong, sustainable expansion of the economy. Second, to do this in a predictable and transparent way that creates as little disruption as possible. 6 So far, this plan has worked very well, with the economic expansion nearing record duration. But it is important to stress that if circumstances change, I will reassess our choices regarding monetary policy, including the path of balance sheet normalization. Data dependence applies to all that we do. And, as always, if the outlook deteriorates in a material way, we stand prepared to deploy all our policy tools as appropriate in support of the economy. Conclusion I’d like to conclude where I began, with the dual mandate. There’s sometimes a view that Fed policymakers are fixated on two data points: inflation and employment. And the reason is that’s how we’re judged by Congress at doing our job. But underpinning these is a strong economy, and ultimately that’s what we’re always using monetary policy to support. So, as the year unfolds I’ve got my eyes wide open, looking at the data and listening to experience—whether it’s coming from household surveys, market indicators, or from leaders in my District. The economy is strong, the outlook is healthy, and my number one priority is using monetary policy to keep it that way. In short, I’m watching, listening, and prepared to adjust my views depending on the data. 1 For more information on how the FOMC specifies its goals, see Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy , Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, amended January 30, 2018. 2 This question on whether jobs are "hard to get" is part of the survey conducted by Nielsen for the Conference Board that is used to calculate the Conference Board’s consumer confidence index. Information about the survey, including the latest press release of the index, is available at https://www.conference-board.org/data/consumerconfidence.cfm . 3 For example, the minutes of the December FOMC meeting stated that “Participants also reported hearing more frequent concerns about the global economic outlook from business contacts” (page 8). Later on the same page, the minutes said “However, contacts in a number of Districts appeared less upbeat than at the time of the November meeting, as concerns about a variety of factors—including trade policy, waning fiscal stimulus, slowing global economic growth, or financial market volatility—were reportedly beginning to weigh on business sentiment.” See Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee: December 18–19, 2018 , Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 9, 2019. 4 See FOMC issues addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans , Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 14, 2017. 5 See John C. Williams, 'Normal' Monetary Policy in Words and Deeds , September 28, 2018. 6 See FOMC Communications related to Policy Normalization , Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, updated June 13, 2018. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

February 22, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York City As prepared for delivery The Phillips curve is the connective tissue between the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. Despite regular declarations of its demise, the Phillips curve has endured. It is useful, both as an empirical basis for forecasting and for monetary policy analysis. The paper by Peter Hooper, Rick Mishkin, and Amir Sufi—HMS for short—provides an in-depth analysis of key aspects of inflation dynamics in the United States and how they may have changed. This study is particularly timely against the backdrop of an emerging consensus that the Phillips curve has become nearly flat. If this is true it would fundamentally alter the employment-inflation trade-offs the Fed confronts. There is a lot to like about this paper: It synthesizes existing research, new analysis, and bridges the study of wages and prices. Too often these are studied in isolation. But most significant, as someone who has discussed papers at the USMPF that reached the century mark in page count, this year’s paper came in at a relatively svelte 65 pages. I hope this represents a durable structural shift, and isn’t merely a reflection of the fact that this year’s paper has three authors rather than the usual four. The paper covers a lot of ground, so I will only summarize a few key takeaways. First, HMS find evidence of asymmetric effects of unemployment on both price and wage inflation, with very low rates of unemployment leading to disproportionately large movements in inflation. That is, the Phillips curve is very much alive in very tight labor markets. Second, they find that the dynamics of price inflation have changed in important ways; specifically, it has become less sensitive to the business cycle and less persistent. Finally, they draw the policy conclusion that Fed policymakers should not be complacent about the possibility of a resurgence of inflation in the context of a tight labor market. In my remarks, I will discuss two issues. First, that price inflation dynamics have changed significantly in recent decades. I will argue that a number of structural factors have contributed to the appearance of a flattening of the Phillips curve and that a modified formulation that accounts for these changes displays little sign of the Phillips curve flattening. Second, I will turn to the issue of anchoring of inflation expectations and the need for the Fed to be vigilant in maintaining the anchor in the right place. Before I continue, I’ll give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Has the Phillips Curve Changed, or Is it a Trick of the Data? Throughout the paper, HMS use a reduced-form Phillips curve regression as a basis for their analysis. For my remarks, I simplify the specification and assume the inflation rate depends on the unemployment gap (and variants thereof), four lags of inflation, and a constant (relative to HMS, I have dropped the import price and inflation expectations terms). Overall, the results for the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index inflation using this simplified specification are quite similar to those reported in HMS. The full-sample (1961-2017) estimated coefficients using the core PCE price inflation rate are reported in the first column of the upper part of Table 1. The second column reports results corresponding to the “spline” specification of HMS, where positive values of the unemployment gap are added to the equation to capture asymmetry in the response of inflation to labor market tightness versus slack. The third and fourth columns of Table 1 report the corresponding estimation results for the subsample of 1961-1987, and the final two columns report the results for the subsample 1988-2017. Like HMS, the latter sample shows far less intrinsic persistence in inflation and a severe flattening of the Phillips curve relative to the full-sample results. Interestingly, I find evidence in the early (pre-1988) sample that suggests that inflation was, if anything, more sensitive to the unemployment gap when unemployment was high, rather than low. Although these estimates are imprecise, this pattern is the opposite of the claim by HMS, which relies on full-sample estimates to draw conclusions. This also runs counter to HMS’s historical narrative about the 1960s and the dangers of a red-hot labor market. I will not dwell on this further, but it is a reminder that findings of nonlinearities in Phillips curves are often not robust. The apparent breakdown in this simple price Phillips curve in the past 30 years reflects a number of structural changes in the U.S. economy. The Federal Reserve’s success in re-anchoring inflation expectations at a low level can explain the decline in inflation persistence seen in the data. 1 However, the role of well-anchored expectations in flattening the Phillips curve is not obvious, and as HMS note, this flattening is not as clear in the wage inflation equations. This suggests other forces are at work. Several usual suspects come to mind, including the effects of supply shocks, increased globalization of goods markets and supply chains, and changes in the market structure for consumer goods. For example, Alberto Cavallo has shown how Amazon and other online retailers have fundamentally changed price dynamics for consumer goods, with prices changing more rapidly and more affected by exchange rate changes. 2 In today’s globalized and rapidly changing economy, standard reduced-form Phillips curve models that focus primarily on the demand-driven movements in inflation are less relevant. Other factors besides the state of the business cycle dominate price movements for a wide variety of goods. CSI to the Rescue In theory, one could try to modify the model to account of these factors, but for the present purpose, a more straightforward approach is to focus on prices for categories of consumer spending that are less susceptible to supply shocks, international trade, and changing market structure. This approach follows in the tradition of “core” measures of inflation that remove the categories that are particularly prone to supply shocks. 3 A number of related measures have been developed along these lines, including work at both the New York and San Francisco Feds. 4 In my remarks I will use the “Cyclically Sensitive Inflation” measure, or CSI, developed by Jim Stock and Mark Watson. 5 By design, CSI includes the categories that are cyclically sensitive and less prone to measurement error or other non-cyclical drivers. In practice, this measure more heavily weights services with well-measured market-based prices and significantly down-weights goods. Figure 1 compares the four-quarter moving averages of CSI to that of core PCE price inflation, with the shaded regions indicating NBER-dated recessions. Regression results using CSI display neither a flattening of the short-run Phillips curve nor signs of nonlinearities. The lower part of Table 1 reports the estimation results using CSI inflation. Starting with the linear specification, the full-sample and early-sample results are very similar to those using core PCE price inflation. This is not altogether surprising since the two series track each other closely during the first half of the sample. The big difference is in the later sub-sample, where the coefficient on the unemployment gap is not that much smaller than in the early sample, and larger than in the full-sample estimation. Moreover, there is little evidence of nonlinearity in the Phillips curve relationship in either the full or later samples. Evidently, both the flattening of the Phillips curve and evidence of nonlinearities depend on including goods and other categories that are primarily influenced by non-cyclical factors. These results suggests that the Phillips curve is alive and kicking when inflation is measured using categories that are cyclically sensitive, rather than buffeted by supply and other shocks. Based on this analysis, the trade-offs between employment and inflation the Fed faces haven’t fundamentally changed. That does not imply there have not been meaningful changes in inflation dynamics—inflation persistence has fallen significantly for the CSI as well. This means that transitory shocks no longer get embedded in inflation expectations, but instead have relatively short-lived effects on inflation. This is a very favorable development for the economy and monetary policy, which can safely “look through” transitory shocks. Anchoring Inflation Expectations at the Target This brings me to my second point of the importance of anchoring inflation expectations at the target level. As HMS correctly stress, policymakers cannot take for granted that inflation expectations will remain well anchored. They highlight the risk that very tight labor markets could eventually lead to a resurgence of inflation and unmoor expectations, as in the 1960s. I concur that we must remain vigilant regarding a sustained takeoff in inflation. We must be equally vigilant that inflation expectations do not get anchored at too low a level. So far during this expansion, core and overall PCE inflation has averaged about 1.5 percent, well below the Fed’s 2 percent target. Taking a longer perspective, over the past 25 years, core and overall inflation have both averaged 1.8 percent. This persistent undershoot of the Fed’s target risks undermining the 2 percent inflation anchor. In this regard, research by Ulrike Malmendier and Stefan Nagel is sobering. 6 They find that inflation expectations are heavily influenced by the inflation experience in one’s own lifetime, which implies that decades of too low inflation can become embedded in expectations. Indeed, we have seen some worrying signs of a deterioration of measures of longer-run inflation expectations in recent years, as seen in Table 2. Importantly, this sustained undershoot of the inflation target is likely to be a recurring dilemma for the Fed and central banks in Japan and Europe that have had similar experiences over the past decade. This problem of inflation running chronically below the target stems in part from the limited ability of central banks to offset economic downturns due to the lower bound on interest rates in a low-neutral-rate environment. 7 Implications for the Monetary Policy Framework The risk of the inflation expectations anchor slipping toward shore calls for a reassessment of the dominant inflation targeting framework. 8 A number of alternative frameworks and strategies have been proposed that hold the promise of better achieving the inflation goal and holding fast the inflation anchor. 9 In this regard, I am very pleased that the Federal Reserve is undertaking a review of our policy framework this year, a topic that Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Clarida will discuss in his lunch remarks today. In summary, the Phillips curve is alive and well. I wholeheartedly agree with the authors that we must not be complacent about inflation expectations becoming unmoored, whether at too high or too low a level. Tables and Figures 1 See John C. Williams, Inflation Persistence in an Era of Well-Anchored Inflation Expectations , Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2006-27, October 13, 2006. 2 See More Amazon Effects: Online Competition and Pricing Behaviors , Jackson Hole Economic Symposium Conference Proceedings; Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2018. 3 See Alan S. Blinder, Economic Policy and the Great Stagflation , Academic Press, 1979 4 See Tim Mahedy and Adam Shapiro, What’s Down with Inflation? FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-35, November 27, 2017, and Andrea Tambalotti, Stefano Eusepi, and Bart Hobijn, CONDI: A Cost-of-Nominal-Distortions Index , American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics , 3(3): 53-91, July 2011. 5 See James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson, Slack and Cyclically Sensitive Inflation , Working Paper. 6 See Ulrike Malmendier and Stefan Nagel, Learning from Inflation Experiences , The Quarterly Journal of Economics , Volume 131, Issue 1, 1 February 2016, Pages 53–87. 7 See John C. Williams, Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World , Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2016-23, August 15, 2016. 8 See John C. Williams, Preparing for the Next Storm: Reassessing Frameworks and Strategies in a Low R-star World , Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter 2017-13, May 8, 2017. 9 See Thomas Mertens and John C. Williams, Monetary Policy Frameworks and the Effective Lower Bound on Interest Rates , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 877, Revised January 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

The Economic Outlook: The ‘New Normal’ Is Now - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech The Economic Outlook: The ‘New Normal’ Is Now March 06, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at The Economic Club of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Introduction Thank you for the kind introduction. It’s a great pleasure to be here today and a huge honor to be joining the board of the Economic Club of New York. This institution has been an essential forum for debate for many decades, and I sincerely hope today will be no exception. I’m going to start with a spoiler: At a certain point during this speech I will talk about interest rates. I imagine that if I don’t, you’ll feel you’ve been shortchanged. So before I get going, I’ll give the usual Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. R-star Now that’s out of the way, I want to take you back a long time ago, to a galaxy far, far away. It’s 2001: Destiny’s Child is topping the charts, you were marveling over your Motorola flip phone, and I was a young economist at the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. At the time, I was burning the midnight oil, along with a fellow economist, Thomas Laubach, trying to understand what the burst of productivity growth generated by the tech boom meant for interest rates, both in the short term and in the long run. This led us to develop a model for measuring r-star. I know what’s going through your mind: “What is this r-star that you speak of?” R-star is how economists describe the neutral or natural rate of interest. It’s the rate that we expect to prevail in the long run when interest rates are neither providing a boost to the economy nor trying to cool things down. It’s neither accommodative, nor contractionary. In other words, it’s the “normal” interest rate we expect in “normal” economic times. G-star One of the major factors determining r-star is… you guessed it, g-star! G-star is what economists mean when they describe trend growth, sustainable growth, or potential growth of the economy. The two main drivers of g-star are labor force growth and productivity growth. We started trying to understand where r-star was when productivity growth was very high. During the boom GDP growth averaged over 4 percent per year. Our estimate of r-star for that time was above 3 percent, a full percentage point higher than before the tech boom started. Given that this research was originally focused on the reasons r-star had risen, it’s ironic that I and others have ultimately dedicated much more of our careers to understanding why it’s dropped. In recent years, r-star has been averaging well below 1 percent. And it’s actually now lower than at any time before the Great Recession. One of the reasons for this dramatic decline in r-star lies in changes to the major factors determining potential growth: labor force growth and productivity growth. Baby boomers are retiring and fertility rates have come down. Both of these demographic shifts have significantly slowed labor force growth relative to past decades. Productivity growth has also fallen considerably from the boom years of the late 1990s and early 2000s. All the rapid changes in technology that we see around us every day may make this seem counterintuitive. But for the moment, being able to order a Nintendo Switch and have it arrive the same day is, shockingly , not increasing productivity in a meaningful way. I could go on for quite some time on this topic, but will leave it to another day! I should note that these demographic and productivity trends are not unique to the United States. In fact, we’ve seen similar slowdowns in growth and sharp declines in r-star in other advanced economies. 1 So why did I take you back to simple days of the millennium bug, when you were playing Snake on your phone and ordering takeout from a paper menu? The Economic Outlook Understanding the fundamentals driving g-star and r-star provides a helpful backdrop for what’s going on in the economy today, and an indication of what we should expect in the future. What is the current economic outlook? The potential growth rate, or g-star, currently appears to be about 2 percent. That may sound low to many of you, but remember that labor force and productivity trends have slowed considerably relative to the past, and that’s unlikely to change anytime soon. By comparison, actual GDP growth for 2018 came in at just above 3 percent. A number of positive tailwinds gave the economy this extra boost. Strong global growth, fiscal stimulus, and accommodative financial conditions all helped drive strong headline GDP growth and a tight labor market. These tailwinds have calmed, and in fact reversed in some cases, and I expect growth to slow considerably relative to last year, to around 2 percent. Three developments contribute to this view: a downturn in global growth, heightened geopolitical uncertainty, and the effects of tighter financial conditions. Starting with global growth, the outlook in both Europe and China has become less bright, with the downgrade to the outlook in Europe notable. This means less demand for our exports. In addition, there’s geopolitical risk on the horizon that’s creating angst. I know we’re all on tenterhooks waiting to see what will happen at the end of this month to our good friends across the pond. And concerns around trade negotiations continue to loom large. These geopolitical risks leave an imprint on the economy as businesses put off hiring and investment decisions until the air has cleared. Moving away from the global context, back to the United States, the tightening of financial conditions that occurred late last year will likely restrain consumer and business spending this year. In fact, we have already seen a sustained slowing in housing construction, in part reflecting less favorable financing costs. Now, I know this talk of slowing growth is causing uncertainty, some hand-wringing, and even fear of recession. But slower growth shouldn’t necessarily come as a surprise. For quite some time, the economic fundamentals have pointed to GDP growth much lower than what we saw in the 1990s, for example. In fact, my 2 percent growth forecast is right in line with g-star. That means slower growth isn’t necessarily cause for alarm. Instead, it’s the “new normal” we should expect. And, it’s important to remember that this is happening at a time when the labor market is very strong. From the perspective of monetary policy, the overall picture of the economy is about as good as it gets: very low unemployment, sustainable growth, and inflation just about at our 2 percent goal. Given this favorable situation, when you look at monetary policy, things are looking pretty normal as well. My current estimate for r-star is 0.5 percent, so when you adjust for inflation that’s near 2 percent, the current federal funds rate of 2.4 percent puts us right at neutral. What Does the Future Hold? So what does the future hold? With a strong labor market, moderate growth, and no sign of any significant inflationary pressures, the baseline outlook is quite favorable, as I’ve said. Of course, there are a number of different scenarios that could play out over the year ahead. Geopolitical uncertainty and other factors holding back growth may recede, and the U.S. economy could resume the robust trajectory of last year. Or GDP growth could continue closer to trend, which is my own forecast. Finally, there’s always a chance that downside risks could knock GDP growth off course. What will the response of the Fed be? My short answer: It depends! I promised talk of interest rates, and here it is. I’ve said it before, and no doubt, I’ll say it as long as I work for a central bank. But in the current conditions the phrase takes on even more importance. Our response will always be “data dependent.” When growth is well above trend, raising interest rates to keep the economy on a sustainable path is the right decision. Equally, when faced with a crisis like the Great Recession, it’s incumbent upon policy makers to use every tool at their disposal to get the economy back on course. The base case outlook is looking good, but various uncertainties continue to loom large. Therefore, we can afford to be flexible and wait for the data to guide our approach. In that context, the FOMC decided to keep interest rates where they were at the most recent meeting, and noted the importance of patience in determining future policy actions. To use a nautical metaphor, guiding the U.S. economy is like steering a large ship. Monetary policy decisions can leave a wake several miles long, with implications that reach far into the future. We’ll consider the full range of data, the headline statistics, the market indicators, and we’ll listen to our business contacts on the ground, as we aim to keep the economy on its current course of a strong labor market, sustainable growth, and 2 percent inflation. Conclusion R-star provides a helpful framework, not just for thinking about monetary policy, but also for understanding the current progress of GDP growth and its likely trajectory over the coming years. Moderate growth, both in the U.S. and the global economy, is far less alarming when you know what the underlying factors might be. And all the signs have been pointing to a slower growth trend. You may have had Destiny’s Child—Beyoncé—turned up too loud to spot the signs, but they have certainly been there. Slow trend growth and low r-star in the current global context presents certain challenges to monetary policy, another topic for a future day. In everything that we do, we need to consider all the information, and exercise data dependence and flexibility, as we navigate the course ahead. 1 See John C. Williams, Interest Rates and the ‘New Normal’ , Remarks to the Community Banking in the 21st Century Research and Policy Conference, St. Louis, Missouri (October 5, 2017), and Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants , Journal of International Economics, Volume 108, Supplement 1, pp. S59–S75 (May 2017). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
