Perspectives on the U.S. Economic Outlook By Eric S. Rosengren December 17, 2019 New York, NY Forecasters Club of New York Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Takeaway: The economy is currently in a good place – having performed pretty much as professional forecasters expected, despite recent concerns about the risks presented by slower global growth and uncertainty about trade policy. Excerpt: “The U.S. economy is quite solid, and barring an unexpected adverse shock, my view is that the economy is currently well positioned for the coming year. …Labor markets are strong, inflation is moving to target, and growth is likely to be somewhat above potential.” Takeaway: An economic downturn is unlikely in 2020, given generally positive economic conditions and the continuation of accommodative monetary and fiscal policies, and assuming no significant negative shock. Excerpt: “With both fiscal and monetary policy being accommodative, financial conditions supportive, and recent data positive, I agree with the surveyed professional forecasters that the likelihood of a recession in 2020 is relatively low. However, a low probability does not mean it cannot happen, and certainly a negative shock from abroad or a significant flare up in trade disputes could change the outlook significantly.” Takeaway: Unemployment will likely fluctuate narrowly around its current rate of 3.5 percent in 2020, and inflation will be close to the Fed’s 2 percent target. Excerpt: “In early 2019, core PCE inflation was lower than expected. However, most forecasters continue to believe that shortfall reflected temporary factors – and thus they expect the core PCE … to remain close to the Fed’s 2 percent target in 2020. My own forecast is quite similar. I expect that given the strong labor market, core PCE inflation should move in a narrow range around the 2 percent target.” Takeaway: The economy has grown at close to a 2 percent annual rate over the past two quarters, as strength in households has offset weaknesses in business investment. That pattern is likely to continue, as consumer spending is bolstered by job creation and increases in personal income and wealth. Excerpt: “Trends in the saving rate and household wealth (net worth) … also highlight why the consumer is well positioned to spend. … Plentiful jobs and growth in income have provided improvements in confidence and bode well for holiday sales and beyond.” Takeaway: Barring a material change in the outlook, additional policy easing is likely unnecessary in the near term. Excerpt: “Given that monetary policy works with lags, and Federal Reserve policymakers have already eased monetary policy three times in 2019, my view is that it is appropriate to take a patient approach to considering any policy changes, unless there is a material change to the outlook.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords Global Economy , inflation , Inverted Yield Curve , U.S. economic outlook , monetary policy easing , risks to the outlook , consumer spending , PCE inflation

The Economic Outlook – and Two Risks to the Forecast that are Worth Watching By Eric S. Rosengren January 13, 2020 Hartford, CT Economic Summit & Outlook Connecticut Business & Industry Association Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share 4 takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s Jan. 13 remarks to the Connecticut Business & Industry Association in Hartford, Conn. Takeaway: As 2020 begins, Fed policymakers anticipate an “almost ideal” economic outcome: inflation returning to target, labor markets remaining strong, and economic growth close to potential. But possible risks to this benign forecast are also worth watching. Excerpt: “As a practical matter, central bankers do not have much historical experience with extended periods where interest rates are running below the estimated equilibrium level while unemployment rates are, simultaneously, historically low. So we want to be alert to any potential risks emerging. …If these risks remain contained, my view is we will likely have another year of good economic outcomes.” Takeaway: One potential risk is that inflationary pressures could build at a faster pace than expected, should labor markets tighten to unsustainable levels. The extent to which we see this inflation risk materialize may depend on how willing or able firms are to absorb rising labor costs, as wages respond to low unemployment. Excerpt: “More rapid than expected inflation remains a risk of running the economy with accommodative monetary policy and tight labor markets.” Takeaway: Another potential risk is that low interest rates could lead consumers and firms to seek higher returns, or “reach for yield,” by taking on riskier investments. This could increase asset prices to unsustainable levels, which ultimately could threaten financial stability. Given its history, the real estate sector is worth watching closely in this regard. Excerpt: “It is important to see and understand the risk that sustained low interest rates could place more pressure on real estate asset prices through reach-for-yield behavior – a scenario that preceded the 1990 and 2007 recessions. In certain scenarios, financial stability risks could potentially emerge as a problem for the otherwise benign forecast.” Takeaway: Monetary policy is currently accommodative, while forecasts for GDP growth, unemployment, and inflation remain favorable, and stable. So it’s not surprising that the median forecast for interest rates is “no change” for this year and gradual increases over the next two years. Excerpt: “Certainly, the lack of inflationary pressure to date has provided one justification for accommodative monetary policy despite the duration of the recovery and a current historically low unemployment rate. However, maintaining interest rates below the consensus longer-run ‘equilibrium’ interest rate is predicated on both inflationary pressures not building up and financial stability concerns being contained.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords inflation , Economic outlook , reach for yield , financial stability , Risks , Forecast , Inflationary Pressures , Accommodative Monetary Policy

Observations on Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound By Eric S. Rosengren March 6, 2020 New York, NY Current Monetary Policy: The Influence of Marvin Goodfriend Shadow Open Market Committee and Manhattan Institute Full-text Speech (pdf) Speech Audio (mp3) more share share share share Six takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s March 6 remarks at the conference “Current Monetary Policy: The Influence of Marvin Goodfriend” Takeaway: Economist Marvin Goodfriend anticipated many policy challenges well before central banks were forced to confront them. Excerpt: “Marvin showed a great deal of intellectual dexterity at a time when the United States was far from seeing short-term rates approach the zero bound. In many respects, [he] provided a prescient preview of many of the actions ultimately taken by global central banks during the Financial Crisis.” Takeaway: Goodfriend suggested that negative interest rates might be an effective policy tool in some situations – but Rosengren remains skeptical, saying the experience in Europe and Japan shows the adverse side effects are likely quite large. Excerpt: “In my view, negative interest rates poorly position an economy to recover from a downturn. … I view the recent experience of countries with negative rates as evidence that such a policy would not be particularly successful in stimulating economic activity. … [Also,] we need banks to be healthy enough to provide credit and liquidity in challenging economic times.” Takeaway: Goodfriend foresaw that the equilibrium real rate of interest might fall to a very low level. This has significantly diminished the “space” for monetary policy to operate before hitting the effective lower bound. Excerpt: “If the economic reaction to the coronavirus does result in the funds rate falling to its effective lower bound, [the observed] heightened sensitivity of the 10-year U.S. Treasury rate to adverse news raises the possibility that the 10-year U.S. Treasury rate could follow close behind. … As a result, there would be little room for the Federal Reserve to lower rates through large purchases of long-term Treasury securities – like it did to make conditions more accommodative in and after the Great Recession – if a recession occurred in this rate environment. Such a situation would raise challenges policymakers did not face even during the Great Recession.” Takeaway: In a situation where both short-term interest rates and 10-year Treasury rates approach the zero lower bound, allowing the Federal Reserve to purchase a broader range of assets could be important. Excerpt: “In such a case, as Marvin highlighted in his 1999 article, we should allow the central bank to purchase a broader range of securities or assets. Such a policy, however, would require a change in the Federal Reserve Act. … Alternatively, the Federal Reserve could consider a facility that could buy a broader set of assets, provided the Treasury agreed to provide indemnification.” Takeaway: In a low-rate environment, an alternative to using monetary policy to stimulate the economy during a downturn is depending on fiscal policy to shoulder a greater share of the burden. Excerpt: “Somewhat surprisingly, there seems to be little movement toward making [fiscal] automatic stabilizers more prominent, or preparing to invest significantly more in the sorts of public investment projects that yield positive returns." Takeaway: Policymakers dealing with challenges should seek to emulate the boldness and imagination Marvin Goodfriend showed two decades ago. Excerpt: “In 1999, Marvin Goodfriend was able to consider what had not occurred in the recent past, and contemplate bold alternatives. Over the next few years, that type of vision and boldness will be needed by all policymakers if we have to consider how policy should react to any large, adverse shock to the economy.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Speech Audio (mp3) Keywords monetary policy , zero lower bound , Low Interest Rate Environment , fiscal policy , Federal Funds Rate , Negative Interest Rates

Addressing the Economic Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic A perspective from Eric Rosengren, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston View full size Peter Davis/Federal Reserve Bank of Boston By Eric S. Rosengren April 1, 2020 Webinar Addressing the Economic Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce Full-text Speech (pdf) share share share share Just 20 days ago, Dr. Paul Biddinger and I urged employers to prepare for the gathering storm by taking tangible steps, like implementing work-from-home and restricting business travel, to prevent more devastating health and economic outcomes from the pandemic. Today, we’re witnessing the pandemic’s stark effects on public health. Meanwhile, the necessary response – social distancing – has stilled our strong economy, disrupting countless lives and livelihoods. It’s also been distorting the credit and liquidity flows that underpin our economy, threatening the greater pain of a full-blown financial crisis. But everybody can help mitigate the pandemic’s impact. Public health officials and heroic front-line medical personnel play the most important part. Governments, civic organizations, scientific and educational institutions, and citizens also have key roles to play. And fiscal policy is crucial. At the central bank we’re focused on addressing, and blunting, the economic effects of the pandemic. The Federal Reserve has acted quickly to address spillovers from the economic disruption. I’d like to explain some of what the Fed did, and suggest other steps that a range of parties could pursue. The Federal Reserve is working to limit the financial and economic distress – to take actions that help avoid even higher levels of unemployment or a slower recovery. To that end, the Fed’s interest-rate-setting committee cut the short-term rates the Fed controls to close to zero to help ease market interest rates in an economy suddenly facing challenges (see Fig. 1). View full size Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Further, both the Treasury and mortgage-securities markets had too many people and institutions seeking to sell assets to raise cash (rushing to more liquid assets as a crisis response), resulting in an inability to trade, and unusual volatility. To remedy distortions in these important markets, the Fed has been buying Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities to stabilize markets and make it easier for financial institutions to pass through lower interest rates to consumers and businesses. In addition, many firms and individuals keep liquid assets in money market funds, and there was a danger of seeing funds gated or closed as investors rushed to pull cash from them (see Fig. 2). Similarly, the municipal money market funds that buy short-term, highly-rated municipal securities and help meet the short-term funding needs of municipalities were seeing few trades. In sum, given the rush for cash in financial markets, it was proving a challenge for the funds to sell high-quality debt of even the strongest companies and states. The Boston Fed opened a facility that lends money to banks, so they can buy these highly-rated assets from money market funds. This ensures money market funds can meet the demands of individuals and firms seeking to redeem cash, restores a market for short-term high-quality assets, and addresses the liquidity problem impacting individuals, companies, and local governments. View full size Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Also, the New York Reserve Bank is running a facility to buy short-term high-quality assets of firms – helping trading to resume and supporting firms’ ability to issue short-term debt. It is important for economic functioning that firms have access to funding. The New York Fed is establishing facilities for firms to issue debt and for secondary trading of debt. (see Figs. 3 & 4) View full size Federal Reserve Bank of Boston View full size Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Meanwhile, problems threatened to ripple through banking markets as business closures and layoffs spiked. To meet the increased demand for liquidity, the Federal Reserve is providing collateralized loans to banks so their customers – firms and individuals – have access to liquid funds. Regulatory changes will allow banks to restructure loans to help individuals and businesses with a temporary loss of revenue avoid bankruptcy and layoffs by, for instance, deferring payment of principal and interest for up to six months. Fiscal policymakers have acted strongly with the recently passed CARES Act. We must continue to adapt as the crisis proceeds, with constant attention to the plight of workers who have been or will be laid off. Unfortunately, we expect the unemployment rate to rise dramatically. Social distancing is needed to avoid overwhelmed medical facilities and unnecessary deaths, but it also poses great challenges for low-income workers, who are more likely to lose jobs and have few other resources. Meanwhile, furloughs have been occurring, particularly in the hotel, retail, travel and restaurant industries. We’ve already seen an unprecedented rise in initial claims for unemployment insurance. Traditional economic models are challenged by this unique situation. To me, the most important factors are how well we avoid financial spillovers, and how effective the fiscal stimulus is, as well as the progression of COVID-19 infections. These will all impact the speed of the economic recovery. That is not a fatalistic assessment. On the contrary, it should galvanize us. In that spirit, I offer three concluding observations: This is a time for public-spiritedness Our mantra at the Boston Fed is “public service that makes a difference.” Central banks can and must do a lot in crises, to alleviate stresses in the financial system we all count on, which can hurt all citizens. But everyone – in small or big ways – can do their part to make a difference. The public interest is more important than ever; social distancing is one example. What we all do now in the public interest can help recovery, once the worst is over. This is no time to leave anyone behind We are all being challenged right now, but our legacy can be that we rose to the challenge and kept a focus on the vulnerable, those with low and moderate income, and those whose livelihoods operate on the thinnest of margins. The long-term prosperity of our region and the people who are our neighbors (and our customers) will shape the recovery. Among other things, we need to support the workers who keep our organizations and those we rely on (like grocery stores, shipping networks, and of course health care) up and running. And we must tide over workers and businesses that see demand dry up for a while. This is a time for our best, together The brainpower of our region and nation is needed more than ever, and it is important to continue being nimble, creative, proactive, and, perhaps most importantly, collaborative – because the tactics and approaches that will help are likely to be multifaceted and involve the public, private, and nonprofit sectors. This is a time of challenge, but it’s also a time to bring out our very best. This perspective summarizes remarks delivered at a forum hosted by the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, held on April 1, 2020. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Keywords credit , liquidity , employment , interest rates , money market funds , COVID-19

The Main Street Lending Program and Other Federal Reserve Actions By Eric S. Rosengren May 19, 2020 Webinar New England Council Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Key Takeaways from Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren’s May 19 Remarks Takeaway: The absolutely necessary response to the COVID-19 pandemic – social distancing, aimed at protecting lives – comes at a high economic cost. The recent employment report underscores the unprecedented speed and ferocity with which jobs have been affected by this public health crisis. Excerpt: “I expect that the unemployment rate will likely peak at close to 20 percent. Unfortunately, even by the end of the year, I expect the unemployment rate to remain at double-digit levels. This outlook is both sobering and a call to action. Now is the time for both monetary and fiscal policy to act boldly to minimize the economic pain from the pandemic.” Takeaway: It is important that our progress to date not be undone, and simply allowing business to reopen is not a panacea. Our economic challenges are rooted in public health concerns. If consumers are not comfortable visiting restaurants and shops, relaxing restrictions may do little to bring back business and jobs. Excerpt: “Public health solutions are paramount – without them, it will be virtually impossible to return to full employment. It is vital that the design and timing of reductions in business restrictions not result in worse health outcomes and higher unemployment over a longer period of time.” Takeaway: The Fed has taken strong actions to mitigate the economic consequences of the pandemic. We want to limit the potential for medium- and longer-term “scarring” from the crisis. This means, among other things, working to minimize the length of unemployment spells and ensuring solvent firms have necessary liquidity. Excerpt: “Preventing bouts of financial instability from having significant spillovers to the flow of credit to consumers and businesses is a vital crisis role for central banks, and the Fed has aggressively played that role during this very challenging period.” Takeaway: It is important to note that the powers granted to the Federal Reserve for emergency actions involve “lending, not spending.” All of the Fed’s programs involve loans, to be repaid – they are not grants by the Fed. Excerpt: “Lending can play a crucial role in a crisis and in bridging to more normal conditions.” Takeaway: The Main Street Lending Program , expected to open in the coming weeks at the Boston Fed, is one of the Federal Reserve’s more innovative and important programs. It is designed to help credit flow to small- and medium-sized businesses that were in good financial condition prior to the crisis, but now need loans that can help them until they have recovered from, or adapted to, the impact of the pandemic. Excerpt: “This is an important program, and we’ve worked very hard to get it right. We listened carefully to initial feedback and expanded the program in a number of ways to serve a wider range of borrowers. It will not be able to assist everyone, but we expect that it will provide an important bridge for many businesses that employ much of the American workforce.” Takeaway: How we respond to this public health crisis will greatly influence whether many of these temporary job losses become permanent. As Fed policymakers, we will continue to vigilantly pursue ways to help the economy return to full employment. Excerpt: “The economic shock is an unprecedented challenge for economic policymakers including the Federal Reserve, where we will do whatever we can to support a return to full employment and stable prices – our mandate from Congress – and our commitment to financial stability, which is important to the well-being of all Americans.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Keywords COVID-19 , employment , Money Market Mutual Funds , fiscal policy , monetary policy , Pandemic , Economic Shock , Public Health , Main Street Lending Program
