Monetary Policy Frameworks Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Panel Remarks for the National Association for Business Economics and American Economic Association Session, “Coordinating Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policies for Macroeconomic Stability” Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting Philadelphia, PA January 5, 2018 1 Introduction I thank George Kahn for inviting me to speak in this session. I will use my time to discuss the framework the FOMC uses for setting monetary policy and some alternative frameworks. Let me emphasize that this is a longer-run issue and not one that is of immediate concern. It lies in the realm of what economists and policymakers should have on their agendas for study given the economic developments we’ve seen over the past decade and what is expected over the coming decade. The views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. T he FOMC currently uses a flexible inflation-targeting framework to set monetary policy. It is briefly described in the FOMC’s statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy.1 The U.S. adopted an explicit numerical inflation goal in January 2012. This is a symmetric goal of 2 percent, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. In establishing this numerical goal, the U.S. joined many other countries, including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Sweden, and the U.K., as well as the European Central Bank, that conduct monetary policy with a goal of achieving an explicit inflation target. An explicit target provides transparency to the public and helps anchor expectations about inflation. Congress has given the Fed a dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment. The flexible inflation-targeting framework recognizes that, over the longer run, monetary policy can influence only inflation and not the underlying real structural aspects of the economy such as the natural rate of unemployment or maximum employment, but that monetary policy can be used to help offset shorter-run fluctuations in employment from maximum employment. T he financial crisis and Great Recession imposed large economic costs on people and businesses. To fight disinflationary pressures and economic contraction, Fed policymakers brought the policy rate to 1 See FOMC (2017). 2 effectively zero, where it remained for seven years, and augmented their usual policy tools with unconventional tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases. This was not business as usual. But now the economic expansion is firmly in place, labor markets are strong, and I expect that inflation, which has been running under our goal for quite some time, will return to our 2 percent goal on a sustained basis over the next couple of years. Nonetheless, the post-crisis economic environment is expected to differ in some important ways from the pre-crisis world. As I’ve discussed elsewhere, the expected slowdown in population growth and labor force participation rates due to changes in demographics will weigh on long-run economic growth, the natural rate of unemployment, and the longer-term equilibrium interest rate.2 In fact, FOMC participants have been lowering their estimates of the fed funds rate that will be consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run. The median estimate has decreased from 4 percent in March 2014 to 2.8 percent today. Empirical estimates of the equilibrium real fed funds rate, so-called r-star, while highly uncertain, are lower than in the past.3 So real interest rates may potentially remain lower than in past decades. If so, then there will be less room for monetary policymakers to cushion against a negative economic shock than in the past. Said differently, the policy rate will have a higher chance of hitting the zero lower bound, necessitating the use of nontraditional monetary policy tools more often. To the extent that these tools are less effective than the traditional interest rate tool or are constrained, the potential is for longer recessions and longer bouts of low inflation. This raises the legitimate question of whether any changes in our monetary policy framework would be helpful in maintaining macroeconomic stability in this environment. I’m not going to answer that question today. Nor am I going to discuss other government policies that could be brought to bear to increase the long-term growth rate and equilibrium interest rate, which would give monetary policy more room to act. Instead, I’m going to outline four 2 See Mester (2017). 3 For FOMC projections, see FOMC (2014) and FOMC (2018). For a review of the literature on the equilibrium interest rate, see Hamilton, et al. (2015). 3 alternative monetary policy frameworks that have received some attention and discuss some of their pros and cons. Higher Inflation Target One alternative would be to set a higher inflation target, say, 4 percent instead of 2 percent.4 Since the equilibrium nominal fed funds rate is the sum of the inflation target and the equilibrium real rate, a higher inflation target would offset a lower equilibrium real rate and so the nominal rate would be less likely to hit the zero lower bound for any given negative shock. One advantage of this framework is that it is very familiar because it is similar to the current framework. But there are also several challenges. First, the transition could be difficult. The benefits of the higher target come only if the public views the increase as permanent so that inflation expectations rise to the new higher target. But inflation expectations are reasonably well anchored at 2 percent, so raising expectations would not necessarily be easy to do. Second, a higher level of inflation may be associated with higher inflation volatility and with higher inflation risk premia, neither of which is desirable. Third, it isn’t clear whether an inflation rate at 4 percent should be viewed as consistent with the Fed’s mandate of price stability. If, for this reason, one then opted to raise the target to 3 percent instead, this would add only modest room for keeping the policy rate from the zero lower bound. And finally, one would need to evaluate whether the gain from avoiding the zero lower bound when a negative shock hits the economy outweighs the costs of running a higher level of inflation at all times, remembering that much of the economy is not indexed to inflation. Price-Level Targeting A second alternative framework involves targeting a path for the nominal level of prices rather than inflation, which is the growth rate of prices. Inflation targeting lets bygones-be-bygones: it does not make up for past deviations of inflation from target. Instead, the inflation-targeting policymaker just tries 4 See Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro (2010) for discussion. 4 to bring inflation back to target. For example, if inflation has run low for a time (so that the price level falls below its targeted price path), the inflation-targeting policymaker would aim to move the inflation rate back up to its target rate and allow the price level to remain at a level permanently below its targeted path. In contrast, price-level targeting makes up for past deviations of the price level from its path.5 If inflation has run low so that the price level has fallen below its targeted path, the price-level targeter would try to move the price level back up to path, and this would entail inflation running high for a while. Similarly, if inflation had been running high, the inflation targeter would aim to bring it down to target, while a price-level targeter would aim to bring the price level back down to its targeted path, which would mean inflation would be low for a while. Thus, the price-level-targeting framework builds in a form of forward commitment, thereby affecting current economic conditions. When inflation has been running low, the framework builds in a “low for longer” interest-rate strategy, as the policymaker would keep rates low for longer until the price level moved back to its targeted path. The anticipation of higher inflation in the future should move inflation expectations up, and this would tend to buoy the current level of inflation and shorten the amount of time the economy spends at the zero lower bound, therefore yielding better outcomes than inflation targeting. In fact, the academic literature suggests that a price-level-targeting framework may approximate optimal monetary policy when policymakers want to minimize fluctuations in the output gap and in inflation around a target, and it can be particularly useful at the zero lower bound by putting upward pressure on inflation expectations and, thereby, downward pressure on the real rate.6 Before I talk about some challenges, let me discuss a third related framework: nominal GDP targeting. 5 See Kahn (2009) for a discussion of price-level targeting. 6 See Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). 5 Nominal GDP Targeting This framework is similar to price-level targeting in that it targets the level of nominal GDP rather than the growth rate. Of course, nominal GDP comprises real GDP and inflation, so this framework explicitly incorporates both parts of the Fed’s mandate. For example, targeting the level of nominal GDP to be on a path rising by 4 percent per year would be consistent with 2 percent inflation and 2 percent potential growth. This strategy, like price-level targeting, makes up for past deviations. But it may perform better than price-level targeting when there are supply shocks to which the policymaker would not want to respond because such supply shocks tend to push prices and real output in opposite directions, leaving nominal income stable. While both price-level and nominal GDP targeting have the benefit of building in some forward commitment, which is useful at the zero lower bound, there would be some challenges in implementing either framework. First, there is little international experience with such frameworks to assess how they would work in practice.7 Second, for frameworks targeting levels instead of growth rates, the starting point matters, and these frameworks are complicated by other measurement issues as well. For example, Figure 1 shows the price-level path using four different starting points: the first quarters of 1990, 1995, 2001, and 2007. As you can see on the left-hand side of the chart, if the starting point is 1990Q1, the price level is essentially on its path, and if the starting point is 2001Q1, it is near its path. The other two starting points, on the right-hand side of the chart, show a larger gap. Moreover, because the level-targeting frameworks do not let bygones-be-bygones, data revisions pose a more serious issue than they do with inflation targeting (see Figure 2), and are perhaps greater for nominal GDP targeting than price-level targeting because revisions to nominal GDP tend to be larger than 7 Sweden did price-level targeting for less than two years when it went off the gold standard in 1931. See Kahn (2009). 6 revisions to prices. Also, the path of the nominal GDP target depends on estimates of potential real output growth. If the nominal income target incorporates an unrealistically high estimate of potential growth, then inflation will need to be higher in order to hit the target. A third complication, and perhaps the largest, for frameworks targeting nominal levels is that the benefits depend on the public’s not only understanding the framework but believing that future Committees will follow through. Explaining this unfamiliar framework to the public could be difficult. One also has to ask whether it is a credible commitment on the part of policymakers to keep interest rates low to make up for past shortfalls even when demand is growing strongly or to act to bring inflation down in the face of a supply shock by tightening policy even in the face of weak demand. If it is not credible that policymakers will do so, then the benefits of nominal level targeting will not be realized. The final framework I’ll discuss was suggested by former Fed Chair Ben Bernanke and is a hybrid between inflation targeting and price-level targeting, which tries to capture the advantages of each while minimizing the challenges.8 Temporary Price-Level Targeting Under the temporary price-level-targeting framework, monetary policymakers would target inflation in normal times, but when the policy rate fell to the zero lower bound, they would begin targeting the price level from that starting point. Under this framework, consistent with optimal monetary policy, policymakers would have a more powerful commitment at the zero lower bound than would be the case under inflation targeting. Switching to price-level targeting at the zero lower bound means that policy would be kept at zero at least until the cumulative inflation rate from the time the zero lower bound had 8 Bernanke (2017). 7 been reached had risen back to target. Once policymakers were satisfied that this goal had been met, the policy rate could begin to rise and policymakers would revert to targeting inflation. This framework has benefits similar to those of price-level targeting in that when monetary policy is not able to provide more stimulus because it is constrained by the zero lower bound, the framework builds in a forward commitment of easier monetary policy in the future. But this hybrid framework could be easier to communicate because it could be discussed solely in terms of the inflation goal (see Figure 3). It would also mean that some of the commitment problems of nominal level targeting, including having to make up for supply shocks that would temporarily raise inflation even if aggregate demand were low, could be avoided when away from the zero lower bound because policymakers would be targeting inflation and not the price level there. However, a drawback of the hybrid approach is that determining and communicating the timing of when to switch back to the inflation-targeting regime could be complex. Policymakers would not want to switch back prematurely, so they would need to be sure that inflation had sustainably made up for the cumulative shortfall. This would seem to involve a considerable amount of discretion, which would undermine some of the benefits of the framework. Summary In summary, there are several alternative monetary policy frameworks that potentially offer some benefits in a low interest rate environment. None of these alternative frameworks are without challenges and we will need to evaluate whether the net benefits of any of the alternatives would outweigh those of the flexible inflation-targeting framework currently in use in the U.S. and in many other countries. Each framework is worthy of further study, and now may be an appropriate time to undertake such study because the economy is growing, labor markets are strong, and inflation is projected to move back to our goal. 8 References Bernanke, Ben S., “Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy,” Ben Bernanke’s Blog, The Brookings Institution, October 12, 2017. (https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2017/10/12/temporary-price-level-targeting-an- alternative-framework-for-monetary-policy/) Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro, “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42(s1), 2010, pp. 199-215. (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1538-4616.2010.00334.x/full) Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, 2003, pp. 139-233. (https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/the-zero-bound-on-interest-rates-and-optimal-monetary-policy/) FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 18-19, 2014,” April 2014. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20140319.pdf) FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 12-13, 2017,” January 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20171213.pdf) FOMC, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” January 31, 2017. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf) Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West, “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future,” U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, February 2015, revised August 2015. (https://research.chicagobooth.edu/-/media/research/igm/docs/2015-usmpf.pdf) Kahn, George A., “Beyond Inflation Targeting: Should Central Banks Target the Price Level?,” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Third Quarter 2009, pp. 35-64. (https://www.kansascityfed.org/PeXPZ/Publicat/EconRev/PDF/09q3kahn.pdf) Mester, Loretta J., “Demographics and Their Implications for the Economy and Policy,” Cato Institute’s 35th Annual Monetary Conference: The Future of Monetary Policy, Washington, DC, November 16, 2017. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20171116-demographics-and-their- implications-for-the-economy-and-policy.aspx) 120.0 120.0 Figure 1: In a nominal level‐targeting framework, the starting point matters Price‐level targeting with different starting points Index, 2009=100 Index, 2009=100 80.0 90.0 100.0 110.0 80.0 90.0 100.0 110.0 PCE price index 2% trend starting at 1995Q1 PCE price index 2% td tt i t 1990Q1 60.0 70.0 990_Q1 992_Q1 994_Q1 996_Q1 998_Q1 000_Q1 002_Q1 004_Q1 006_Q1 008_Q1 010_Q1 012_Q1 014_Q1 016_Q1 018_Q1 60.0 70.0 90_Q1 92_Q1 94_Q1 96_Q1 98_Q1 00_Q1 02_Q1 04_Q1 06_Q1 08_Q1 10_Q1 12_Q1 14_Q1 16_Q1 18_Q1 2% trend, starting at 1995Q12% trend, starting at 1990Q1 19 19 19 19 19 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 199 199 199 199 199 200 200 200 200 200 20 20 20 20 20 Index, 2009=100 110.0 120.0 110.0 120.0 Index, 2009=100 70.0 80.0 90.0 100.0 PCE price index 2% trend, starting at 2001Q1 70.0 80.0 90.0 100.0 PCE price index 2% trend, starting at 2007Q1 60.0 1990_Q1 1992_Q1 1994_Q1 1996_Q1 1998_Q1 2000_Q1 2002_Q1 2004_Q1 2006_Q1 2008_Q1 2010_Q1 2012_Q1 2014_Q1 2016_Q1 2018_Q1 60.0 1990_Q1 1992_Q1 1994_Q1 1996_Q1 1998_Q1 2000_Q1 2002_Q1 2004_Q1 2006_Q1 2008_Q1 2010_Q1 2012_Q1 2014_Q1 2016_Q1 2018_Q1 Loretta J. Mester 1/5/20181 Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, via Haver Analytics Quarterly data: Last obs. for price level 2017Q3 Figure 2: Data revisions could be more serious with nominal level targeting because there is no letting bygones‐be‐bygones May 2002 data showed core PCE inflation falling sharply; FOMC statement in May 2003 noted “the probability of an unwelcome substantial fall in inflation though minor exceeds that of a pickupin inflation”substantial fall in inflation, though minor, exceeds that of a pickup in inflation. Subsequently, the fall was revised away. Source: Croushore, 2017, using data from U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis Loretta J. Mester 1/5/2018 2 Figure 3. Temporary price‐level targeting could be communicated in terms of the cumulative shortfall of inflation from target 12 0 Year‐over‐year percentage change in headline PCE and core PCEPercent Percent Cumulative annual growth in core PCE inflation since 2008Q4 70 8.0 9.0 10.0 11.0 12.0 U.S. headline PCE price inflation U.S. core PCE inflation 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 _Q4 _Q4 _Q4 _Q4 _Q4 _Q4 _Q4 _Q4 _Q4 _Q4 ‐2.0 ‐1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 2008_ 2009_ 2010_ 2011_ 2012_ 2013_ 2014_ 2015_ 2016_ 2017_ Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, via Haver Analytics 1965_Q1 1967_Q1 1969_Q1 1971_Q1 1973_Q1 1975_Q1 1977_Q1 1979_Q1 1981_Q1 1983_Q1 1985_Q1 1987_Q1 1989_Q1 1991_Q1 1993_Q1 1995_Q1 1997_Q1 1999_Q1 2001_Q1 2003_Q1 2005_Q1 2007_Q1 2009_Q1 2011_Q1 2013_Q1 2015_Q1 2017_Q1 Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, via Haver Analytics Haver Analytics Quarterly data: Last obs. 2017Q3 As reported in Bernanke, 2017 Loretta J. Mester 1/5/2018 3 Quarterly data: Last obs. 2017Q3

Financial Stability Framework Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Panel Remarks for the International Banking, Economics, and Finance Association and American Economic Association Session, “Integrating Financial Stability with Monetary Policy” Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting Philadelphia, PA January 6, 2018 1 Introduction I thank Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore for inviting me to speak today. I will use my time to discuss four topics: the relationship between financial stability and monetary policy, the Federal Reserve’s current framework for assessing and monitoring financial stability risks, an exercise aimed to assess possible policy responses to such risk, and some of the governance issues we face in addressing these risks. The views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Financial Stability and Central Banks The global financial crisis and the deep recession that followed were a rude awakening that much more needed to be done to assess and address vulnerabilities in the financial system. In the U.S., significant resources have been brought to bear to improve financial system resiliency, both to lower the probability that financial instability will arise and to limit the damage when financial shocks occur. Financial stability matters to central banks. One reason is that monetary policy affects the real economy by affecting financial conditions. During the financial crisis, we saw that when financial markets are not functioning well, the transmission of monetary policy to the economy can be disrupted. Another reason central banks care about financial stability is that the goals of monetary policy and financial stability are interconnected. Indeed, the definition of financial stability is often framed in terms of a financial system that is able to provide its valuable credit, risk-management, and liquidity services to businesses and households in the face of economic and financial shocks. Disruptions to the financial system that could interfere with its ability to provide these services include fire sales of assets, runs on financial firms, shortages of liquid assets, and contraction of credit in the face of unknown counterparty risk. We saw all of these during the global financial crisis. Because central banks care about financial stability to the extent that it affects the health of the real economy, volatility or minor disruptions in financial markets that represent the ebb and flow of a dynamic 2 economy but do not threaten the health of the economy are not something monetary policy should respond to. In most circumstances, the goals of monetary policy and financial stability are complementary. For example, price stability helps businesses, households, and financial institutions make better decisions, thereby fostering the stability of the financial system. And a stable financial system allows for more effective transmission of monetary policy throughout the economy. But in the short run, at times there may be trade-offs between monetary policy and financial stability, as macroprudential actions may slow the economy for a while. If such actions are needed to maintain the stability of the financial system, then these actions would also foster the monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment over the medium run, and would be complementary to economic growth.1 The first line of defense against financial instability should involve making the structure of the financial system more resilient. Structural resiliency is promoted by requiring higher levels and quality of capital (including a minimum non-risk-based leverage ratio, as well as risk-based capital standards), liquidity standards, stress tests, living wills, effective resolution methods for systemically important banks and nonbank financial institutions, and reforms to improve the stability of certain nonbank markets. The latter include changes to regulations governing money market mutual funds to reduce the chance of investor runs on these funds, rules requiring standardized over-the-counter derivatives contracts to be cleared through central counterparties, and limiting interday credit exposures in the tri-party repo market.2 In contrast to structural tools, which apply regardless of the level of vulnerability, the countercyclical capital 1 Of course, even with an optimally designed regime to foster financial stability, there could be a trade- off between the average level of economic growth over the longer run and the desired degree of financial system resilience, because risk-taking and risk management are at the heart of the financial system. Indeed, in the U.K., the Financial Services Act recognizes this potential trade-off and indicates that the act does not authorize the Financial Policy Committee to operate in a way that the committee feels is “likely to have a significant adverse effect on the capacity of the financial sector to contribute to the growth of the U.K. economy in the medium or long term.” See U.K. Financial Services Act 2012, Section 9C(4). 2 The Securities and Exchange Commission implemented revisions to the regulations governing money market mutual funds in 2014 and 2016. The G20 countries agreed in 2009 that standardized over -the-counter derivatives contracts should be cleared by central counterparties. 3 buffer is an example of a cyclical tool that can be varied with the perceived level of vulnerabilities in the financial system. The Federal Reserve Board has indicated that it will use this tool only when systemic vulnerabilities are “meaningfully above normal” and that, when using the tool, it intends to increase the buffer in a gradual way.3 The U.S. has not had much experience with this tool, so the focus on increasing the resiliency of the structure of the financial system seems well-founded. I believe monetary policy should remain focused on promoting price stability and maximum employment and not be given a third objective of financial stability. But I also recognize that monetary policy and financial stability goals and actions are interrelated and that if we assessed the risks to financial stability to be sufficiently great, achieving our dual-mandate monetary policy goals would also be in jeopardy. In this situation, the distinction between financial stability goals and monetary policy goals would be blurry, and to the extent that financial instability affects macroeconomic stability, those using a risk-management approach to monetary policy might be compelled to act, even though financial stability is not an explicit part of the FOMC’s monetary policy mandate. The FOMC recognizes these linkages. It has acknowledged that nonconventional monetary policy, including large-scale asset purchases and the extended period of essentially zero interest rates, could pose potential risks to financial stability by affecting market functioning and spurring risk-taking in a search for yield.4 One study using Spanish data found that a lower overnight policy rate induced low-capitalized banks to lend more to ex ante riskier firms and to require less collateral compared to high-capitalized 3 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). Other countries have used limits on loan -to-value ratios and debt-to-income ratios that vary over the cycle and are targeted to particular sectors like housing or household credit to control leverage. See Liang (2013) and Fischer (2014). 4 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), p. 25. 4 banks, direct evidence of monetary policy’s effect on risk-taking.5 The low-interest-rate environment has also posed challenges for bank profitability. In addition, to the extent that asset valuations have been elevated relative to historical standards because of the low level of interest rates (which means a low discount rate), as interest rates rise, valuations might be expected to fall, which would pose some risks to financial stability.6 Effects also run in the reverse direction, from macroprudential policy to monetary policy: Tight macroprudential policy can tighten financial conditions more generally, thereby increasing the likelihood that a monetary policy response will be needed. So when we are making monetary policy decisions, we need to be cognizant of the linkages between our monetary policy actions and financial stability and we need to monitor financial system conditions and developments as part of the economic environment. Well before the financial crisis, the FOMC discussed financial stability considerations at its meetings when setting monetary policy.7 But since the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has developed a framework for systematically tracking risks, and financial stability surveillance is receiving regular attention at FOMC meetings. This regular attention is important because, as we learned during the financial crisis, even in periods when conditions look benign, vulnerabilities may be building. 5 Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró, and Saurina (2014) use data on 23 million bank loans from the Spanish credit registry and separately identify how a change in the monetary policy rate affects the demand for credit and the volume and composition of credit supplied, in particular, the supply to riskier borrowers. 6 See FSOC (2017) for further discussion. 7 Peek, Rosengren, and Tootell’s (2015) textual analysis of the transcripts of FOMC meetings from 1982 through 2009 suggests that the FOMC does consider financial stability when setting monetary policy. 5 The Fed’s Framework for Monitoring Financial Stability The basic framework used by Federal Reserve staff to monitor financial stability risks is described in Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013, 2015). The framework recognizes the complex nature of the financial system in the U.S., with its mix of bank-based finance and market-based finance and its multiplicity of regulatory and supervisory bodies. The framework is informed by experience during the financial crisis, as well as the theoretical and empirical literature on financial stability. This literature demonstrates that systemic risk is endogenous, determined by the choices of financial market participants, and that it varies across the cycle. When the economy is performing well, collateral values increase, which supports further borrowing. Funding constraints fall, and with credit amply available to borrowers, the volatility of output and the volatility of asset prices fall. This induces banks to increase their leverage and lend even more. Leverage and maturity mismatch build up, the price of risk falls, and asset values rise. But these developments mean the system is more vulnerable, so that when a negative shock hits the economy and output declines, collateral values also fall, lenders become risk- averse, and credit contracts. This causes households and businesses to pull back on their spending, which depresses output even further, thereby propagating the shock to the real economy. On a conceptual level, the Fed’s framework is based on an understanding of these mechanisms through which shocks can be amplified and propagated throughout the financial system and to the real economy.8 The framework tracks a standard set of financial system vulnerabilities that could amplify and propagate shocks using a set of indicators on various financial activities in four categories: asset valuation pressures (reflecting the price of risk and risk appetites among investors), leverage, maturity and liquidity 8 Important research on the propagation and amplification of shocks throughout the financial system includes Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), and Gorton and Ordoñez (2014). 6 transformation, and interconnectedness and complexity. Tools like heat maps and data-visualization techniques aid in the tracking over time.9 The financial crisis underscored the importance of assessing and monitoring risks more broadly than just in individual regulated banks, so these vulnerabilities are assessed across four sectors of the economy: the banking sector; the nonbank financial sector, including capital markets, nonbanks, and shadow banks; the nonfinancial business sector; and the household sector. The framework makes a distinction between shocks and vulnerabilities.10 Shocks are difficult to predict and arise from various sources, whereas vulnerabilities are characteristics of the financial system and depend on the behavior of providers of financial services, their customers, and their regulators. Some of these vulnerabilities, like leverage, vary over the business and financial cycles; others, like complexity, are more structural in nature, reflecting the design of markets and intermediaries. To see the distinction between shocks and vulnerabilities, consider the financial crisis. Developments in the subprime mortgage market constituted a shock that precipitated the crisis. Recall that, at the time, many thought that the subprime market was too small to pose major problems in the financial system. That view turned out to be terribly wrong because it failed to recognize both the interconnectedness across markets and institutions and the fact that, at the time, the financial system was highly vulnerable to a shock due to high leverage and reliance on short-term funding. The easing of underwriting standards and the demand for securitized subprime mortgage assets led to a build-up in leverage before the crisis. When house prices fell, losses on subprime mortgages were amplified because the loans were funded by short-term funding sources, such as asset-backed commercial paper. Banks that sponsored these funds 9 See Aikman, et al. (2015a, 2015b). 10 See Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013, 2015) and Bernanke (2012). 7 felt compelled to support these vehicles, diverting funds from other types of lending; they pulled back on risk because of the drop in the value of mortgages and other assets. The drop in the value of asset-backed securities caused problems in other markets, such as the repo market, where these assets were used as collateral. Thus, leverage and reliance on short-term funding were vulnerabilities that allowed the original shock to propagate across the financial system, becoming amplified and wreaking much destruction as it went. Another distinction between vulnerabilities and shocks is that, unlike with shocks, it is feasible that policies could be designed to limit the build-up of vulnerabilities, thereby promoting financial stability. Using the framework helps the Fed be systematic in its analysis of the financial system’s vulnerability to a range of possible shocks. Systematic analysis means we can better identify changes in vulnerabilities over time and compare the level of vulnerabilities to historical experience at similar stages of the business cycle. An assessment of individual vulnerabilities is then combined to get an assessment of the overall vulnerability of the financial system. For example, when asset valuations are high and leverage is high, the financial system is likely more vulnerable to shocks because the combination can lead to rapid credit growth and excessive risk-taking that can reverse quickly when a negative shock hits. The minutes of the FOMC meetings indicate the types of discussions of financial conditions that regularly take place. At each meeting, the staff briefs the Committee on developments in financial markets over the intermeeting period. This discussion includes movements in equity prices; government and corporate bond yields; availability of credit to households and businesses; credit standards, loan growth, and financing conditions in various sectors, including the business, consumer, and residential and commercial real estate sectors; conditions in short-run funding markets; foreign exchange movements; and financial conditions abroad. At every other meeting, the staff reports on its assessment of the vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system, discussing how the vulnerabilities have changed since the last report and over time. 8 Recognizing the global interconnectedness of financial systems, the staff has developed tools to assess foreign financial stability as well.11 An evaluation of developments related to financial stability and the assessment of the financial system’s vulnerabilities have also become a regular section in the Board of Governors’ monetary policy report. The report occasionally includes additional in-depth information on particular sectors. For example, the latest report included a section discussing liquidity in the corporate bond market.12 Although market participants had been expressing concerns about reduced liquidity in the market, the Board’s analysis suggested that liquidity strains in the market were minimal. And as a member of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), the Federal Reserve contributes to the FSOC’s annual report that identifies potential risks to financial stability and makes recommendations about what can be done to mitigate those risks.13 The Fed has made a lot of progress on building a system to monitor and assess changes in the financial system’s vulnerabilities. Analysis suggests that the vulnerabilities now being tracked had, indeed, been building up for several years before the onset of the financial crisis.14 As discussed in the minutes of the October FOMC meeting, the Fed staff assessed that overall vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system remained moderate. Valuation pressures were elevated but vulnerabilities stemming from leverage in the nonfinancial sector were moderate; those stemming from leverage in the financial sector and from maturity and liquidity mismatch remained low. The staff also assessed that overall vulnerabilities to foreign financial stability were moderate. 11 For example, see FOMC (November 2017). 12 See Board of Governors (July 2017). 13 See FSOC (2017). 14 See Aikman, et al. (2015a, 2015b). 9 Ongoing work at the Fed continues to evaluate what changes in vulnerabilities may signal about financial stability and how policy should respond to signs of emerging financial stability risks and, in particular, how financial stability concerns should be incorporated into monetary policymaking. A Financial Stability Tabletop Exercise Included in these efforts is the tabletop exercise that was undertaken by the Financial Stability Subcommittee of the Conference of Presidents of the Federal Reserve System in June 2015.15 This exercise involved working through a plausible scenario of loose financial conditions, reflected by falling term and risk premia, leading to pressures on valuations in the commercial property market and increasing leverage in the form of higher corporate debt issuance and leveraged lending that was funded by short- term wholesale funding. The context included monetary policy that was gradually removing accommodation, as in 2015-2016, with inflation below the FOMC’s 2 percent goal but the economy at full employment. The scenario reflected some historical episodes of financial market instability, including the real estate boom and bust in New England in the mid-1980s and in Sweden in 1989-1990, but with the incorporation of increased leverage in the nonfinancial sector, as well as in banking, and a focus on commercial real estate as opposed to residential real estate. Within this scenario, financial conditions were judged to be too loose given macroeconomic conditions and despite the gradual withdrawal of monetary accommodation. A sharp reversal in the pricing of risk would have adverse effects on the corporate bond market and a sharp drop in commercial real estate prices could adversely affect the banking sector. Either would have implications for the real economy. The reliance on short-term wholesale funding could exacerbate the problems, and with many of the 15 The participating presidents were Eric Rosengren (FRB Boston and chair of the subcommittee at the time of the exercise), William Dudley (FRB New York), Esther George (FRB Kansas City), Narayana Kocherlakota (FRB Minneapolis), and Loretta Mester (FRB Cleveland). See Adrian, et al. (2015). 10 providers of this funding outside of the supervisory purview of the Federal Reserve, it would be difficult to directly address this issue. The objective of the exercise was for the policymaker participants to use available macroprudential tools and/or monetary policy to reduce the probability of and the severity of financial disruptions associated with the scenario. The macroprudential tools considered included leverage ratios; countercyclical capital buffers, which could vary across sectors; liquidity requirements; limits on loan-to-value and debt-to- income ratios; capital and liquidity stress testing; supervisory guidance; and moral suasion. As the scenario played out, the limits to the macroprudential tools were illuminated. The macroprudential tools that ended up being favored were stress testing, margins on repo funding, and supervisory guidance. Capital-based, liquidity-based, and loan-to-value and debt-to-income limits, while good in theory, were deemed to have implementation challenges, such as having to coordinate across multiple regulators or, in some cases, to follow administrative procedures like public comment periods, which would slow down the process. Another limitation to some tools is that they applied to regulated banking firms but not necessarily to shadow banks or other types of institutions. While my preference going into the exercise was, and continues to be, to start with the macroprudential tools that can be implemented more promptly, the limits on these tools suggest that, in some circumstances, monetary policy might have to be used to address financial stability concerns. This is all the more reason to take steps to ensure that the financial system is structurally resilient, as increased resiliency would lessen the need to shift some of monetary policy’s focus away from its macroeconomic goals of price stability and maximum employment. In addition, we must continue to hone our methods of assessing financial system vulnerabilities – in both the regulated and unregulated sectors and between the two. We don’t want to over-identify such risks. Finding risks around every corner where none exist would stifle productivity and innovation in the financial services sector and markets, and thereby 11 undermine longer-run economic growth.16 This leads me to my final topic: the governance of financial stability policy. The Governance of Financial Stability Policy The complexity of the U.S. financial system, with multiple types of financial services providers and multiple regulators, complicates the application of macroprudential policy. The multiple financial regulators in the U.S. include the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the National Credit Union Administration, the U.S. Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and the Federal Housing Finance Agency. In addition, there are regulatory agencies at the state level. In many cases, the regulatory authority of these agencies is defined by type of institution rather than by instrument. The Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) was created by the Dodd-Frank Act to promote coordination and information sharing across these financial system regulators. Its membership includes the heads of the regulatory agencies, with the Secretary of the Treasury as chair. The Office of Financial Research (OFR), also established by the Dodd-Frank Act, supports the FSOC and has been working to improve the data resources available to assess financial stability risks. This is particularly important as some segments of the financial system are less regulated than others, e.g., hedge funds, and without data, it is difficult to ascertain emerging risks in these sectors. Moreover, even when data are collected, it is harder to track emerging risks to the extent that data aren’t standardized across segments.17 16 Using a large group of countries, Rancière, Tornell, and Westermann (2008) find that average growth over 1960- 2000 was higher in countries that have experienced occasional financial crises, as measured by the negative skewness of credit growth. They provide a model in which the enforceability of contracts plays an important role in engendering risk-taking and investment, which leads to higher growth. 17 One of the FSOC’s priorities is to broaden the adoption by financial market participants of the Legal Entity Identifier, which is a unique identifier for any entity participating in a financial transaction. See FSOC (2017). 12 Establishing the FSOC and the OFR, and the regulatory changes to increase the structural resiliency of the financial system, including higher capital requirements and liquidity requirements, were important steps. Still, it has to be recognized that other than the ability to designate firms as systemically important financial institutions and, therefore, subject to enhanced regulation by the Fed, the FSOC does not have the authority to take actions to mitigate emerging risks. Instead, it can make recommendations to the agencies and to Congress, who can then decide to act or not.18 As the tabletop exercise I just spoke of illuminated, regulatory and financial system complexity and the need for coordination impose some limits on the efficacy of countercyclical macroprudential policy to mitigate financial stability risks that build up over time. If implementation is delayed so much that the policies take effect after the risks are realized, at best, they would be ineffective and, at worst, they would exacerbate the situation rather than shore up the financial system. Moreover, unless the policies are coordinated across the entire financial services landscape, they could result in regulatory arbitrage whereby activities move to the sector with less stringent rules. The need to be preemptive when wielding countercyclical macroprudential tools poses another challenge: that of communication. The tools will have to be used well before there are clear signs of instability. This might be difficult to explain, and there may be various interests that would prefer the tools not be invoked in seemingly good times. Thus, it’s important that policymakers have some independence in setting macroprudential policy, with appropriate accountability to elected officials and the public.19 This argues for transparency and regular testimony before Congress to explain the rationale behind policies. 18 Kohn (2014) compares and contrasts the financial stability structure in the U.S. with that in the U.K. 19 Kohn (2014) discusses the importance of the financial stability authority being able to pursue its goals independent of short-run political considerations even when the actions taken aren’t popular. 13 The FSOC and OFR annual reports, as well the materials included in the minutes of FOMC meetings and the Board’s monetary policy report, all contribute to needed transparency.20 Finally, it is important to have a clearer understanding of how monetary policy and financial stability policy should interact. Loose monetary policy, to the extent that it allows financial vulnerabilities to build up, can pose risks to financial stability when the monetary policy is reversed. And tightening macroprudential rules to counteract growing imbalances can impede the flow of credit, thereby dampening economic growth. Tabletop exercises like the one I described can be helpful in clarifying strategies for both monetary policy and financial stability policy. We are still some distance away from being able to articulate a clear strategy about the circumstances under which monetary policy should be used as a tool for financial stability. But progress on this will be important to provide clarity not only to the public but also to ourselves as policymakers. As Kohn (2014) describes, the institutional structure in the U.K. has allowed it to be further along in this respect. In August 2013, the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee initiated forward guidance that it would hold interest rates low and consider additional asset purchases at least until the unemployment rate had fallen to 7 percent.21 But it also said that one of the conditions that would vacate this guidance would be if the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee found that the stance of monetary policy was threatening financial stability in a way that couldn’t be contained by the available macroprudential tools. Note that both policy committees are within the Bank of England. The committees are independent but they also share members, which allows for good communication and information sharing between the two committees. 20 For examples, see FOMC (2017), Board of Governors (2017), FSOC (2017) and OFR (2017a, 2017b). 21 See Bank of England (2013). 14 In the U.S., the FSOC should not play a similar role, as this would compromise the independence of monetary policy decisions. This independence must be preserved because, as shown by a substantial body of research and actual practice, when a central bank formulates monetary policy free from short-run political interference and is held accountable for its decisions, better economic outcomes result. Instead, the Federal Reserve, itself, should work to make further progress on clarifying the strategies for the interactions between monetary policy and financial stability policy. With the continued focus throughout the Federal Reserve System on improving our ability to monitor emerging financial stability risks and on developing tools and policies to address those risks, I am confident that such progress will be made. 15 References Adrian, Tobias, Patrick de Fontnouvelle, Emily Yang, and Andrei Zlate, “Macroprudential Policy: Case Study from a Tabletop Exercise,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper RPA 15-1, September 30, 2015, revised December 2015. (https://www.bostonfed.org/publications/risk-and-policy-analysis/2015/macroprudential-policy-case- study-from-a-tabletop-exercise.aspx) Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang, “Financial Stability Monitoring,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) paper 2013-21, Divisions of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, March 2013. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2013/201321/201321pap.pdf) Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang, “Financial Stability Monitoring,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 7, December 2015, pp. 357-395. (http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-financial-111914-042008) Aikman, David, Michael T. Kiley, Seung Jung Lee, Michael G. Palumbo, and Missaka N. Warusawitharana, “Mapping Heat in the U.S. Financial System,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Divisions of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs Working Paper 2015-059, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, June 24, 2015a. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2015/files/2015059pap.pdf) Aikman, David, Michael Kiley, Seung Jung Lee, Michael Palumbo, and Missaka Warusawitharana, “Mapping Heat in the U.S. Financial System: A Summary,” FEDS Notes, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, August 5, 2015b. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/mapping-heat-in-the-us-financial- system-a-summary-20150805.html) Bank of England, “Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting, 31 July and 1 August, 2013,” August 14, 2013. (https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/monetary-policy-summary-and- minutes/2013/minutes-august-2013.pdf) Bernanke, Ben S., “Some Reflections on the Crisis and the Policy Response,” remarks at the Conference on “Rethinking Finance: Perspectives on the Crisis,” The Russell Sage Foundation and The Century Foundation, New York, NY, April 13, 2012. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/bernanke20120413a.pdf) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Regulatory Capital Rules: The Federal Reserve Board’s Framework for Implementing the U.S. Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer,” Federal Register, Federal Reserve System 12 CFR Part 217, Appendix A, Docket No. R-1529; RIN 7100 AE-43, September 8, 2016. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20160908b1.pdf) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Developments Related to Financial Stability,” in the Monetary Policy Report, February 11, 2014, pp. 24-25. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20140211_mprfullreport.pdf) 16 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Developments Related to Financial Stability” and “Recent Developments in Corporate Bond Market Liquidity,” in the Monetary Policy Report, July 7, 2017, pp. 24-28. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20170707_mprfullreport.pdf) Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector,” American Economic Review 104, February 2014, pp. 379-421. (https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.104.2.379) Fischer, Stanley, “Macroprudential Policy in Action: Israel,” in George A. Akerlof, Olivier J. Blanchard, David Romer, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds., What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the Crisis (Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press), 2014, pp. 87-98. (https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/what-have-we-learned) FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, October 31-November 1, 2017,” November 2017. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20171101.pdf) FSOC, 2017 Annual Report, Financial Stability Oversight Council, 2017. (https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/studies-reports/Pages/2017-Annual-Report.aspx) Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordoñez, “Collateral Crises,” American Economic Review 104, February 2014, pp. 343-378. (https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.104.2.343) Jiménez, G., S. Ongena, S., J.-L. Peydró, and J. Saurina, “Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk- Taking?” Econometrica 82, March 2014, pp. 463-505. (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.3982/ECTA10104/full) Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105, April 1997, pp. 211-248. (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/262072) Kohn, Donald, “Institutions for Macroprudential Regulation: The UK and the U.S.,” On the Record, The Brookings Institution, April 17, 2014 (https://www.brookings.edu/on-the-record/institutions-for-macroprudential-regulation-the-uk-and-the-u- s/) Liang, Nellie, “Systemic Risk Monitoring and Financial Stability,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Supplement to Vol. 45, No. s1, 2013, pp. 129-135. (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jmcb.12039/full) OFR, 2017 Annual Report to Congress, Office of Financial Research, December 5, 2017a. (https://www.financialresearch.gov/annual-reports/2017-annual-report/) OFR, 2017 Financial Stability Report, Office of Financial Research, December 5, 2017b. (https://www.financialresearch.gov/financial-stability-reports/2017-financial-stability-report/) 17 Peek, Joe, Eric S. Rosengren, and Geoffrey M.B. Tootell, “Should U.S. Monetary Policy Have a Ternary Mandate?” presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 59th Economic Conference: Macroprudential Monetary Policy, October 2-3, 2015. (https://www.bostonfed.org/macroprudential2015/papers/Rosengren-Peek-Tootell.pdf) Rancière, Romain, Aaron Tornell, and Frank Westermann, “Systemic Crises and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, February 2008, pp. 359-406. (https://academic.oup.com/qje/article/123/1/359/1889824) U.K. Financial Services Act 2012. (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2012/21/pdfs/ukpga_20120021_en.pdf)

The Federal Reserve and Monetary Policy Communications Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Tangri Lecture Rutgers University New Brunswick, NJ January 17, 2018 1 Introduction I thank Tom Prusa, chair of the economics department, and Professor Joe Hughes for inviting me to present the Tangri Lecture. It is an honor for me to be with you today. I’d also like to take the opportunity to thank Joe for our research collaboration, which has spanned many years – probably more than we care to admit. Joe is a wonderful co-author, and he often tells me of the innovative techniques he is bringing to the classroom, so I would venture to say he is a dedicated and highly effective teacher as well. This afternoon I will speak about the structure of the Federal Reserve System and the value of clear monetary policy communications. I’ll summarize some of the improvements the Fed has made to its communications, and then offer my recommendation for potential next steps. Of course, my remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Fed Structure, Monetary Policy Independence, and Accountability Before we can discuss monetary policy communications, it’s important to have a sense of the structure of the Federal Reserve System. After a period of financial instability, Congress established the Fed in 1913 to promote the health of the U.S. economy and financial system. Congress designed the Fed to operate in the public interest as a decentralized central bank: the Fed is independent within the government but not independent from the government. At the time, there were concerns that the central bank would become dominated by financial interests in New York or political interests in Washington. So the design includes representation from across the country and balances public-sector and private-sector interests, and Wall Street and Main Street concerns. 2 The Federal Reserve System has 12 regional Reserve Banks and a seven-member Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. that oversees those Banks. The governors are appointed by the president of the United States and confirmed by the Senate. Governors serve staggered terms of up to 14 years. These terms span several terms of the president and members of Congress, which is intended to insulate the governors from short-term political influence and allows them to take a longer-run perspective when setting monetary and financial regulatory policy. The chair and vice chair of the Board of Governors, and the governor who serves as vice chair of supervision, a position created by the Dodd-Frank Act of 2010, are chosen by the president and confirmed by the Senate from among the sitting governors for four-year terms. The chair and vice chairs can be reappointed until their terms as governors expire. The 12 Reserve Banks are distributed around the country in locations that were the centers of economic activity back when the Fed was established.1 Each Reserve Bank has a board of directors whose nine members are chosen in a nonpolitical process, with three representing banks and six representing business, agricultural, industrial, and public interests in the Districts they serve. The nonbank directors are responsible for choosing a Reserve Bank’s president, who is subject to approval of the Fed’s Board of Governors. This regional structure has served the country well for more than 100 years. It allows monetary policy decisions to take into account the diversity of the American economy and its people, and also helps us to carry out our other responsibilities. These include supervising and regulating banks and other important financial institutions, promoting the stability of the financial system, playing a major role in overseeing the nation’s payments system, providing certain financial services to the U.S. government, and identifying 1Some Reserve Banks also have Branches. For example, the Cleveland Fed has a Branch in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and a Branch in Cincinnati, Ohio. Each Branch of a Reserve Bank has a board of directors with five or seven members. 3 effective community development policies and best practices for promoting economic progress and access to credit in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, is the body within the Fed that is responsible for setting monetary policy. It holds eight regularly scheduled meetings per year in Washington, D.C. The FOMC was established by the Banking Act of 1935 and has 12 members: the seven members of the Board of Governors, the president of the New York Fed, and four other Reserve Bank presidents, who serve on a rotating basis. As president of the Cleveland Fed, I vote every other year, rotating my vote with the president of the Chicago Fed. Other than New York, Cleveland, and Chicago, the other presidents vote every third year. I am a voting member this year, but it’s important to note that all presidents, whether voting or nonvoting, participate in FOMC meetings. So the discussions at FOMC meetings contain a mosaic of economic information and analysis from all parts of the country. And this regional information, along with economic and financial data and analysis, plays an important part in the FOMC’s setting of national monetary policy in pursuit of our goals. Those monetary policy goals were given to the Fed by Congress. The Federal Reserve Act says that the Fed should conduct monetary policy to “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” When prices are stable and the economy is at maximum employment, long-term interest rates are typically at moderate levels, so it is often said that Congress has given the Fed a dual mandate. While Congress has set the Fed’s goals, it has also wisely given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of those goals. This means monetary policy decisions do not have to be approved by the president or Congress. This is wise because a substantial body of research and actual 4 practice indicate that when a central bank formulates monetary policy free from short-run political interference and is held accountable for its decisions, better economic outcomes result. But independence does not mean that the Fed should be unaccountable for its monetary policy decisions or that it shouldn’t be transparent about the rationale for those decisions. In fact, accountability must go hand in hand with independence or else independence from the political process won’t be sustainable. Because it takes some time for monetary policy to affect the economy, the public won’t be able to immediately see whether a policy action was a good one. So it is incumbent upon policymakers to explain their decisions, their assessment of economic conditions, and their outlook for the economy. In other words, clear communications play a crucial role in monetary policymaking. The Benefits of Clear Communications in Monetary Policymaking One important benefit of clear communication is that it can actually make monetary policy more effective by helping households and businesses make better economic and financial decisions. The public will have a better understanding of monetary policy when policymakers are clear about their policy goals, those aspects of the economy monetary policy can and can’t influence, and the economic information that influences their forecasts and policy decisions. And when policymakers strive to be systematic in their policy responses to changes in economic conditions that influence the outlook, the public will have a better idea of how monetary policy is likely to change as economic conditions evolve. They will have a better sense of how policy will react not only to anticipated changes in conditions but also to unanticipated economic developments. With such knowledge, households and firms can plan better; they can make better saving, borrowing, investment, and employment decisions. In addition, when the public has a clearer understanding of the strategy monetary policymakers follow in normal times, they will also understand when nonstandard monetary policy action is required in extraordinary circumstances. 5 Indeed, in extraordinary times, like the financial crisis and deep recession we’ve lived through, policy communications not only provide transparency but they can also serve as a monetary policy tool. In particular, once interest rates hit their effective zero lower bound, providing forward guidance about the path that policy will likely follow in the future has the potential to increase the current degree of monetary policy accommodation. By reducing uncertainty about the future path of policy, forward guidance helps lower interest rates by reducing the premiums investors demand to compensate them for interest-rate uncertainty. In addition, in theory, if the central bank indicates that the future path of short-term interest rates will be low for a long time – lower and for longer than would have been consistent with the central bank’s past behavior – this can also put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, thereby adding accommodation and spurring current economic activity. In theory, if people believe that the central bank is committed to keeping interest rates very low, they will expect higher economic activity and higher inflation in the future and that will induce them to make investments in capital and labor today, thereby helping the current economy. The Fed and other central banks used forward guidance as a tool during the Great Recession. The Fed’s forward guidance took several forms. First, it was qualitative: the FOMC indicated in December 2008 that it anticipated that weak economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the fed funds rate for “some time.” In March 2009, “some time” became an “extended period.” In August 2011, this qualitative forward guidance changed to calendar-date guidance when the FOMC said it anticipated an exceptionally low fed funds rate at least through mid-2013. That date was later extended to late 2014, and then to mid-2015. In December 2012, calendar-date guidance was changed to state- contingent guidance when the FOMC said that it anticipated that the 0-to-¼ percent target range for the fed funds rate would be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remained above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead was projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continued to be well anchored. Some form of this threshold guidance was used until March 2014. Since then, as the 6 economy has returned to normal and policy is normalizing, the FOMC has been providing information about the factors that will influence the future path of policy, but this is in the realm of regular policy communication conveying a sense of how the FOMC is likely to react to economic developments rather than guidance as a policy tool. Steps the FOMC Has Taken to Enhance Monetary Policy Communications Over the past couple of decades, as the benefits of enhanced transparency have become better appreciated, the Federal Reserve has taken several steps to enhance its regular policy communications. I believe we’ve made substantial progress, although I also believe that achieving clearer monetary policy communications is better viewed as a journey rather than as a destination and we should always be working to make our communications more effective. Some commentators have criticized the Fed for being, perhaps, a bit too transparent – with a cacophony of Fed voices speaking too many times. So it might surprise you to know that it wasn’t until 1994 that the FOMC began explicitly announcing changes in its targeted policy rate, the fed funds rate. Before 1994, there was no post-meeting FOMC statement; the public had to infer what the FOMC decided by looking at how it implemented policy through its open market operations in financial markets. Now, the post- meeting statement describes the FOMC’s view of the state of the economy and the rationale for its decisions. Since 2002, the statement has also included the votes of individual members and the preferred policy choices of any dissenters. Further context for the decisions is provided in the meeting minutes. Before 2005, these minutes weren’t released until after the subsequent FOMC meeting. Now they are released with only a three-week lag. Recently, the FOMC used the minutes to convey information about the strategies it was considering for normalizing the size and composition of the Fed’s balance sheet.2 By 2 See FOMC, “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” as adopted effective June 13, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf ), FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14-15, 2017,” April 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20170315.pdf ), and FOMC, “Minutes of the 7 the time it was announced in June 2017, the plan was well understood by market participants. In addition to minutes, the FOMC publishes a full transcript of each meeting with a five-year lag. An important enhancement to monetary policy communications was the FOMC’s statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, adopted in January 2012 and reviewed and reaffirmed each year since.3 This statement laid out for the first time the guiding principles the FOMC uses in setting monetary policy. It recognizes that over the longer run, monetary policy can influence only inflation and not the underlying real structural aspects of the economy such as the natural rate of unemployment or maximum employment, but that monetary policy can be used to help offset shorter-run fluctuations in employment from maximum employment. Importantly, the statement also established an explicit numerical goal for inflation over the longer run. This is a symmetric goal of 2 percent, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. The explicit target not only provides transparency to the public but it also underscores the FOMC’s commitment to price stability, thereby helping to anchor expectations about inflation. Since inflation expectations are an important determinant of actual inflation, having an explicit target helps promote price stability. Outside of the blackout period around FOMC meetings, many of the FOMC participants present speeches – like this one – in which they share their perspectives on the economy and monetary policy with the public. As I mentioned, sometimes this speaking is criticized, but as a public servant, I think it’s one of my duties to explain my views. In addition to speeches, the chair testifies before subcommittees of both houses of Congress at two regularly scheduled monetary policy hearings a year, and at additional hearings when asked. And since 2011, the chair has held press briefings after four FOMC meetings per year. Federal Open Market Committee, May 2-3, 2017,” May 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20170503.pdf). 3 See FOMC, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” January 31, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf). 8 These briefings allow the chair to expand on things that are too complex to discuss in the FOMC’s relatively short post-meeting statement and to respond to questions from the media. The four meetings followed by press briefings are also ones at which the FOMC releases its Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP. These projections, which are now quarterly, began in 2007. In ensuing years, the projections have been enhanced in various ways and I would expect us to consider further enhancements to the SEP over time, as part of our ongoing efforts to make our communications even more effective. The SEP now includes more variables and a longer time horizon. The variables included are real output growth, the unemployment rate, inflation, and core inflation, that is, inflation excluding food and energy prices, which tend to be volatile. The projections also include participants’ anticipated path of appropriate policy given their outlook and their assessment of risks around the outlook. The projections are for the current year and for up to three additional years, and also provide participants’ longer-run estimates of key economic variables. Most recently, the FOMC added confidence bands around the median projections across the participants. I view the addition of confidence bands as an important enhancement, because these bands illustrate in a simple way the reasonable amount of variation to expect in forecasts and in outcomes relative to projections. They remind us of the important message that the economy can evolve in unexpected ways. For example, as shown in the latest SEP projections,4 the 70 percent confidence interval around the median forecast of real GDP growth is about ±1.7 percentage points for this year and a little over ±2.0 percentage points for each of the following two years; for inflation, it is about ±1.0 percentage point for 4 See FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 12-13, 2017,” January 2018 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20171213.pdf) . 9 each of the next three years, and for the fed funds rate, it is about 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 percentage points over the next three years. The Communications Challenge According to Voltaire, “Uncertainty is an uncomfortable position, but certainty is an absurd one.” In our context, this means it is important to remember that monetary policymakers have to deal with uncertainty, which takes several forms. The economy is constantly being buffeted by shocks that can lead economic conditions to evolve differently than anticipated. In addition, our view of current economic conditions can be cloudy because many economic data are revised over time, and these data revisions complicate forecasting and setting monetary policy in real time. There is also model uncertainty: it isn’t clear which model will best predict the future path of the economy at any given time. One approach that I like is to average across various models to develop a forecast, or to look at the forecasts from several different models and to analyze different scenarios. In speaking about FOMC projections, former Fed Chair Ben Bernanke said, “The only economic forecast in which I have complete confidence is that the economy will not evolve along the precise path implied by our projections.”5 The FOMC is not prescient, nor should anyone expect it to be. Yet, because policy affects the economy with a lag, policymakers need to make medium-run forecasts and acknowledge the uncertainty. But this poses a fundamental communications challenge – how can policymakers be transparent about their current assessment of economic conditions, the economic outlook, and their anticipated appropriate policy path without being perceived as having made a promise they won’t necessarily keep should the economy evolve in an unanticipated way. Added to this is the tendency for market participants, among others, to prefer more explicit statements and less uncertainty, and the potential that they will interpret the forecasts 5 See Bernanke, Ben S., “Federal Reserve Communications,” Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, D.C., November 14, 2007 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20071114a.htm). 10 of the economy and the appropriate policy path as having more certitude than they actually do, which creates communication issues when the forecasts and policy path change. I note that here I’m talking about normal times. In extraordinary times, for example, when interest rates have reached the zero lower bound and policymakers want to run a policy of keeping interest rates very low for longer than they otherwise would, the challenge is just the opposite – how can policymakers credibly commit to such a policy path that differs from normal policy? Policy Communications Recommendations I believe that to meet these challenges, we should focus our policy communications on conveying a better sense of the FOMC’s reaction function in normal times, that is, the relationship between changes in monetary policy and changes in the economic outlook. This takes us away from having to predict the various shocks that may hit the economy, shocks that can arise from many different sources. Instead, we should provide a better sense of how policy can be expected to react when there is a change in economic conditions and the medium-run outlook, whether those changes were anticipated or not. Of course, policymakers do not necessarily agree on the precise form of the policy reaction function. Still, there is consensus on some of the factors that should influence policy, including measures of the unemployment rate, employment growth, output growth, inflation, and longer-run inflation expectations. From a practical viewpoint, let me offer three suggestions of what the FOMC can do to create a better understanding of our policy reaction function. First, let’s ensure that our post-meeting FOMC statement focuses less on short-term changes in the data released between FOMC meetings and more on accumulated changes in economic and financial conditions and their effect on the medium-run outlook and progress toward our monetary policy goals. The statement should help the public and financial market participants to better understand policymakers’ 11 consensus assessment of what is signal versus noise in the data. While the statement has been evolving in this direction, I believe it could do more to dissuade people from thinking short term. The statement is a very important part of FOMC communications. We could improve the public’s understanding of our monetary policy reaction function if the statement provided more of a narrative of our assessment of how changes in economic and financial data have or have not changed the medium-run outlook, the risks around that outlook, and therefore, the appropriate policy path. In addition to the narrative, the statement would describe the current stance of policy and any policy actions taken, and some information on the future path of policy. In extraordinary economic circumstances, this might be explicit forward guidance that serves as a policy tool, as it did during the Great Recession and early part of the recovery. But during normal times, the statement would, instead, provide a rationale for future policy decisions. It would articulate the considerations the Committee would take into account when determining future changes in policy. If we provided more consistency about the conditions we systematically assess in calibrating the stance of policy, I believe the public and market participants would get a better sense of the Committee’s reaction function over time and their policy expectations will better align with those of policymakers, thereby making policy more effective and, at least to some extent, reducing market volatility. What I’m suggesting would likely not result in a shorter statement but, I believe, a more informative one. Second, let’s begin using simple monetary policy rules as benchmarks to explain our policy decisions. You can find updates for a set of seven rules and their outcomes across several forecasts on the Cleveland Fed’s website, and the Federal Reserve Board’s Monetary Policy Report now includes a section on policy rules.6 These types of rules describe policy reaction functions that have been shown to yield good economic outcomes in some models and in some economic circumstances. I am not advocating setting policy mechanically according to a simple policy rule; no rule works well enough across a variety of 6 See “Simple Monetary Policy Rules,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/our- research/indicators-and-data/simple-monetary-policy-rules.aspx) and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Monetary Policy Report,” July 7, 2017, pp. 24-28 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20170707_mprfullreport.pdf) . 12 economic models and circumstances. However, using the rules as reference points and discussing why our policy may differ from these policy descriptions could go some way in helping to explain our own policy reaction function to the public. This doesn’t go as far as having the FOMC present a forecast that could serve as the benchmark for understanding the FOMC’s policy actions and post-meeting statements, a recommendation I’ve made in the past.7 The median paths in the SEP are somewhat of a step in that direction, but because the variables are not linked across participants, the median paths don’t really represent a coherent forecast. For example, there is no guarantee that someone projecting the median inflation path would necessarily be projecting the median output path. In 2012, the FOMC experimented with developing a forecast representing the consensus of the Committee, but it proved difficult to achieve.8 In lieu of that, the FOMC should consider publishing the Board staff’s forecast as a benchmark against which policymakers could explain how and why their forecasts may differ. Third, let’s link the variables in the SEP. As I just mentioned, right now, each variable in our projections is reported independently, so, for example, there is no way to see whether a person low in the range of unemployment rate forecasts is high in the range of inflation projections. The SEP could be enhanced by linking the variables for each participant’s projection so that the public could see what each policymaker is projecting for growth, unemployment, and inflation, and what policy path he or she believes is appropriate given those projections. This could be done without revealing the identities of the participants and would convey information on each individual policymaker’s reaction function. We might also consider other enhancements to help the public understand that the policy paths in the SEP are 7 See Mester, Loretta J., “Acknowledging Uncertainty,” Shadow Open Market Committee Fall Meeting, New York, NY, October 7, 2016 (http://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20161007- acknowledging-uncertainty.aspx). 8 See the minutes and transcripts from the July, September, and October 2012 FOMC meetings (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomchistorical2012.htm). 13 not necessarily commitments but depend on how the economy evolves. Although this message may already be understood because of the FOMC’s actions: last year, the economy evolved in a way that resulted in the FOMC raising the fed funds rate three times. This was consistent with the median projection of FOMC participants in March 2017. However, in both 2015 and 2016, the FOMC raised the funds rate fewer times than the median projection made in March of those years, clearly demonstrating that when economic conditions evolve differently than anticipated, the FOMC will adjust policy accordingly. Conclusion Let me end by noting that 14 years ago, Alan Greenspan, then chairman of the Federal Reserve, gave an economic outlook speech. The next day’s headline in The New York Times read: “Greenspan Hints at End to Low Rates,” while the headline in The Wall Street Journal read: “Greenspan Suggests Continued Patience on Rates.”9 That one speech generated such contradictory messages illustrates the challenges monetary policymakers face when communicating with the public. I suspect that monetary policy communication will likely always remain somewhat of a challenge, but over the past couple of decades, the FOMC has been taking significant steps on its journey toward increased transparency and better communication. It is important for the FOMC to continue on this journey because when the public has a better understanding of how monetary policy decisions are made, not only will the public have the information it needs to hold us accountable for our decisions but monetary policy itself will be more effective. I have offered some concrete suggestions on how we might improve our communications by conveying a better sense of our policy reaction function. I expect the FOMC will continue to make progress because the benefits of clearer communication are clearly worth the effort. 9These were the original headlines in the November 7, 2003 print editions.

The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Vantage Point: Economists on the Economy Series The Council for Economic Education New York, NY January 18, 2018 1 Introduction I thank Nan Morrison, president and CEO of the Council for Economic Education, for inviting me to speak this evening, and I thank Nan and Barry Haimes, chairman of the board, for inviting me to join the board of the CEE. The CEE’s vision is to teach every child in America about personal finance and economics, and the Council offers abundant resources to help teachers do just that. The Federal Reserve System also supports economic education as part of our mission to engage in our communities. The Cleveland Fed’s Learning Center and Money Museum offers various programs for teachers and students with the goal of increasing financial and economic literacy. What we have learned over the years is that when people have a better understanding of the economy, they can make better financial decisions and be part of the national discourse on the important economic policy choices facing the country. Federal Reserve policymakers are also in the economic education business. One of our tasks is to explain our views on the economy and monetary policy to the public. When they understand the rationale for our policy decisions, people can hold us accountable for those decisions. But in addition, our policy is more effective when people understand how policy is likely to react to changes in the economic outlook. So I’m very happy to have this opportunity to talk about the economy and monetary policy. Let me remind you that the views I’ll provide today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook The economic expansion is 8-1/2 years long and counting. It is now the third longest on record. But looking at it this way is a little misleading. Remember, the economy had to dig out of a very deep hole after the financial crisis and Great Recession. So it took quite a long time for the labor market to heal and the expansion to gain traction. Now labor markets are strong and economic growth picked up to around 2-1/2 percent last year, compared to the 2 percent pace seen over much of the expansion. This is about a quarter of a percentage point stronger than I expected at the beginning of last year. So the economy is 2 coming into 2018 with positive momentum, and for the first time in a while, there are some more salient upside risks to the forecast. The underlying fundamentals supporting the economy are very sound. Monetary policy and financial conditions are accommodative. Household and business balance sheets continue to improve, and incomes are growing. In addition, conditions in the economies of many of our trading partners are improving. You’ll notice that I haven’t said anything yet about the recently passed tax package. The reduction in business and personal taxes will likely also have some positive effect on growth this year and next. Overall, I expect 2018 to be a good year for the economy. My own expectation is that output growth will be around 2-1/2 percent, above my 2 percent estimate of trend growth. I anticipate that fiscal policy will add about ¼ to ½ percentage points to growth over the next couple of years. There’s an upside risk that the effect could be larger. I expect labor markets will remain strong this year, with above-trend employment growth continuing and the unemployment rate falling below 4 percent. Inflation ended up last year slightly lower than I thought it would at the start of the year, but I anticipate it will gradually move up to 2 percent over the next one to two years. The goals of monetary policy, given to us by Congress, are to promote maximum employment and price stability. The task before us is to calibrate monetary policy to this healthy economy, so that the economic expansion is sustained. In my view, this means that if the economy evolves as I anticipate, we’ll need to make some further increases in interest rates this year and next year, at a pace similar to last year’s. That’s a summary of my outlook, but let me give you some context so you’ll see how I got there. Economic growth Over the expansion, output growth has maintained a moderate pace of a bit more than 2 percent, on average. But last year, after a weak first quarter, growth picked up to an average pace of around 3 percent 3 over the remainder of the year. This pickup came in the midst of a severe hurricane season that caused a lot of damage in parts of the country. Growth was relatively balanced across sectors. Earlier in the expansion, while consumer spending was relatively good, business spending was weak, and net exports were a drag on growth. Last year, all three sectors made positive contributions, as did residential housing. This balance should help to sustain the expansion going forward. As I mentioned, I expect real GDP will grow at an above-trend 2-1/2 percent pace this year. Consumer spending makes up over two-thirds of output and the outlook for consumers remains sound. Spending during the fourth quarter, including the holiday season, was healthy. Readings on consumer sentiment and confidence remain high, but even more important for spending, personal incomes are growing because labor market conditions are strong. Household balance sheets are in much better shape since the Great Recession, reflecting a combination of deleveraging and increased savings. The increases in stock prices and house prices over the past year have contributed to a rise in wealth in the household sector in the aggregate. Although not true for every homeowner, the equity that households as a group have in housing has risen above its previous peak before the housing crash. This housing recovery has taken some time, but activity has picked up in recent months. Buyers, sellers, developers, and bankers were all wary about reentering the market, and rightfully so, given the fallout from the housing bust. But low interest rates and the improved financial condition of households and lenders have led to increased construction and sales. Rebuilding after the hurricanes and fires in California will also add to construction activity for a time. In some places, demand for housing is outpacing supply and house prices are accelerating. They are rising at between 6 and 7 percent, on average, nationally. Overall, I expect activity in the housing sector to continue to expand at a sustainable pace. 4 Business investment has also picked up and this is a welcome development. Investment was weak in 2015 and 2016, as the sharp drop in oil prices and the strengthening of the dollar weighed on the energy and manufacturing sectors. But conditions improved last year. Oil prices rose and the dollar depreciated as the economies of our trading partners began to strengthen. In fact, for the first time in many years, growth around the world is picking up. Business sentiment remains at high levels, and our business contacts in manufacturing and services report increasing demand, consistent with readings from national and regional business surveys. Labor markets The labor market is strong. Last year, the economy added over 2 million jobs, about 170 thousand per month, and the unemployment rate fell by six-tenths of a percentage point, to 4.1 percent. The pace of job growth is well above trend, which most estimates put in the range of 75,000 to 120,000 jobs per month. The unemployment rate is below the lowest level reached during the last expansion; it is well below the range most economists associate with full employment; and it is below the 4.3-5.0 percent range that FOMC participants project for the unemployment rate over the longer run.1 In addition, the broader measure of the unemployment rate that includes discouraged workers and those working part- time who would prefer full-time jobs is near its pre-Great Recession low, and other labor market indicators like job openings and turnover rates indicate a strong labor market. I expect this strength to continue and that the unemployment rate will move down further, ending the year at slightly under 4 percent. This is low by historical standards and well below my current estimate of its longer-run rate, which I put at 4-3/4 percent. 1 See Minutes of the FOMC Meeting of December 12-13, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20171213.htm). 5 We continue to hear from a wide range of firms that labor market conditions are tight and businesses are finding it hard to find workers, both in high-skill occupations and in lower-skill jobs. Wages have accelerated from under 2 percent earlier in the expansion to about 2-1/2 percent more recently. That strikes some people as a rather modest acceleration given the tightness in labor markets, but it is consistent with the low level of productivity growth we’ve seen over this expansion.2 Our business contacts are increasingly reporting that they are responding to labor shortages by increasing wages and offering other benefits to attract and retain workers. These increases should eventually find their way into the aggregate compensation measures. Overall, my assessment is that from the standpoint of the cyclical conditions that monetary policy can address, we are slightly beyond the maximum employment part of the Fed’s monetary policy mandate. One might ask, what’s wrong with low unemployment? An unemployment rate below what is sustainable can be a positive in the short run by bringing in workers from the sidelines of the labor market, but over time, it can be a negative by creating bottlenecks, lowering productivity growth, and putting upward pressure on inflation, which might require a policy response. Inflation Consistent with meeting the price stability part of its mandate, the FOMC has set a symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. The 2 percent inflation goal isn’t a ceiling. The inflation measures will vary from month to month, sometimes above and sometimes below 2 percent, but we aim to keep inflation at 2 percent on average over the longer run. 2 Although actual wage setting is a complicated process, in economic models of competitive markets, real wages reflect the marginal product of workers. For a discussion of wages and their relationship to productivity growth over the expansion, see Pinheiro, Roberto and Yang, Meifeng, “Wage Growth after the Great Recession,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Economic Commentary, March 21, 2017 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/publications/economic-commentary/2017-economic-commentaries/ec-201704-wage-growth-after-great- recession.aspx). 6 Inflation has been running below this goal for some time. Inflation moved up from the very low levels seen in 2015, when it was held down by falling oil and import prices. Inflation readings were above 2 percent early last year, but then fell below 2 percent partly due to special factors, like the drop in the prices of prescription drugs and cell phone service plans. Toward the end of the year, inflation readings showed some stability, but inflation ended the year at 1-3/4 percent, below our goal. I anticipate that with the economy growing above trend and the demand for labor resources continuing to strengthen, inflation will gradually move up to 2 percent on a sustainable basis over the next one to two years. Stable inflation expectations are an important component of this forecast. Inflation expectations help to anchor actual inflation rates, and this stability has already proved its value during this business cycle. During the dark days of the Great Recession, the collapse in demand could have led to deflation – not only low inflation rates but actually falling prices – because the pullback in activity was so deep. But deflationary conditions did not develop because policy responses helped to maintain people’s expectations that prices would remain stable over the longer run and that inflation would eventually return to goal. The fact that inflation expectations remain reasonably stable gives me confidence that inflation will gradually move back to goal. Of course, I also recognize that inflation forecasts – including my own – are subject to a lot of uncertainty.3,4 In determining appropriate monetary policy, we’ll need to keep evaluating the inflation forecast as the year moves on. We’ll also need to evaluate the effects of the recent changes in tax policy, which are part of the economic environment. So let me discuss fiscal policy before I turn to monetary policy. 3 Based on historical forecast errors over the past 20 years, the 70 percent confidence range for forecasts of PCE inflation one year ahead is plus or minus 1 percentage point. (See Table 2: “Average Historical Projection Error Ranges,” in the Summary of Economic Projections portion of the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 12-13, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20171213.pdf). 4 A significant portion of the variation in inflation rates comes from idiosyncratic factors that can’t be forecasted. See Yellen, Janet, “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” remarks delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24, 2015 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/yellen20150924a.pdf). 7 Fiscal Policy I expect that the recently enacted tax changes will have a positive effect on economic growth over the next couple of years. It is difficult to be precise about the magnitude of the effect of the fiscal stimulus; I’m estimating an additional ¼ to ½ percentage point of growth this year and next, but there is some upside risk that the effects could be larger. While the impact on individual households will depend on the level and sources of their income, in the aggregate, lower personal tax rates and higher standard deductions are expected to spur some additional household spending. On the corporate side, lower tax rates and full expensing for investment in equipment and intangibles should spur additional business spending to meet higher near-term demand, but how much remains to be seen. The majority of our business contacts have told us that while they welcome lower tax rates, they aren’t planning to make significant changes to their capital or hiring plans as a result of the change in taxes. Instead, those firms planning to increase spending and hiring say the increases are being driven by brighter sales prospects and the pickup in activity in the second half of last year. At the same time, some businesses attributed the firm-wide bonuses they paid to workers at the end of the year to the tax cuts, and others have taken the occasion to implement wage increases they had contemplated for some time. A stronger outlook for business spending and hiring is a welcome development. In addition to having a positive effect on near-term demand, if lower taxes spur higher labor force participation, investment in physical and human capital, research and development, and innovation, the tax package could also have a positive effect on the economy’s productive capacity, its productivity growth, and its trend growth rate. Productivity growth is a key determinant of an economy’s longer-run output growth and of living standards. The U.S. economy has been struggling with very low productivity growth during this expansion, on the order of only 1 percent.5 This is less than half the pace over the prior two expansions, 5 Labor productivity as measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector has averaged 1 percent over this expansion. 8 and partially explains why wage growth has been relatively sluggish despite the tightness in labor markets. In addition, as a result of lower population growth and labor force participation, the growth of the U.S. labor force has slowed considerably, from 2.5 percent per year, on average, in the 1970s, to around 0.5 percent per year over 2010-2016. It is expected to remain near that level over the next decade.6 While I expect some increase in productivity growth as the expansion continues, the effects of changes in tax policy on productivity growth and labor force participation are even more difficult to estimate than their effects on near-term spending, and they would play out over a longer period of time. So I have not incorporated them into my own projection for longer-run growth, which I put at 2 percent. Another aspect of the tax package that needs to be considered is its effect on the longer-run budget deficit. Before the tax package, projected longer-run fiscal imbalances were unlikely to be sustainable.7 Were the trend growth rate not to pick up, lower tax revenues would add to the deficit relative to GDP, making it even more likely that the government would need to respond with some combination of increased borrowing, reduced or restructured benefits, and increased taxes, thereby reducing any long-run benefits of the tax package. We will need to continue to evaluate the responses to tax changes as the year progresses and into the future. 6 According to the latest available projections, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that annual growth in the labor force over 2016-2026 will average 0.6 percent. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Economic Projections – 2016-26,” October 24, 2017, p. 2 (https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/ecopro.pdf). 7 For further discussion, see Mester, Loretta J., “Demographics and Their Implications for the Economy and Policy,” Cato Institute’s 35th Annual Monetary Conference: The Future of Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C., November 16, 2017 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20171116-demographics-and-their- implications-for-the-economy-and-policy.aspx). 9 Monetary Policy At its meeting last month, the FOMC raised the target range for the fed funds rate by one-quarter percentage point to 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent. This was the fifth increase in rates since December 2015, when the FOMC began removing some of the extraordinary monetary policy accommodation that was necessary in the wake of the financial crisis and Great Recession. In October, the Fed began implementing the plan to normalize its balance sheet in terms of the size and composition of assets.8 To address the Great Recession and put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates once the fed funds rate had hit effectively zero, the Fed undertook several programs to purchase longer-term assets, including longer-maturity Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). As a result of the purchases, the Fed’s balance sheet grew, from nearly $900 billion in assets in 2007, or 6 percent of nominal GDP, to about $4.5 trillion today, or 23 percent of nominal GDP. The composition changed from mainly short-term Treasuries to longer-maturity Treasuries and agency MBS. The normalization plan, which will take several years to complete, involves letting maturing Treasuries and principal payments of agency MBS and agency debt to gradually roll off the balance sheet up to a monthly cap, with the caps rising over time. The gradual, predictable decline in assets allows balance- sheet normalization to run in the background and monetary policy to focus on setting the appropriate level of the fed funds rate, our conventional monetary policy tool. The ultimate size of the balance sheet will depend on how the FOMC decides to implement monetary policy in the future, a decision that has not yet been made.9 8 See FOMC, “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” June 13, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf). 9 For an accessible description of frameworks for implementing monetary policy, see Ihrig, Jane E., Meade, Ellen E., and Weinbach, Gretchen C., “Rewriting Monetary Policy 101: What’s the Fed’s Preferred Post-Crisis Approach to Raising Interest Rates?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (Fall 2015), pp. 177-198 (http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.29.4.177). 10 I supported implementing the balance-sheet normalization plan and the December decision to raise rates. If the economy evolves as I anticipate, I believe further increases in interest rates will be appropriate this year and next year, at a pace similar to last year’s. Based on my medium-run outlook, I believe this gradual upward path of interest rates will help balance the risks and prolong the expansion so that our longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment are met and maintained. This policy path gives inflation time to move back to goal while, at the same time, avoiding a build-up of risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy is allowed to overheat, with the Fed then having to raise rates sharply in response. It helps avoid a build-up of risks to financial stability should overly low interest rates encourage investors to take on excessively risky investments in a search for yield. And it puts monetary policy in a better position to address whatever risks, whether to the upside or to the downside, are ultimately realized. Of course, this is my current view of monetary policy. We will need to calibrate our policy decisions to how the economy actually evolves and the implications of incoming information for the medium-run outlook and risks around the outlook. If you think this sounds like normal monetary policy-setting behavior, you’re right – a positive sign that the economy is finally back to normal.

Views on the Economy and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Government Affairs Breakfast Series Dayton Area Chamber of Commerce Dayton, OH February 13, 2018 1 Introduction I thank the Dayton Area Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to speak at today’s breakfast. Yesterday I had the opportunity to meet with several community organizations and to tour several Dayton neighborhoods. As I’m sure you know, we analyze a lot of data at the Fed. But augmenting the economic and financial statistics by getting out and about in the Fourth District gives me a better sense of what is happening in the economy in real time. Nothing provides a more powerful reminder that Federal Reserve policy affects real people and local communities. They say that all politics is local. In a sense, monetary policy is, too. Although we set a national monetary policy, the local information we gather from contacts around the country allows those policy decisions to take into account the diversity of the American economy and its people. The Fed’s regional structure, with 12 Reserve Banks distributed across the country, overseen by the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., supports us in this work. The information we get in the field helps us evaluate economic developments, formulate an outlook, and ultimately make better policy decisions. Today, I will provide my assessment of economic developments, and my outlook for the economy and monetary policy. As always, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economy Let me start with an issue that is on everybody’s mind: what’s going on in financial markets? The past week or so has been a roller coaster ride of ups and downs in the stock market, with a sudden increase in volatility. Longer-term bond rates have also moved up. It’s helpful to put this into perspective. Equity markets had generally been on a sizable upswing over the past year, with the S&P 500 index up 19 percent in 2017, amidst extremely low volatility. While some commentators thought that the low level of interest rates and high earnings prospects supported high stock market valuations, others thought that equity prices had begun to outpace earnings, that bond yields were too low given the economic outlook, 2 and that a correction was waiting to happen, it was just a matter of time. Of course, it is investors, not commentators, who determine prices and yields. Even with the recent movements, as of Friday, the S&P 500 index is still significantly higher than it was a year ago. Bond yields are at levels seen at the start of 2014. Whenever there are such big swings in the market, we need to assess their implications. In the near term, we look at whether the market swing is accompanied by disorderly trading, a lack of liquidity, or contagion to other markets. We have not seen this: trading has been relatively orderly, markets have remained generally liquid, and there hasn’t been a pullback in credit. We also assess whether there are spillovers to the broader economy that could affect the medium-run economic outlook. While a deeper and more persistent drop in equity markets could dash confidence and lead to a pullback in risk-taking and spending, the movements we have seen are far away from this scenario. I’ll continue to monitor financial market developments closely, but for now, I expect the economy will work through this episode of market turbulence and I have not changed my outlook. In my view, the underlying fundamentals supporting the economy are very sound. Financial conditions remain accommodative. Household and business balance sheets are healthy and incomes are growing. We’ve also seen improvement in the economies of many of our trading partners, which helps U.S. export growth. Monetary policy is accommodative and the changes in tax policy will also have a positive effect on growth this year and next. The economic expansion is now in its ninth year, and I expect 2018 will be another good year for the economy, with growth around 2-1/2 percent, which is stronger than my 2 percent estimate of trend growth. I anticipate that the tax package will add about 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point to annual growth over the next couple of years, but based on the positive reactions so far, there’s an upside risk that the effect could be larger. Labor markets have been strong, and I expect that strength to continue, with above-trend 3 employment growth continuing and the unemployment rate falling below 4 percent. Inflation has been running under 2 percent, but I expect it to gradually move up to our goal of 2 percent over the next one to two years. The task before Fed policymakers is to calibrate monetary policy to this healthy economy so that our congressionally mandated long-run goals of maximum employment and price stability are met. This means making sure we don’t get behind the curve given the economy’s strength but also making sure we don’t overreact to the positive outlook. To my mind, that means if economic conditions evolve as expected, we’ll need to make some further increases in interest rates this year and next year, at a pace similar to last year’s. I think this gradual approach is the best strategy for sustaining the expansion and balancing the risks to our dual-mandate goals. That’s a summary of my outlook, which is informed by economic information, so let’s review some of that now. Economic growth Last year, economic growth picked up to 2-1/2 percent from a moderate annual pace of about 2 percent over the prior years of the expansion. Consumer spending, which makes up over two-thirds of output, showed strength last year and my outlook is that it will remain healthy. Personal incomes are growing because labor market conditions are strong. In addition, household balance sheets are in much better shape since the Great Recession, reflecting a combination of deleveraging and increased savings. Even after the recent downturn in stock prices, increases in stock prices and house prices over the past year have contributed to a rise in household wealth in the aggregate. In fact, the housing equity held by households is now above its peak before the housing crash. 4 The recovery in housing took some time to gain traction. Buyers, sellers, developers, and bankers were all wary about re-entering the market because of the fallout from the housing bust. But low interest rates and the improved financial condition of households and lenders have led to increased construction and sales. Overall, I expect activity in the housing sector to continue to expand at a sustainable pace. The pickup in business investment last year was a welcome development. Investment was weak in 2015 and 2016, as the sharp drop in oil prices and the strengthening of the dollar weighed on the energy and manufacturing sectors. Last year, conditions improved: oil prices rose and the dollar depreciated as the economies of our trading partners began to strengthen. For the first time in many years, growth around the world is picking up and forecasts for global growth are being revised up. This has a positive feedback effect on the U.S. economy via exports. In the U.S., business sentiment is high, our business contacts are reporting increasing demand, and national and regional surveys show rising levels of activity and orders in the manufacturing and service sectors. Labor markets The labor market is strong and I expect that strength to continue. Last year, the economy added over 2 million jobs, about 180 thousand per month. In January, payroll jobs rose by 200 thousand. This pace of job growth is well above trend, which most estimates put in the range of 75,000 to 120,000 jobs per month. The unemployment rate is now 4.1 percent. This is seven-tenths of a percentage point lower than it was a year ago and below its lowest point during the last expansion. It is well below the range most economists associate with full employment, including my own estimate of 4-3/4 percent. Other indicators, including broader measures of unemployment, the job openings rate, and the job turnover rate, show that the labor market is strong. I expect this strength to continue and that the unemployment rate will move down below 4 percent this year. 5 Dayton has also benefited from an improving job market. After peaking at just over 12 percent after the Great Recession, the unemployment rate has fallen to 4.5 percent. Over the past year, payrolls have grown at a brisk 2-3/4 percent pace. This is quite a reversal, as Dayton has had its challenges. Over the 2001-2007 expansion, the Dayton region lost over 5 percent of its payroll jobs, while jobs grew more than 5 percent in the nation. During the Great Recession, payroll jobs fell about 8 percent here compared to 5 percent in the nation. But things have improved. In the Dayton region, payrolls are up 10 percent since the start of the expansion, an increase of about 35 thousand jobs. Some of the regional differences reflect differences in industry mix. Wright-Patterson Air Force Base remains the largest employer in the area. It added jobs during the recession and helped to cushion some of the job losses in other sectors. On the other hand, manufacturing employment has been on a longer- term downward trend, at both the regional and the national level, and compared to the nation, manufacturing represents a relatively larger share of payroll jobs in the Dayton region. Even so, that difference has narrowed over time as Dayton’s economy has been transitioning from one that is largely dependent on manufacturing and heavy industry to one that is diversifying into health care and education. In the 1990s, manufacturing represented about 19 percent of Dayton’s jobs and “eds and meds” represented about 13 percent. Those shares have now reversed. In the past decade, the share of jobs in eds and meds has been 19 percent, while the share in manufacturing has been 11 percent. Regions that have diversified their industrial base have generally fared better over time, and effective leadership, like that provided by the Dayton Area Chamber of Commerce, can help the region navigate this transition. As both national and regional labor markets have tightened, our contacts throughout the Fourth District have been reporting for a while that they’ve had trouble finding qualified workers. These reports are now coming from a wide range of firms across different sectors and cover both higher-skill and lower-skill occupations. Anecdotal evidence suggests that the tightness in the labor market is gradually showing up in higher compensation. Earlier in the expansion compensation growth was under 2 percent; more 6 recently, it has increased to over 2-1/2 percent. The latest employment report showed another pickup in wage growth. These increases are consistent with the increasing number of reports from firm contacts who tell us that they are responding to labor shortages by offering higher wages and benefits to attract and retain workers. Overall, my assessment is that from the standpoint of the cyclical conditions monetary policy can address, we are slightly beyond the maximum employment part of the Fed’s monetary policy mandate. Inflation The other part of the Fed’s mandate is price stability. The FOMC has set a symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. “Symmetric” means that the 2 percent inflation goal isn’t a ceiling. The inflation measures will vary from month to month, sometimes above and sometimes below 2 percent, but we aim to keep inflation at 2 percent on average over the longer run. Inflation has been running below this goal for some time, but the recent news on inflation has been positive. Inflation moved up from the very low levels seen in 2015, when it was held down by falling oil and import prices. Inflation readings were above 2 percent early last year, but then fell below 2 percent partly due to special factors, like the drop in the prices of prescription drugs and cell phone service plans. Since the lows seen last summer, inflation has moved up. We will likely see higher inflation numbers once the price declines of last March drop out of the year-over-year measures. But just as we didn’t overreact to last summer’s weaker inflation readings, we shouldn’t overreact to these increases either. Instead, I remain focused on the medium-run outlook for inflation, and I anticipate that with the economy growing above trend and the demand for labor resources continuing to strengthen, inflation will gradually move up to 2 percent on a sustainable basis over the next one to two years. 7 Stable inflation expectations are an important component of this forecast. Inflation expectations help to anchor actual inflation rates, and this stability has already proved its value during this business cycle. During the dark days of the Great Recession, the deep pullback in activity and collapse in demand could have led to deflation – not just low inflation rates but actually falling prices. But deflationary conditions did not develop because policy responses helped to maintain people’s expectations that prices would remain stable over the longer run and that inflation would eventually return to goal. The fact that inflation expectations remain reasonably stable gives me confidence that inflation will gradually move back to goal. But since inflation forecasts are subject to considerable uncertainty, I’ll keep evaluating my inflation forecast as the year progresses.1,2 I’ll also need to continue to evaluate the effects of the recent changes in tax policy. So let me discuss fiscal policy before I turn to monetary policy. Fiscal Policy I expect that the tax changes will increase spending and raise economic growth over the next couple of years. At this point, it is difficult to be precise about the magnitude of the effect of the fiscal stimulus from the tax changes; as I mentioned, I’m estimating an additional 1/4 to 1/2 percentage point of annual growth this year and next year, but there is some upside risk that the effects could be larger. The impact on individual households will depend on the level and sources of their income, but in the aggregate, I expect lower personal tax rates and higher standard deductions to spur some additional household spending. On the corporate side, lower tax rates and full expensing for investment in equipment and intangibles should spur additional business spending to meet higher near-term demand, but how much remains to be seen. Except for firms in the tax consulting business, the majority of our business contacts 1 Based on historical forecast errors over the past 20 years, the 70 percent confidence range for forecasts of PCE inflation one year ahead is plus or minus 1 percentage point. (See Table 2: “Average Historical Projection Error Ranges,” in the Summary of Economic Projections portion of the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 12-13, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20171213.pdf). 2 A significant portion of the variation in inflation rates comes from idiosyncratic factors that can’t be forecasted. See Yellen, Janet, “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” remarks delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24, 2015 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/yellen20150924a .pdf). 8 have told us that while they welcome lower tax rates, they aren’t planning to make significant changes to their capital or hiring plans as a result of the change in taxes. Instead, those firms planning to increase spending and hiring say those increases are driven by brighter sales prospects and stronger demand. At the same time, some businesses attributed the firm-wide bonuses they paid to workers at the end of the year to the tax cuts, and others have taken the occasion to implement wage increases they had contemplated for some time. Firms might also be expected to spend some of their tax savings on increased dividends and share buybacks. I expect to have a better read on how households and firms are actually responding to the tax changes over the next several months. A stronger outlook for business spending and hiring is a welcome development because investment and labor force growth are key determinants of productivity growth and productivity growth is a key determinant of an economy’s longer-run output growth and of living standards. The U.S. economy has been struggling with very low productivity growth during this expansion, on the order of only 1 percent.3 This is less than half the pace over the prior two expansions, and partially explains why wage growth has been relatively sluggish despite the tightness in labor markets. In addition, as a result of lower population growth and labor force participation, the growth of the U.S. labor force has slowed considerably, from 2.5 percent per year, on average, in the 1970s, to around 0.5 percent per year over 2010-2016. It is expected to remain near that level over the next decade.4 I expect some increase in productivity growth as the expansion continues. It is possible that the tax changes could spur higher labor force participation and investment in physical and human capital, thereby having a positive effect on the economy’s productive capacity, its productivity growth, and its trend 3 Labor productivity as measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector has averaged 1 percent over this expansion. 4 According to the latest available projections, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that annual growth in the labor force over 2016-2026 will average 0.6 percent. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Economic Projections – 2016-26,” October 24, 2017, p. 2 (https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/ecopro.pdf). 9 growth rate. But these effects from the tax changes are even more difficult to estimate than the effects on near-term spending, and they would play out over a longer period of time. So I have not incorporated them into my own projection for longer-run growth, which I put at 2 percent. Another aspect of fiscal policy that needs to be considered is its effect on the longer-run budget deficit. Before the tax package and recently passed federal budget deal, projected longer-run fiscal imbalances were unlikely to be sustainable.5 Were the trend growth rate not to pick up, lower tax revenues and higher federal spending would add to the deficit relative to GDP, making it even more likely that the government would eventually need to respond with some combination of increased borrowing, reduced or restructured benefits, and increased taxes, thereby reducing any long-run positive effects of the recent changes in fiscal policy. We will need to continue to evaluate the responses to tax changes not only as the year progresses but into the future. Monetary Policy This brings me to monetary policy. At its January meeting, the FOMC maintained the target range for the fed funds rate at 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 percent. This range was set in December, which saw the fifth increase in rates since December 2015, when the FOMC began removing some of the extraordinary monetary policy accommodation that was necessary in the wake of the financial crisis and Great Recession. In January, the FOMC also continued to implement its plan to normalize its balance sheet in terms of the size and composition of assets.6 To address the Great Recession and put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates once the fed funds rate had hit effectively zero, the Fed undertook several programs to 5 For further discussion, see Mester, Loretta J., “Demographics and Their Implications for the Economy and Policy,” Cato Institute’s 35th Annual Monetary Conference: The Future of Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C., November 16, 2017 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20171116-demographics-and-their- implications-for-the-economy-and-policy.aspx). 6 See FOMC, “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” June 13, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf ). 10 purchase longer-term assets, including longer-maturity Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). As a result of the purchases, the Fed’s balance sheet grew, from nearly $900 billion in assets in 2007, or 6 percent of nominal GDP, to about $4.5 trillion today, or 23 percent of nominal GDP. The composition changed from mainly short-term Treasuries to longer-maturity Treasuries and agency MBS. The normalization plan, which began last October and will take several years to complete, involves letting maturing Treasuries and principal payments of agency MBS and agency debt to gradually roll off the balance sheet up to a monthly cap, with the caps rising over time. The gradual, predictable decline in assets allows balance-sheet normalization to run in the background and monetary policy to focus on setting the appropriate level of the fed funds rate, our conventional monetary policy tool. The ultimate size of the balance sheet will depend on how the FOMC decides to implement monetary policy in the future, a decision that has not yet been made.7 I supported implementing the balance-sheet normalization plan and the December and January decisions on interest rates. If the economy evolves as I anticipate, I believe further increases in interest rates will be appropriate this year and next year, at a pace similar to last year’s. I believe this gradual upward path of interest rates will help balance the risks and prolong the expansion so that our longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment are met and maintained. This policy path gives inflation time to move back to goal while, at the same time, avoiding a build-up of risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy is allowed to overheat, with the Fed then having to raise rates sharply in response. It helps avoid a build-up of risks to financial stability should overly low interest rates encourage investors to take on excessively risky investments in a search for yield. And it puts monetary policy in a better position to address whatever risks, whether to the upside or to the downside, are ultimately realized. 7 For an accessible description of frameworks for implementing monetary policy, see Ihrig, Jane E., Meade, Ellen E., and Weinbach, Gretchen C., “Rewriting Monetary Policy 101: What’s the Fed’s Preferred Post-Crisis Approach to Raising Interest Rates?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (Fall 2015), pp. 177-198 (http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.29.4.177). 11 Of course, this is my current view of monetary policy. We will need to calibrate our policy decisions to how the economy actually evolves and the implications of incoming information for the medium-run outlook and risks around the outlook. If the upside risks to growth come to pass, we may need to steepen the path a bit; if inflation surprises on the downside, we may need to go a bit slower. But this is normal monetary-policy-setting behavior – we will calibrate our policy based on the outlook and the realized and expected progress on our dual-mandate monetary policy goals.

Remarks on the FOMC’s Monetary Policy Framework Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Panel Remarks at the 2018 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum Sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business New York, NY February 23, 2018 1 Introduction I will focus my brief remarks on the FOMC’s monetary policy framework for determining the appropriate policy to promote our longer-run monetary policy goals.1 The views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Recently, some economists and policymakers have recommended that the FOMC evaluate its monetary policy framework. Indeed, a careful reader of the January FOMC minutes, released earlier this week, might have noticed that a few participants suggested such an examination.2 The FOMC has not indicated whether or not it will undertake such a review. But let me provide my own thoughts on the rationale for undertaking an assessment, what it might cover, and the timing, that is, the why, what, and when of a review. I’ll also briefly discuss some alternative frameworks that should be part of the assessment. But first, some background. Flexible Inflation Targeting The Fed’s longer-run monetary policy goals are price stability and maximum employment. Congress specified these goals but gave the Fed considerable independence in choosing the framework used to achieve these goals. The FOMC currently uses a flexible inflation-targeting framework. This framework recognizes that, over the longer run, monetary policy can influence only inflation and not the underlying real structural aspects of the economy such as the natural rate of unemployment or maximum employment, but that monetary policy can be used to help offset shorter-run fluctuations in employment from maximum employment. 1 I view the monetary policy framework as distinct from the operating framework, which is more tactical and is concerned with the tools used to implement appropriate policy choices, e.g., whether to operate with a large amount of reserves as in a floor system or a smaller amount of reserves as in a corridor system to hit the policy interest rate. 2 FOMC (February 2018). 2 The framework is briefly described in the FOMC’s statement on longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy.3 This statement was initially released in January 2012 when the FOMC adopted an explicit numerical inflation goal. This is a symmetric goal of 2 percent, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. “Symmetric” means that the 2 percent inflation goal is not a ceiling. The inflation measures will vary from month to month, sometimes above and sometimes below 2 percent, but we aim to keep inflation at 2 percent on average over the longer run. Why Review the Framework? The flexible inflation-targeting framework has served the FOMC well and has been effective in promoting our monetary policy goals. So why review the framework? There are a couple of reasons. First, as a matter of good governance, it behooves the Fed to conduct periodic reviews of its assumptions, methods, and models. This is the way the FOMC has operated for some time. For example, as indicated in the minutes, the January FOMC meeting included staff briefings and a discussion of inflation analysis and forecasting models.4 It is a standard best practice for a central bank to assess its performance.5 Another reason for the FOMC to review its framework derives from the experience of the Great Recession and its aftermath. To fight disinflationary pressures and economic contraction, the policy rate was brought to effectively zero, where it remained for seven years, and unconventional tools, including forward guidance and large-scale asset purchases, were used. Although the recovery was slow in coming, the economic expansion is now firmly in place, labor markets are strong, and inflation is expected to 3 See FOMC (January 30, 2018). 4 See FOMC (February 2018). 5 For example, the Bank of Canada renews its agreement with the government on its inflation target every five years. The next renewal is in 2021. 3 return to 2 percent on a sustained basis over the next couple of years. Nonetheless, the post-crisis economic environment is expected to differ in some important ways from the pre-crisis world. The expected slowdown in population growth and labor force participation rates due to changes in demographics will weigh on long-run economic growth, the natural rate of unemployment, and the longer-term equilibrium interest rate.6,7 Real interest rates may potentially remain lower than in past decades. If so, then compared to the past, there would be less room for monetary policymakers to cushion against a negative economic shock, the probability of the policy rate hitting the zero lower bound would be higher, and nontraditional monetary policy tools would need to be used more often. To the extent that these tools are less effective than the traditional interest rate tool or are constrained from being used, the potential would be for longer recessions and longer bouts of low inflation. This raises the legitimate question of whether any changes in our monetary policy framework would be helpful in maintaining macroeconomic stability in this environment.8 What Should a Review Cover? We cannot know whether the FOMC would have been even more successful had it used a different monetary policy framework in the times leading up to and following the financial crisis. But that’s the wrong question. The review should focus on evaluating whether changing the framework could make monetary policy even more effective given the current and future economic environment. 6 See Mester (2017). 7 FOMC participants have been lowering their estimates of the fed funds rate that will be consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run. The median estimate has decreased from 4 percent in March 2014 to 2.8 percent today. (See FOMC (April 2014) and FOMC (January 2018).) Also, empirical estimates of the equilibrium real fed funds rate, so-called r-star, while highly uncertain, are lower than in the past. For a review of the literature on the equilibrium interest rate, see Hamilton, et al. (2015). 8 Although I don’t discuss them here, other government policies might also be brought to bear to increase the long- term growth rate and equilibrium interest rate, which would give monetary policy more room to act. Such policies would focus on increasing productivity growth and labor force participation. 4 I remain open-minded on this. At the same time, a change from flexible inflation targeting shouldn’t be decided cavalierly. There is little experience with alternative frameworks because the central banks of most advanced economies like the U.S. have used some form of inflation targeting. In my view, the success of the current framework, coupled with the lack of empirical evidence on alternatives, means that the bar should be high for changing to a new framework. It is important to recognize that any framework will have positives and negatives and we are not starting from scratch, there is a framework in place, so transition costs need to be considered. Two important parts of any framework are communication and credibility. The FOMC has been on a journey over the past couple of decades to make our monetary policy more transparent to the public and Chairman Powell has emphasized that the FOMC will continue on this journey.9 When the public has a better understanding of the goals and rationale for monetary policy decisions, they are better able to hold policymakers accountable for their actions. But effective communication also makes monetary policy itself more effective by providing the public with information about the economic outlook and aligning the public’s expectations about future policy actions. Thus, an important aspect of any framework is how well it communicates monetary policy to businesses and households that are making economic decisions. If the framework is not well understood, its benefits cannot be captured. Another important aspect of any monetary policy framework is its credibility. Is the framework credible to the public so that they will formulate expectations about future policy based on the framework? Is it a framework that future Committees will stick with? Of course, one determinant of a framework’s credibility is its effectiveness in achieving monetary policy goals. So effectiveness, communication, and credibility, and the interactions among these three need to be part of assessing the framework. 9 See Powell (2018). 5 When Should a Review Commence? After coming through the financial crisis and Great Recession, the economy has returned to normal and monetary policy, including the policy rate and the balance sheet, is normalizing. The smooth transition to new Fed leadership is also underway. Nothing is broken and a return to a normal economy and normal policymaking gives us an opportunity to look at some longer-run issues. This suggests to me that it may be appropriate later this year to begin an assessment of our current monetary policy framework and alternatives. Such reviews take time and should be thorough. As I mentioned, the FOMC adopted its numerical inflation goal in January 2012, but this came after years of study and discussion going back to at least May 1996, with subsequent discussions in 2005, 2009, and 2011. Even if the FOMC concludes that it is best to stay with its current framework, the review will have served the Committee well and may indicate some ways we can further improve our monetary policy transparency and communication. Some Alternative Frameworks I will end my remarks by briefly noting some alternative frameworks that could be assessed as part of a review. I will not have time to discuss their strengths and weaknesses at length, but I can give you a flavor.10 Higher Inflation Target One alternative is to keep the flexible inflation-targeting framework but set a higher longer-run inflation target, say, 4 percent instead of 2 percent.11 This would be a familiar arrangement but give the nominal rate more of a cushion from hitting the zero lower bound for any given negative shock. But does the gain from more likely avoiding the zero lower bound when a negative shock hits outweigh the costs of running a higher level of inflation at all times? Will it be easy to raise inflation expectations after having 10 See Mester (2018) for further discussion of monetary policy frameworks and their strengths and weaknesses. 11 See Blanchard, Dell’Ariccia, and Mauro (2010) for discussion. 6 successfully anchored them at 2 percent? Is 4 percent inflation seen as consistent with price stability? These questions will need to be answered. Price-Level Targeting and Nominal GDP Targeting Price-level targeting and nominal GDP targeting involve targeting a path for the nominal level rather than a growth rate. Unlike inflation targeting, which lets bygones-be-bygones, these level-targeting frameworks make up for past deviations from the path.12 For example, when inflation has been running low, price-level targeting builds in a form of forward commitment to higher inflation in the future and a “low for longer” interest rate strategy. In theory, this can move current inflation expectations up, buoying current inflation and limiting the time the economy spends at the zero lower bound.13 There is little international experience with these frameworks and there are measurement issues to contend with: the starting point for the path matters, data revisions would be more serious because these frameworks do not let bygones-be-bygones, and to know what inflation will be along the nominal GDP path, one needs a reliable estimate of potential real output growth.14,15 There are also credibility issues. Is it credible that policymakers will keep interest rates low to make up for past shortfalls even when demand is growing strongly or that they will tighten policy when demand is weak after a supply shock has raised the price level? 12 The academic literature suggests that a price-level-targeting framework may approximate optimal monetary policy when policymakers want to minimize fluctuations in the output gap and in inflation around a target, and it can be particularly useful at the zero lower bound by putting upward pressure on inflation expectations and, thereby, downward pressure on the real rate. See Kahn (2009) for an accessible discussion of price- level targeting. 13 See Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). 14 Sweden did price-level targeting for less than two years when it went off the gold standard in 1931. See Kahn (2009). 15 Figure 1 in Mester (2018) shows four different starting points for the price-level path: the first quarters of 1990, 1995, 2001, and 2007. If the starting point is 1990Q1, the price level is essentially on its path, and if the starting point is 2001Q1, it is near its path. The other two starting points show a larger gap. 7 Temporary Price-Level Targeting Former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke has suggested a temporary price-level-targeting framework, which involves targeting inflation in normal times but switching to price-level targeting once the policy rate has fallen to the zero lower bound.16 Policymakers would revert to inflation targeting and begin to raise interest rates once the cumulative inflation rate from the time the zero lower bound was hit had risen sustainably back to target. This framework might be easy to communicate because it could be discussed solely in terms of the inflation goal; however, determining and communicating the timing of when to switch back to the inflation-targeting regime could be complex. Summary A review of monetary policy frameworks should consider these alternatives, as well as others. The goal would be to assess which framework would make monetary policy the most effective at achieving its goals, given the current and future economic environment, and whether any changes to the current framework could enhance monetary policy communications, credibility, and transparency. 16 Bernanke (2017). 8 References Bernanke, Ben S., “Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy,” Ben Bernanke’s Blog, The Brookings Institution, October 12, 2017. (https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2017/10/12/temporary-price-level-targeting-an- alternative-framework-for-monetary-policy/) Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia, and Paolo Mauro, “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 42(s1), 2010, pp. 199-215. (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1538-4616.2010.00334.x/full) Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford, “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, 2003, pp. 139-233. (https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/the-zero-bound-on-interest-rates-and-optimal-monetary-policy/) FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 18-19, 2014,” April 2014. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20140319.pdf) FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 12-13, 2017,” January 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20171213.pdf) FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, January 30-31, 2018,” February 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20180131.pdf) FOMC, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 30, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf) Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West, “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future,” U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, February 2015, revised August 2015. (https://research.chicagobooth.edu/-/media/research/igm/docs/2015-usmpf.pdf) Kahn, George A., “Beyond Inflation Targeting: Should Central Banks Target the Price Level?,” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Third Quarter 2009, pp. 35-64. (https://www.kansascityfed.org/PeXPZ/Publicat/EconRev/PDF/09q3kahn.pdf) Mester, Loretta J., “Monetary Policy Frameworks,” National Association for Business Economics and American Economic Association Session at the Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, PA, January 5, 2018. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20180105-monetary-policy- frameworks.aspx) Mester, Loretta J., “Demographics and Their Implications for the Economy and Policy,” Cato Institute’s 35th Annual Monetary Conference: The Future of Monetary Policy, Washington, DC, November 16, 2017. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20171116-demographics-and-their- implications-for-the-economy-and-policy.aspx) Powell, Jerome H., “Remarks at the Ceremonial Swearing-In,” February 13, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20180213a.htm)
