September 23, 2013 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Fordham Wall Street Council, Fordham University Graduate School of Business, New York City As prepared for delivery Thank you, Dean Gautschi, for that kind introduction. It is a pleasure to be here today at Fordham University and I thank the Fordham Wall Street Council for hosting me. This morning my remarks will focus on the U.S. economic outlook. I am also going to discuss a new tool that the New York Fed will begin to test—an overnight, fixed-rate full allotment reverse repo facility. I want to dispel any misconceptions about why we are doing this testing. The introduction of this facility is not a precursor to a change in the stance of monetary policy. Instead, the goal of this new facility is to improve our control over overnight interest rates to aid us in the implementation of monetary policy. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and opinions and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. Let me start by summarizing my main points regarding the economic outlook. In my view, the economy is slowly healing. But, while significant progress has been made since the end of the recession, there remain a number of headwinds that have offset the improvement in the underlying fundamentals. As a result, we have yet to see any meaningful pickup in the economy’s forward momentum. The most notable recent headwind, of course, has been the large amount of fiscal drag this year from the payroll and income tax increases and the budget sequester. Also noteworthy is the tightening of financial market conditions that has occurred since May. As we move into 2014, the fiscal headwinds should abate somewhat. As that occurs, the improving underlying fundamentals of the economy should begin to dominate, pushing up the overall growth rate. But this is just a forecast, it has not been realized yet. That is one reason why I supported the FOMC’s decision last week to maintain the current pace of our Treasury and mortgage-backed security purchases. In my view, the economy still needs the support of a very accommodative monetary policy. Adjustments to that policy need to be anchored in an assessment of how the economy is actually performing, how financial conditions are evolving, and how this affects the longer-term outlook and the risks around it. Our decisions on how to adjust our policy tools—for example, the pace of asset purchases and forward guidance with respect to the level of short-term rates—must be rooted in the ongoing flow of information that informs our judgments about the prospects for a sustainable recovery. Decisions on the pace of asset purchase and forward guidance must be based on what is most appropriate to achieve our dual mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment in a context of price stability. Economic Outlook Let’s dig a bit deeper into the tug- of-war between improving fundamentals and the drag exerted by fiscal policy and tighter financial conditions. Starting with the improving underlying fundamentals, one important aspect is the household sector and its balance sheet. In a number of dimensions, households have made significant progress in repairing their finances. Prior to the recession, households took on an excessive amount of debt— much in the form of residential mortgages. The process of deleveraging and reducing this debt overhang is now well advanced. For example, household debt relative to disposable income has declined substantially since it peaked in the third quarter of 2007, bringing it back to levels last seen in early 2003. Delinquency rates on mortgages, auto loans and credit cards continue to decline. In addition, household wealth relative to disposable income has recovered from the steep decline following the crisis and is now near its 20-year average. Reflecting this improvement, credit standards are beginning to ease, which should support consumer spending on durable goods. Another sector in which the fundamentals have improved is the housing sector. Most importantly, the excess supply of housing created during the boom appears to have been largely worked off. As a result, house prices are now rising in most areas of the country and homebuilding activity has strengthened. Moreover, there is further scope for gains in homebuilding. After all, the current annualized rate of housing starts—around 900,000—is considerably below the rate consistent with the country’s underlying demographic trends and the expected long-run rate of household formation. By these metrics, housing starts should ultimately climb back to about a 1.5 million annualized rate. The underlying fundamentals supporting business investment are also good. Profit margins have been high and cash flows strong for some time. Credit availability has been gradually improving. For example, the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey indicates that banks are continuing to gradually ease their lending standards for commercial and industrial loans. However, against these improving economic fundamentals, we have two important offsets. The first offset is the unusually high degree of fiscal drag, which the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates at about 1¾ percent of potential GDP in 2013. 1 The two most important components of this restraint are the end of the payroll tax holiday and the increase in income tax rates this past January, and, more recently, the government spending cuts resulting from budget sequestration. Another new source of drag for the economy is the sharp rise in long-term interest rates, especially residential mortgage rates—that has occurred since May. So far we don’t have much hard data on how this is affecting the housing sector. But data through mid-September generally indicate that the rise in rates has cut into the upward momentum of the housing sector. Currently, improving economic fundamentals versus fiscal drag and somewhat tighter financial conditions are pulling the economy in opposite directions, roughly cancelling each other. The economy continues to grow and payrolls are rising, but there is little evidence of a pickup in the economy’s forward momentum. For example, real GDP growth is still stuck close to the 2.2 percent average annualized growth rate that has prevailed since the beginning of the expansion. But, as the degree of fiscal drag and other headwinds lessen, the tug-of-war should begin to shift in favor of higher growth. Absent additional fiscal restraint, a further tightening of financial conditions, or some adverse external shock, I expect the economy to grow a bit faster in 2014. So, how compelling is this narrative? In big picture terms, it certainly seems quite reasonable to me. However, no forecast is inevitable and there are some reasons to remain wary. In particular, although the fiscal drag will likely lessen in 2014, I expect it will still be significant, and the outcome of the current federal budget and debt ceiling debates may affect this assessment. Moreover, when one drills down and looks at the recent performance and outlook for the economy’s major sectors, additional caution seems warranted. Turning first to the outlook for fiscal policy, there are two points worth making. First, the CBO projects that significant fiscal drag will persist into 2014. Second, the fact that the degree of restraint lessens next fiscal year could understate the actual impact on the economy because the full impact of some of this year’s cuts may not yet have been fully felt. For example, consider university research spending that depends, in part, on federal grants. As the grant budget falls under sequestration, this will eventually squeeze university budgets over time and likely lead to additional belt-tightening. Next, let’s take a deeper look at how the major sectors of the private economy that might play a role in the strengthening story are doing currently: consumption, housing, business investment and trade. When we’re done, I think you’ll agree that there still are some reasons for caution. Turning first to consumer spending, such spending has remained fairly subdued outside of interest rate-sensitive consumer durables. In July, for example, real personal consumption expenditures were flat, and it is unlikely that third quarter consumption growth will be much above a 2 percent annual rate. Moreover, the drivers of consumer spending do not look particularly supportive. In particular, real disposable income growth has grown at less than a 1 percent annual pace since March. Furthermore, the recent data do not yet clearly indicate a firming in the income growth rate, or the two important components of labor income growth—hours and compensation. The conundrum for consumers is a simple one: if consumer spending growth is to exceed 2 percent annualized on a sustained basis at a time when real disposable income growth is below 2 percent then this would require the household saving rate to decline persistently. But there is little reason to expect such a decline given that the current saving rate is at a level consistent with current level of household wealth relative to income. We have a chicken-egg problem. If the saving rate remains stable, then stronger consumption growth will require a pickup in income growth. But for income to rise, demand must increase. This suggests that there may need to be an impetus to growth from other sectors of the economy to generate a boost in consumer spending growth. One possible source is the housing sector. As noted earlier, housing starts are still quite low relative to what the country’s demographics should support in the long run. But there are two difficulties here. First, the strength of the housing recovery may be blunted by the recent rise in mortgage rates. For example, before last week’s partial reversal, the 30-year fixed mortgage rate had risen by about 120 basis points since May to more than 4½ percent. For a household considering buying a house and financing the purchase with a $100,000 30-year fixed-rate mortgage, this rise in mortgage rates would increase their annual payments by more than $800. The increase in financing costs and the rise in home prices has made housing considerably less affordable than it was earlier in the year. This is illustrated by the National Association of Realtors’ affordability index which has declined by 25 percent over the six months ending in July. Second, housing activity has already been contributing significantly to growth. For example, over the past two years, real residential investment swung from a drag of 1.1 percentage points of GDP to a contribution of 0.4 percentage points. Together, this suggests that the impetus to growth from housing may moderate rather than strengthen. Perhaps, the economy can get a boost from business fixed investment. After all, most of the evidence points towards further improvement. First, as I noted earlier, profit margins and cash flows are high, and credit availability is improving. Thus, those businesses with successful track records should be able to readily finance new investments. Second, business fixed investment is not very high as a share of GDP and overall industrial capacity has been expanding only slowly. This suggests that this sector is not over extended. Third, the drop in U.S. energy costs relative to the rest of the world should spur more investment in the U.S. in energy intensive activities such as petrochemicals manufacturing. However, there are also some negatives here as well. In particular, despite the positive factors I have cited, the growth in manufacturing output has been only moderate, with the overall manufacturing capacity utilization rate still below its pre-recession level. Thus, outside of the energy intensive sectors, there still appears to be little near-term motivation for firms to invest in order to increase their productive capacity. Businesses seem to be waiting for stronger demand before they significantly increase their investment outlays. Thus, we have a second chicken-egg problem. On the trade side, the news is mixed. Although Japanese and European economic activity has picked up recently, the sustainability remains in question. Even as Europe emerges from its recession, growth is likely to be anemic at best over the next year, constrained by continued fiscal consolidation and tight credit conditions as their banks continue to deleverage. In Japan, the consumption tax is scheduled to increase significantly next year, which is likely to constrain domestic demand. Moreover, the recent improvement in Europe and Japan has been offset by slowing in some emerging market economies. In fact, some emerging market economies are under pressure because they are running large current account and trade deficits. Any forced correction among these countries on trade is likely to be a drag on global growth and on U.S. exports over the near term. On balance, my outlook is that growth in the rest of the world will be roughly the same in 2014 as it is this year, so that the contribution of trade to growth will likely remain quite small. Putting all these factors together, I still conclude that there is a basis for a pickup in growth as fiscal restraint lessens, but the impulse is not likely to be a particularly powerful one without some unanticipated impetus to growth that solves the chicken-egg problems, especially in the near term. On the inflation side of the ledger, inflation remains below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent longer-run objective for the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator. The year-over-year change in the total PCE deflator was 1.4 percent in July. This has created some concern that inflation is “too low,” raising real interest rates and making monetary policy less accommodative. I acknowledge this concern, but I believe it will abate as inflation moves gradually back up towards a 2 percent annualized rate over the next few years. A number of considerations inform my view. First, a decomposition of core inflation reveals that the most recent slowing in inflation has been largely confined to core goods, whereas the rate of increase of core services has been relatively steady. Such was not the case in 2010—the previous instance of a significant slowing of inflation. This suggests that the fall in inflation partly reflects idiosyncratic factors that are not likely to be sustained. Second, the recent data suggest that the downtrend in the inflation rate may be coming to an end. For example, the core personal consumption expenditures deflator rose at a higher rate over the past three months than during any other 3-month period since mid-2012. Third, measures of longer-term inflation expectations, whether discerned from financial asset prices or from surveys of households or professional forecasters, remain well anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent objective. This is important because inflation expectations are a major determinant of the inflation process. As long as inflation expectations stay well-anchored, it will be hard for inflation to fall further. Putting these factors together along with my forecast of a gradual pickup in real economic activity, my outlook is for inflation to drift back toward our 2 percent objective over the medium term. However, much like the case of the real growth outlook, there is significant uncertainty around this forecast. Monetary Policy So what does this all imply for monetary policy? As you are aware, at last week’s FOMC meeting we made no changes to our monetary policy. In particular, the Committee decided to continue to purchase long-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at a monthly pace of $45 billion and $40 billion, respectively. The FOMC statement reaffirmed the Committee’s intention “to continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability.” 2 We also reaffirmed our forward guidance with respect to the federal funds rate. The statement notes that the Committee, “currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.” 3 Several questions have emerged following the meeting. Most noteworthy was—given that market expectations were skewed towards anticipating the beginning of a taper at this meeting—why the Committee did not begin to reduce the pace of asset purchases. Although I can’t speak for the Committee, I can provide some reasons for my own decision. To begin to taper, I have two tests that must be passed: (1) evidence that the labor market has shown improvement, and (2) information about the economy’s forward momentum that makes me confident that labor market improvement will continue in the future. So far, I think we have made progress with respect to these metrics, but have not yet achieved success. With respect to the first metric, we have seen labor market improvement since the program began last September. Over this time period, the unemployment rate has declined to 7.3 percent from 8.1 percent. 4 However, at the same time, this decline in the unemployment rate overstates the degree of improvement. Other metrics of labor market conditions, such as the hiring, job-openings, job-finding rate, quits rate and the vacancy-to-unemployment ratio, collectively indicate a much more modest improvement in labor market conditions compared to that suggested by the decline in the unemployment rate. In particular, it is still hard for those who are unemployed to find jobs. Currently, there are three unemployed workers per job opening, as opposed to an average of two during the period from 2003 to 2007. With respect to the second metric—confidence that the economic recovery is strong enough to generate sustained labor market improvement—I don’t think we have yet passed that test. The economy has not picked up forward momentum and a 2 percent growth rate—even if sustained—might not be sufficient to generate further improvement in labor market conditions. Moreover, fiscal uncertainties loom very large right now as Congress considers the issues of funding the government and raising the debt limit ceiling. Assuming no change in my assessment of the efficacy and costs associated with the purchase program, I’d like to see economic news that makes me more confident that we will see continued improvement in the labor market. Then I would feel comfortable that the time had come to cut the pace of asset purchases. A few other points with respect to monetary policy are worth emphasizing following last week’s FOMC meeting. First, as I have noted in earlier remarks, a decision to reduce the rate of asset purchases is not a tightening of monetary policy. If we are purchasing additional securities we are simply adding accommodation at a slower pace. Second, any decision to cut the pace of asset purchases should not be taken as signaling an early exit from this period of unusually low short-term rates. We have established a threshold of 6.5 percent for the unemployment rate as long as we do not expect inflation to exceed 2 ½ percent at a one-to-two year horizon and inflation expectations remain well-anchored. It is likely to take a considerable amount of time to reach the 6.5 percent unemployment rate threshold. Moreover, because the 6.5 percent unemployment rate is a threshold, and not a trigger, depending on the economic circumstances, we might wait a long time after we breach the threshold before we begin to raise our federal funds rate target. The point I wish to emphasize is that any decisions on the pace of asset purchases (the rate at which we are adding accommodation) versus liftoff in terms of the federal funds rate (a tightening of monetary policy) should be viewed as largely independent of one another. One does not foreshadow the other—certainly not in any mechanical way or with a definitive timeframe. As Chairman Bernanke noted in last week’s press conference, our actions are data dependent and how the data will evolve is uncertain. In addition, it is worth explaining why we anticipate the federal funds rate is still likely to be quite low relative to what Committee participants consider normal over the longer run, even as the Committee gets close to its employment and inflation objectives. For example, in the September Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection for the federal funds rate in the fourth quarter of 2016 is 2 percent, far below the median long-run federal funds rate projection of 4 percent, at the same time that the unemployment rate and inflation are close to the Committee’s long-run objectives. How does one explain this? As noted by Chairman Bernanke in last week’s press conference, the still low federal funds rate projections for 2016 reflect the fact that economic headwinds—such as tight credit standards and ongoing fiscal consolidation—are likely to take a long time to fully abate. As a result, monetary policy will have to keep short-term interest rates very low for a sustained period in order for the Committee to achieve its objectives. My view is that the neutral federal funds rate consistent with trend growth is currently very low. That’s one reason why the economy is not growing very fast despite the current accommodative stance of monetary policy. Although the neutral rate should gradually normalize over the long-run as economic fundamentals continue to improve and headwinds abate, this process will likely take many years. In the meantime, the federal funds rate level consistent with the Committee’s objectives of maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability will likely be well below the long-run level. Fixed-Rate, Full Allotment Overnight Reverse Repo Facility Before I conclude, I want to discuss a new tool that the Open Market Trading Desk (the Desk) at the New York Fed will be testing and developing in coming months. The new tool is a fixed-rate, full-allotment overnight reverse repo facility that would be available to a broad range of counterparties—not just open to the primary dealers through which we have historically conducted our open market operations. 5 By being available to a much broader array of counterparties, this should allow the Fed to tighten its control over money market rates. I’ll first explain in plain English what this facility is. Then I’ll explain why we are testing it and what having such a facility in place might accomplish. A fixed-rate, full allotment overnight reverse repo facility is a facility in which the Federal Reserve posts a fixed interest rate and accepts cash from counterparties, which include banks, dealers, money market funds, and some government sponsored enterprises (GSEs), on an overnight basis in return for a security. If implemented, the facility would be “full allotment”—that means the facility would have no cap on the amount of funds accepted from any of its counterparties at the posted overnight interest rate. 6 The repo facility is “reverse” because the direction in which the funds and securities move—participants are lending funds to the Fed rather than vice versa. Users of the facility are making the economic equivalent of an overnight collateralized loan of cash to the Federal Reserve. The amount of funds invested in the facility is likely to be sensitive to the posted interest rate. The higher the interest rate relative to comparable money market rates, the greater the participation is likely to be and vice versa. There are several reasons motivating our interest in developing such a facility. First, such a facility should enable the Federal Reserve to improve its control over the level of money market rates. By offering a new, essentially risk-free investment, one would expect that anyone with access to such a facility would generally be unwilling to lend instead to someone else at a rate below that posted for the facility. This should help to establish a floor on the level of overnight rates. Right now, most short-term rates trade between 0 and 25 basis points, but occasionally T-bill and repo rates go negative, for example at quarter-end or when financial stresses increase the demand for very safe assets. The full allotment element of the reverse repo facility would increase the availability of a risk-free asset, satisfying the demand when the appetite for safe assets increases. This should help tighten the relationship between these and other money market rates. These reverse repos would be available to an expanded set of counterparties that includes many of the money market lenders who are ineligible to earn the interest on excess reserves (IOER), such as GSEs and a number of money market funds. Depending on the facility rate, these lenders who cannot earn the IOER rate might get a better rate by investing in the overnight RRPs compared to lending to banks or to broker dealers. This competitive effect could, in and of itself, put a stronger floor on money market rates. Second, this new facility is also likely to reduce the volatility of short-term interest rates. If a lender that cannot earn the IOER rate has an unexpectedly large amount of funds to invest, this lender currently may have to accept an unusually low interest rate. But with the overnight reverse repo facility in place, this lender could lend as much funds as desired to the facility at a fixed rate and this should reduce the downward pressure on money market rates. By tightening control and reducing the volatility of short-term rates, such a facility should reassure investors that the Federal Reserve has sufficient tools to manage monetary policy effectively even with a very large balance sheet. I have told you what this facility is for. Now let me emphasize what the testing and development of this facility does not foreshadow. The testing and the development of the facility is not being undertaken to facilitate or expedite exit from our large balance sheet and should not be considered to be an element of the exit process. The purpose of the facility is to establish a floor on money market rates and to improve the implementation of monetary policy even when the balance sheet is large. Even if our balance sheet increases significantly further and stays very large for many years, it will be useful to have this facility available to improve monetary policy control. In coming months we will test the facility with two goals in mind. First, we want to be assured that there are no glitches operationally with somewhat higher transaction volumes than in previous tests, that we can accept cash from a larger array of counterparties, post collateral in the tri-party repo system and reverse the transactions each day smoothly. Second, while the limited size of the operations during this exercise will prevent the operations from having a significant impact on market rates, we will observe how the facility impacts individual investor demand relative to other market rates. Additionally, we can see how sensitive that demand is to changes in market conditions such as quarter-end that increase the demand for safe assets. These observations will give us some insight into how the facility could affect the entire constellation of money market rates. Only by testing and learning will we be able to assess how best to use the facility. In conclusion, let me turn back to the economic outlook and the role of monetary policy. I do believe that we are making progress towards our objectives of maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability. The economic fundamentals are improving and I expect that the healing process will continue in the coming months and years. At the same time, it is important to recognize that the financial crisis generated significant headwinds that are only slowly abating. We must push against these headwinds forcefully to best achieve our objectives. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 This number refers to the change in the high-employment budget deficit for fiscal year 2013 as estimated by the CBO in March. 2 Federal Open Market Committee statement , September 18, 2013 3 Federal Open Market Committee statement , September 18, 2013 4 The 8.1 percent unemployment rate refers to the August 2012 unemployment rate that was the latest information available to the Committee at its September 2012 meeting. 5 The Desk has been conducting operational readiness exercises for the use of reverse repurchase agreements since late 2009. At the most recent FOMC meeting last week, the FOMC authorized the Desk to begin another testing program which begins today. See the Desk’s September 20 announcement of the next round of testing. 6 During the testing phase, a ceiling will be placed on the maximum amount that can be invested per counterparty. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

September 25, 2013 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Museum of American Finance, New York City Thank you all for being here to commemorate the opening of the centennial exhibit for the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York at the Museum of American Finance, just a few blocks from the New York Fed’s landmark head office at 33 Liberty Street. I would like to say thank you to our friends at the Museum for their work and interest in the Fed and for supporting us in organizing this event. Before making some brief remarks about the centennial, I would also like to acknowledge some of the people in attendance tonight. We have two former New York Fed presidents here this evening: Jerry Corrigan and Bill McDonough. I met Jerry, the seventh president of the Bank, when I was still wet behind the ears. I was just out of graduate school at the Board of Governors in Washington, but Jerry was already a force to be reckoned with and a part of Paul Volcker’s inner circle. Jerry’s tenure as president had many memorable moments, including the October 1987 stock market “break”. Jerry, of course, was instrumental in working with then Chairman Alan Greenspan in devising a response to provide liquidity to the market, and an episode that could have ended in financial crisis soon passed. Jerry also tackled many other difficult issues during his tenure, including the Latin-American debt crisis and the development of the first Basel accord. We also have Bill McDonough, the eighth president of the Bank, who built on the accomplishments of Jerry’s tenure, and made great strides in connecting the New York Fed to the broader region. At the same time, he helped ensure that the Federal Reserve was prepared to face new, salient challenges presented by developments in the global economic and financial landscape. During his tenure, the city, the country and the Bank experienced a very significant crisis on September 11, 2001. Under Bill’s leadership, New York Fed staff worked tirelessly on Liberty Street, supporting the efforts of first responders, while ensuring that financial markets continued to operate and serve their vital function in the U.S. and global economy. A number of the members of our Board of Directors, including Chairwoman Rafferty, are with us, as is one of the Federal Reserve’s friends from the international central banking community: Mervyn King, the recent head of the Bank of England. Mervyn and his wife recently moved to New York City, so we should extend a warm welcome to them. For Mervyn, I am guessing that one hundred years may not seem like a long time, given that the Bank of England is over 300 years old, but I am sure he will graciously allow us our moment. We are also joined by many other friends and associates of the New York Fed, and a great number of our current and former staff. For 100 years the Federal Reserve has been an essential contributor to American economic prosperity and stability and that record is reflected in this fascinating exhibit. Rather than focus on its achievements during my brief remarks this evening, I thought I’d highlight what I think makes the institution that I have the honor of leading, the New York Fed, such a remarkable place within this extraordinary System. First, we are a bank within government. That means we not only have researchers, supervisors and market analysts, but we also provide banking services and possess significant operational capabilities. We accept deposits, make loans and operate the System Open Market Account for the Federal Open Market Committee. When exigent and unusual circumstances require extraordinary operations, be it in a financial crisis or to implement unconventional monetary policies, we stand ready. Our operational capabilities complement our more conventional central bank policy role in a way that is, I think, very special within the Federal Reserve System. Second, the New York Fed is a vital component of the international role played by the Federal Reserve System. This can be seen in our Central Bank International Account Services, where we have more than $3 trillion in foreign assets under our management. Some of those assets glisten on the bedrock of Manhattan. The gold vault at 33 Liberty Street remains the world’s largest depository of monetary gold held on behalf of foreign governments, central banks and official international organizations. This international orientation was also very much in evidence during the crisis as we negotiated foreign exchange swap agreements with a number of foreign central banks and then operationalized the provision of dollar liquidity worldwide through a coordinated system of dollar auctions. Third, and perhaps most importantly, we have an unusually talented and dedicated group of people working at the Bank who are committed to promoting the mission of the institution and serving the public interest. While we may not, on occasion, be as nimble as we might like, the attitude of our staff is to always find a way, to do whatever it takes (within the law and the scope of our responsibilities, of course), and to not rest until we have come up with the best plan of action. That attitude was most clearly and publicly evident during the Bank’s response to the financial crisis, where we played a critical role within the System in preventing a financial panic from turning into a world-wide depression. We continue to display that spirit each and every day at the Bank. And it is that attitude, ability and esprit de corps that will no doubt allow us and the System to meet the important challenges on the road ahead. I will focus briefly on a few such challenges: The first will be on the monetary policy front. The Federal Reserve has engaged in a set of unconventional monetary policies in recent years. These policies have been necessary because the FOMC could not ease monetary policy further by conventional means—the federal funds rate was constrained by the so-called “zero lower bound”. Exit from these unconventional set of policies is certainly feasible—the ability to pay interest on excess reserves gives us a viable tool to manage monetary policy even with an enlarged balance sheet, and the New York Fed is prepared to execute on this mission, as we always are. But we do have to be a bit humble about what we don’t know. There will undoubtedly be communications and operational challenges and unexpected consequences. We will need to be sufficiently agile so that we can best achieve our dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability. The second challenge for us at the New York Fed, and within the regulatory community more generally, will be in staying the course and implementing a regulatory regime in which no institutions are “too big to fail” (TBTF). TBTF is wrong for several reasons. It creates an unfair disparity between large and small institutions. In addition to being unfair, it creates greater risks to financial stability by encouraging greater size and complexity. We have made considerable progress toward ending TBTF—raising capital and liquidity requirements for the largest, most systemic banks—but there is a ways to go. In particular, to paraphrase former New York Fed President Tim Geithner, while the single point of entry concept “beats no plan”, significant barriers to achieving a cross border resolution remain, and there are still insufficient incentives in place for firms to take corrective actions early on to prevent their failure in the first place. The third challenge for the Federal Reserve is to put financial stability on par with monetary policy. As our experience from 2007 to 2009 has demonstrated, monetary policy cannot work properly when there is financial instability. When financial instability occurs, it disturbs market functioning and can impair bank balance sheets in a way that disrupts their financial intermediation function, constraining the availability of credit for households and businesses. This, in turn, can lead to further reductions in aggregate demand that put additional stress on the weakened financial system. Financial stability cannot be subordinated to any other priority. The fourth challenge is to sustain and enhance the capabilities of the New York Fed. This starts most obviously in continuing to attract, develop and retain the best people. But it also extends to tending to the so-called culture of the institution—for example, ensuring that good ideas rise to the top no matter where they originate, and that people feel comfortable to challenge the conventional wisdom. These challenges are energizing, and that’s why being president of the New York Fed is the greatest job in the world. And I am confident that, because of the talent and dedication of our staff, the New York Fed will succeed in surmounting the challenges it faces now and will face over the next 100 years. And to drive home the point of our staff’s dedication, I would like to highlight the efforts of one person, Rosemary Lazenby, who has made this exhibit possible. Rosemary is the longest tenured employee at the Bank—55 years—she is our resident historian and curator and she has delayed her retirement in order to develop this centennial exhibit. Her efforts are just another example of what really glistens at 33 Liberty Street (and I am not referring to the gold in our vault). Thank you Rosemary, and thank you all for coming out this this evening to enjoy the centennial exhibit. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

, and at the end of my talk will be happy to answer any questions you have about the economic outlook. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. National Economic Conditions Let me begin by taking stock of where we are at the moment. Then I will address my expectations for the performance of the economy over the remainder of 2013 and into 2014. According to the National Bureau of Economic Research, which determines the timing of economic recessions and expansions, the current expansion began in mid-2009, more than four years ago. However, the expansion has been subdued so far, as the average annual growth rate of real GDP has been just 2.2 percent over the past four years. While that growth rate is near most FOMC participants’ estimates of the U.S. economy’s longer-run growth rate as well as those of many outside analysts, a more rapid pace of growth likely is necessary to reduce meaningfully the significant economic slack that developed during the Great Recession. Consistent with the modest pace of economic growth, improvement in labor market conditions has been slow. Even though the unemployment rate has declined by 2.7 percentage points from its peak of 10 percent in October of 2009, there are still many people that want jobs but are not counted as unemployed because they are not actively looking for work. An alternative measure of labor market conditions, the employment to population ratio, which is not influenced by changes in the number of these workers, has shown limited improvement. Job loss rates have fallen, but hiring rates remain depressed at low levels. Taken together, the labor market still cannot be regarded as healthy. Numerous indicators, including the behavior of labor compensation, are all consistent with the view that there remains a great deal of slack in labor markets. Nevertheless, as I have stated in earlier speeches, I see persuasive evidence of improving underlying fundamentals for much of the private sector of the U.S. economy. Key measures of household leverage have declined and are now near the lowest levels they have been in well over a decade. Household net worth, expressed as a percent of disposable income, has increased back to its average of the previous decade, reflecting rising equity and home prices and declining debt. Banks have eased credit standards somewhat recently after a prolonged period of tightness. As a result, we are now experiencing a fairly typical cyclical recovery of consumer spending on durable goods. For example, light-weight motor vehicles sold at a seasonally-adjusted annual rate of nearly 16.1 million in August, close to the number sold in 2007. Similarly, after five years in which housing production was well below what is consistent with underlying demographic trends, it now appears that we have worked off the excess supply of housing built up during the boom years of the last decade. Existing home sales remain on an upward trend, and a widely followed national home price index is up around 12 percent over the 12 months ending in July. 1 Indeed, anecdotal reports suggest that this higher-than-expected increase in home prices is due to a lack of homes for sale. However, a number of risks to the outlook are evident. Long-term interest rates, including mortgage rates, have risen significantly since early May. Since then, we have seen a sharp drop in refinancing mortgage applications, a more moderate but significant decline in purchase mortgage applications and fairly flat housing starts and new home sales. Although I do not anticipate that the rise in long-term rates will lead to a downturn in housing, these developments do suggest that higher mortgage rates have cut into the upward momentum of the housing sector. We will need to monitor upcoming data closely to assess more fully the impact of higher rates on the housing recovery. Another risk is that federal fiscal policy could exert further restraint on the economy during the rest of this year and in 2014. It is difficult to assess how much of the contractionary effects from sequestration, for example, have already occurred, or still remain ahead. A related issue is the high degree of uncertainty about fiscal policy. In coming weeks, Congress will be considering how to fund the government for the next fiscal year and will also be debating what to do about the debt limit. This creates uncertainty about the fiscal outlook and may exert a restraining influence on household and business spending. One other risk to highlight is the global economic outlook. Even though the euro area appears to have begun to grow again after a protracted recession, growth in that area is still expected to be fairly weak at best. In addition, growth in many of the largest emerging economies has slowed, and some of the countries with large trade and current account imbalances have seen their financial markets and currencies come under pressure. If growth abroad were to slow, this could impede the growth of U.S. exports and this could result in less strength in manufacturing production and employment in the U.S. Thus, returning to an analogy I have used in previous speeches, I see the economy in a tug-of-war between these headwinds and underlying fundamental improvement, with a great deal of uncertainty over when the improvement in the underlying fundamentals will prevail. In the end, my best guess is that growth for all of 2013, measured on a Q4/Q4 basis, will be near the post-recession average. But I believe a good case can be made that the pace of growth will pick up some in 2014. The private sector of the economy should continue to heal, while the amount of fiscal drag should subside. I also expect that, despite the near-term concerns, growth prospects among our major trading partners will improve next year. And this combination of events is likely to create an environment in which business investment spending will strengthen. However, the notion that the economy will grow more swiftly remains a forecast rather than a reality at this point. Turning to the inflation outlook, total inflation, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator, has fluctuated recently with short-term movements in energy prices, but it continues to run below the FOMC’s expressed goal of 2 percent. Core inflation, that is, excluding food and energy, slowed in late 2012 and early 2013 to well below 2 percent, although it has shown signs of stabilizing in the last couple of months. A decomposition of core inflation reveals that the most recent slowing of inflation has been largely confined to core goods, whereas the rate of increase of core services has been relatively steady. Such was not the case in 2010—the previous instance of a significant slowing of inflation. In addition, inflation expectations so far have remained relatively stable at levels somewhat above the current inflation rate. This should help prevent an undesirable further drop in inflation relative to our 2 percent objective. Thus, I anticipate that inflation will firm further in the months ahead and move toward the FOMC’s longer-run objective. Still, the FOMC recognizes that inflation persistently below 2 percent could pose risks to economic performance. As is always the case, there is substantial uncertainty surrounding this forecast. Moreover, there is always the possibility of some unforeseen shock. Thus, we will be monitoring U.S. and global economic conditions very carefully and will adjust our views on the likely path for growth, inflation and the unemployment rate accordingly in response to new information. So what does this all portend for monetary policy? As you are aware, at last week’s meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee we made no changes to our monetary policy. In particular, the Committee decided to continue purchasing long-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities at a monthly pace of $45 billion and $40 billion, respectively. The FOMC statement reaffirmed the Committee’s intention to “continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability.” 2 We also reaffirmed our forward guidance with respect to the federal funds rate. The statement notes that the Committee “decided to keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent and currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.” 3 One noteworthy question that emerged following the meeting was why the Committee did not begin to reduce the pace of asset purchases. Although I can’t speak for the Committee, I can provide some reasons for my own decision. To begin to taper, I have two tests that must be passed: (1) evidence that the labor market has shown improvement, and (2) information about the economy’s forward momentum that makes me confident that labor market improvement will continue in the future. So far, I think we have made progress with respect to these metrics, but have not yet achieved success. With respect to the first metric, we have seen labor market improvement since the program began last September. Over this time period, the unemployment rate has declined to 7.3 percent from 8.1 percent. However, at the same time, this decline in the unemployment rate overstates the degree of improvement. Other metrics of labor market conditions, such as the hiring, job-openings, job-finding rate, quits rate and the vacancy-to-unemployment ratio, collectively indicate a much more modest improvement in labor market conditions compared to that suggested by the decline in the unemployment rate. In particular, it is still hard for those who are unemployed to find jobs. Currently, there are three unemployed workers per job opening, as opposed to an average of two during the period from 2003 to 2007. With respect to the second metric—confidence that the economic recovery is strong enough to generate sustained labor market improvement—I don’t think we have yet passed that test. The economy has not picked up forward momentum and a 2 percent growth rate—even if sustained—might not be sufficient to generate further improvement in labor market conditions. Moreover, as I noted earlier, fiscal uncertainties loom very large right now as Congress considers the issues of funding the government and raising the debt limit ceiling. Assuming no change in my assessment of the efficacy and costs associated with the purchase program, I’d like to see economic news that makes me more confident that we will see continued improvement in the labor market. Then I would feel comfortable that the time had come to cut the pace of asset purchases. 4 Regional Economic Conditions Let me now turn to economic conditions in the region. The upstate New York economy is continuing to grow, but at a pace somewhat slower than the national economy. In part, this reflects the fact that the U.S. economy is recovering from a much deeper and more severe recession than Upstate New York. As the national economy continues to heal, places like Upstate New York, which didn’t see a huge boom and bust in housing and their economies before the Great Recession, don’t have as much ground to make up. But the region’s slow economic growth during the recovery also reflects the reemergence of historical trends—Upstate New York hasn’t tended to perform as well as the rest of the country during economic expansions. Like many economies in the Northeast, Upstate has tended to grow slowly in recent decades, as the population has shifted to other parts of the country and the once dominant manufacturing industry has shrunk considerably. These same trends are playing out in the Syracuse area. Like Upstate New York more generally, the recession in Syracuse was not as deep as the nation’s. However, the Syracuse area experienced a deeper recession than Upstate as a whole, losing about 13,000 jobs during the downturn. The area’s recovery has lagged behind Upstate. So far, Syracuse has gained back less than half of the jobs that it lost. Recent job growth has been led by the region’s education and health sectors. Together, these sectors have added stability to the local economy and provided a foundation for growth. Over the past several years, during both recession and recovery, these sectors have added about 1,000 jobs each year to the local economy. The leisure and hospitality sector, as well as the retail sector, has also been a solid source of job growth for the area. However, as you probably well know, job losses in the region’s manufacturing industry have weighed against these gains. About 9,000 manufacturing jobs have been lost since the start of the Great Recession. And, while a slow jobs recovery began in the nation’s manufacturing sector in 2010, Syracuse has continued to lose these jobs in recent years—a painful process for the area to continue to endure to be sure. Nonetheless, these trends have resulted in a more diversified economy. In fact, the share of workers employed in the metro area’s manufacturing sector is now just 8 percent, just below the nation’s 9 percent share. The private education and health sectors have emerged as the largest industries, and now employ one in five workers. So, the face of the local economy has changed dramatically through a somewhat painful restructuring process. But I believe this process is reaching its conclusion, and the resulting more diversified local economy is providing a strong foundation on which Syracuse can build going forward. Hence my interest in the collaborative efforts of the business, academic and health sectors to further economic growth. These efforts capitalize on the strengths of the region and may well be a good way to further economic development not only in Syracuse but in Buffalo and Rochester as well. Each metro area has a strong university, a strong health sector and a business community all eager to find ways to leverage local assets and boost economic development. Looking forward, I believe that the colleges and universities in Syracuse will help drive the region’s economy in the years to come. Syracuse can build on these assets by continuing to make partnerships between industry and higher education a high priority. When companies and universities work together, they can become a powerful engine for innovation and economic growth. These collaborations are a key ingredient to helping improve the competitiveness of local businesses, the universities themselves, and their regions, and we should take every opportunity to exploit these partnerships as much as possible to unleash their full potential. College graduates finding jobs Let me finish off by saying a few words about the value of education. There is no doubt that the Great Recession and sluggish recovery that followed has made it difficult for many people to find jobs. I’m sure many of you here today are worried about finding a good job after you graduate, and you may be wondering whether going to college will turn out to have been a good investment. Let me reassure you, despite the weak labor market conditions that have prevailed since the Great Recession, the benefits of a college degree remain significant. Research we have undertaken at the New York Fed clearly shows that young people with a college degree are more likely to have a job and they tend to earn higher wages than those without degrees—and this is true even for those who may be underemployed initially when they first enter the labor market after graduation. In fact, our research finds that to some extent, it has always proved challenging for college graduates to transition into the labor market, even during economic expansions, but as time passes, and the graduate’s experience grows, the transition generally gets accomplished successfully. Although it is true that the labor market has been more difficult for college graduates in recent years, I am confident that most will find work and transition into higher-skilled jobs as they gain experience and as the labor market improves. Thank you for your kind attention and I will now be happy to take some questions. 1 Based on the CoreLogic home price index including distressed sales. 2 Federal Open Market Committee statement , September 18, 2013 3 Federal Open Market Committee statement , September 18, 2013 4 For more thoughts on the monetary policy outlook, I refer you to the speech made earlier this week: Reflections on the Economic Outlook and the Implications for Monetary Policy . By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Introductory Remarks at Workshop on "Fire Sales" as a Driver of Systemic Risk in Tri-Party Repo and Other Secured Funding Markets - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Introductory Remarks at Workshop on "Fire Sales" as a Driver of Systemic Risk in Tri-Party Repo and Other Secured Funding Markets October 4, 2013 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Workshop on "Fire Sales" as a Driver of Systemic Risk in Tri-Party Repo and Other Secured Funding Markets, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning. I am pleased to have the opportunity to open this workshop and discuss key developments in the tri-party repo market. In my remarks, I would like to give a brief overview of some of the problems that surfaced in this market during the financial crisis of 2008, recognize the improvements that have occurred since then, and most importantly, highlight significant vulnerabilities that still persist despite the progress we have made. While we can feel proud of the enhancements that are currently underway in the tri-party repo market, today I want to underscore the fact that significant work remains to be done. The tri-party repo market constitutes a vital component of the U.S. financial system. It plays an important role in providing financing for broker-dealers that make markets in Treasury and agency securities, and is an important mechanism that supports dealer intermediation of credit. The market also provides a secure investment vehicle for those that manage large amounts of liquidity and need an investment vehicle to park these monies. We care about the health and stability of the tri-party repo market both because of our interest in promoting stable and liquid financial markets and because we use it to implement monetary policy. The recent financial crisis showed us that the tri-party repo market was inherently unstable due to deficiencies in the settlement infrastructure. Prior to 2008, there was limited recognition of the ways in which adverse developments in this market could quickly transmit risk to other parts of the financial system with unforeseen consequences. We now know, with the benefit of hindsight, that the market was overly reliant on massive extensions of intraday credit by the clearing banks to the broker-dealers, that market participants did not adequately appreciate the magnitude of the risk embedded in the role played by the clearing banks, and, as a result, market participants underpriced risk in ways that undermined the market’s resiliency during periods of stress. These vulnerabilities were made apparent in the spring of 2008 when the events surrounding Bear Stearns demonstrated the run risk that existed more broadly in the tri-party repo market, prompting the Federal Reserve to intervene in order to restore confidence and market functioning. This intervention took the form of the creation of a Primary Dealer Credit Facility in March 2008, and a subsequent expansion of the facility in September 2008. The scope and scale of the market disruption were clearly very troublesome. As many of you are aware, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York published a white paper in May 2010 that highlighted three critical sources of instability associated with practices in the tri-party repo market: (1) the market’s excessive reliance on intraday credit from the clearing banks; (2) weaknesses in the liquidity and credit risk management practices of cash lenders and clearing banks that left them vulnerable to stress environments; and (3) the lack of a mechanism or process for liquidating collateral during periods of stress in a manner that did not destabilize other segments of the financial system. After the crisis, we asked the industry to help develop a plan to reengineer the tri-party repo settlement infrastructure to mitigate these risks. The industry responded by identifying key changes that could be made to the platform to eliminate market reliance on intraday credit, thereby removing a key source of fragility observed in 2008. This process was challenging at times, and ultimately required our intervention as a supervisor to move forward. But the industry successfully developed a roadmap for reform that is the basis for the changes now being implemented. The clearing banks are making substantial investments to reengineer their tri-party repo settlement processes, while lenders and borrowers are making adjustments to their business practices and technologies to ensure they are ready for changes that are occurring in the market. When completed at the end of next year, we expect that these changes will substantially improve the stability of the market. Indeed, the work completed to date has already reduced the amount of activity being financed on an intraday basis from 100 percent to about 70 percent, and we project that intraday credit usage will decline to no more than 10 percent by the end of next year. By removing the clearing bank from the role of substantial intraday lender, and making tri-party repurchase exposures truly bilateral, we expect that market participants will have better incentives to manage their liquidity and credit risks more prudently. While these changes represent positive developments that will enhance the stability of the tri-party repo market, an important challenge remains. Current reforms do not address the risk that a dealer’s loss of access to tri-party repo funding could precipitate destabilizing asset fire sales, whether by the dealer itself, or by the dealer’s creditors following a default. Industry participants have yet to fully embrace the role they must play in finding a solution to this problem. As a result, I would urge industry participants to begin work on this issue without further delay. In fact, this is one of the motivations for convening today’s workshop—to start the dialogue. As several of the speakers will discuss in greater detail today, when fire sales occur they can undermine the stability of other markets beyond the tri-party repo market. The transmission of instability typically occurs as a consequence of increased margin calls and mark-to-market losses that strain firms’ liquidity and capital positions and put additional pressure on firms to further deleverage. Such scenarios can have material adverse repercussions on other market segments and market participants. It is vital that we take steps to address this risk now, during a period when markets are functioning without stress, in order to improve the resiliency of this market before the next crisis occurs. This is especially important in light of the heightened threshold established by the Dodd-Frank Act for future central bank interventions in the event of a market disruption. Even if this constraint did not exist, the experience of the recent financial crisis has served to strengthen our resolve to ensure that the market is structured in a way where risk is accurately priced and resilient to stress on a day-to-day basis, without the need for official sector intervention as a first resort. As many of you know, the Federal Reserve has been calling for action on this issue over the past two years, and all three Financial Stability Oversight Council annual reports have highlighted this as a significant issue worthy of our attention. However, the diversity of participants in the tri-party repo market has made it difficult to move forward quickly with a market solution that addresses the risk I have outlined. Industry leadership is absolutely critical to overcoming these challenges. If industry is unable to play its role in achieving a holistic solution, regulators may find themselves forced to employ the specific policy tools at their disposal in their respective purviews to address the fire sale risk. While such an approach may indeed enhance the overall stability of this market, it could also lead to unintended consequences that include reducing the efficacy of the critical role played by this market in supporting the broader financial system. I am glad that you are all here today to work with us to begin to identify the best solutions to the problem of fire sale risk in the context of the tri-party repo market. I urge you to participate actively and express your ideas candidly. I am confident that we will come up with the best solution to this problem by working together. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

October 15, 2013 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Central Bank Independence Conference—Progress and Challenges in Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to be here today. Does the implementation of unconventional monetary policies pose a threat to central bank independence? My short answer, which I will elaborate on, is that while the threat is low, central bankers need to be cognizant of such risks, and clearly explain the motivations for their actions in order to mitigate such risks. The best way for central banks to maintain their independence is to use all their available monetary policy tools to best achieve their objectives. Because the use of our unconventional monetary policy tools has been in pursuit of our dual mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability, I do not see the use of these tools as creating significant new risks to our independence. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. To start, it is important to be clear on what we mean by unconventional monetary policies. In my remarks, I am going to focus only on the set of unconventional monetary policies that are relevant today in an environment in which central banks are constrained from lowering their policy rate any further due to the zero lower bound. I will not discuss the type of extraordinary interventions that occurred at the height of the financial crisis. 1 A starting point is that the independence of the central bank with respect to its budget supports its overall independence. The Federal Reserve’s traditional monetary policy framework has helped to assure this budgetary independence. The liability side of our balance sheet consisted primarily of currency and reserve balances on which we did not pay any interest. The asset side consisted primarily of Treasury securities. There was no meaningful credit risk and the interest rate risk was limited because assets were generally held to maturity. This, combined with the zero cost of the Fed’s liabilities, resulted in the Federal Reserve turning over a large amount of earnings to the Treasury each year after covering all of its operating costs and retaining a small portion of its earnings to maintain a level of surplus capital equal to the amount of capital paid-in by member banks. Thus, one key question is how this budgetary independence might be threatened through the use of unconventional monetary policies. After all, some of these policies do have implications for the Federal Reserve’s remittances to the Treasury and, thus, could conceivably create a potential threat to the Federal Reserve’s budgetary independence. To step back, the Federal Reserve’s set of unconventional monetary policies has consisted of three major components: Forward guidance with respect to the path of the federal funds rate target. Large-scale asset purchases of longer-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). A maturity extension program in which shorter-dated Treasuries were sold and the proceeds used to purchase longer-dated Treasuries. With respect to forward guidance, it is important to distinguish between two specific forms that this guidance may take. In the first form the central bank provides its forecast for the future path of the policy rate and, possibly, some sense of the degree of uncertainty around this path. In the second, the central bank pre-commits to a specific future path for its policy rate. Providing a forecast for the policy rate by itself does not create any budget or reputational risk for the Federal Reserve, so I generally do not see the first form of forward guidance as posing much risk to central bank independence. 2 The second form of forward guidance—pre-commitment to a policy rate path—could create more risk for the central bank. In particular, consider a scenario in which the central bank decided to increase monetary accommodation by committing to maintain a low short-term interest rate for a long time even if this commitment resulted in inflation overshooting the central bank’s objective in the future. I could see how this could create a potential threat to the central bank’s independence. That is because the commitment could force the central bank in the future to conduct monetary policy in a way that was inconsistent with the inflation portion of its mandate. Although this second form of forward guidance could create greater risk for the central bank with respect to its future independence, this is not a policy that has been adopted by the Federal Reserve. There are implementation challenges with this approach. In particular, it is difficult for a monetary policy committee today to institutionally bind future monetary policy committees to follow actions that could conflict with their objectives in the future. Without such a credible forward commitment, such policies would likely be ineffective in affecting expectations in the manner needed to provide additional monetary policy accommodation. In contrast, I think there are greater potential risks to central bank independence from the Fed’s large-scale asset purchase programs and the Treasury maturity extension program. These programs do create some budget risk for the Federal Reserve. The issue here is not that the Fed is taking credit risk because the Fed’s purchases are restricted to Treasuries and agency MBS. Instead, the budgetary risks stem from the fact that these asset purchase and maturity extension programs expose the Federal Reserve to increased interest rate risk that could affect the level of net interest earnings and therefore the amount of the Fed’s remittances back to the U.S. Treasury. If the Federal Reserve needed to raise short-term rates to attain its objectives, it would do so by raising the interest paid on its reserves. As a result, net interest earnings would fall due to the increase in interest cost. If the rise in rates were sufficiently large, the Federal Reserve’s net interest margin could turn negative, resulting in losses for the Federal Reserve. The Fed’s earnings could also be adversely affected by asset sales. For example, if the Fed determined that it needed to reduce the aggregate level of reserves through asset sales, the Fed might incur losses by selling these assets at prices below their amortized costs. Although this risk is real, I believe it is not a big threat to the Federal Reserve’s independence for two reasons. First, the potential for this outcome is mitigated by the fact that the Federal Reserve has considerable non-interest bearing liabilities on its balance sheet—namely currency. These liabilities incur no interest expense regardless of the stance of monetary policy. This means that short-term interest rates have to rise appreciably before the Federal Reserve’s net interest margin turns negative. Second, even if the Federal Reserve were to incur an operating loss either because of an increase in interest expense or because of realized losses on asset sales, the Federal Reserve can create a deferred asset on its balance sheet, obviating the need for funding from the Treasury to the Federal Reserve. In this sense, the Federal Reserve would retain its budgetary independence. In the case where the Fed recognizes a deferred asset, its remittances to the Treasury would cease until that deferred asset was paid down. Is there a risk to budgetary independence that might emerge if the Federal Reserve did not remit any income to the Treasury for a considerable period of time? My response here is that we should take a long-term perspective when we assess the potential fiscal costs associated with the Federal Reserve’s enlarged balance sheet. The fact is that the Fed’s reimbursements to the U.S. Treasury have been around $80 billion per year in recent years, far higher than the $20 to 30 billion range that applied before the financial crisis. Under most scenarios, the Federal Reserve’s total remittances to the Treasury will be larger than they would have otherwise been in the absence of the asset purchase and maturity extension programs. More importantly, the Fed’s cumulative earnings understate the fiscal implications of the Federal Reserve’s actions. To the extent that the asset purchases have resulted in easier financial conditions that have promoted stronger economic activity, this in turn has had a positive fiscal consequence for the U.S. government. In addition, the Fed’s asset purchase programs have pushed longer-term interest rates below what they would otherwise have been, reducing the overall funding expenses of the U.S. Treasury. Once we take into account the broader fiscal consequences of the unconventional monetary policies put in place by the Fed, they are quite likely to cumulatively have an overall positive impact on the government budget. As a result, the use of unconventional monetary policy tools should pose no significant threat to the Fed’s independence. Now some worry that a large balance sheet may cause the Federal Reserve to deviate from the monetary policy that is consistent with its dual mandate goals with respect to unemployment and inflation. The argument is made that concerns about the impact of policy changes on the level of remittances might constrain the conduct of monetary policy. In particular, some argue that the Federal Reserve might pull its punches and not raise short-term interest rates in as timely or as aggressive a manner as needed to keep inflation in check. I think that the size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet actually creates incentives that reinforce the pursuit of the Federal Reserve’s objective with respect to inflation. Consider what would happen if the Federal Reserve failed to tighten in a timely way. Inflation and long-term interest rates would rise, and this would necessitate a larger rise in short-term interest rates and even greater pressure on the Federal Reserve’s net interest margin and earnings in the future. In contrast, by tightening in a timely way, the Fed would prevent inflation pressures from emerging and this would limit the need for a larger rise in short-term rates in the future. The current size of the balance sheet would also discourage a premature interest rate hike. In the absence of solid improvements in labor market activity, a sharp increase in short-term rates would unnecessarily reduce the Federal Reserve net interest income without any benefits in terms of achieving its dual mandate goals. Thus, the current size and composition of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet actually create strong incentives to adjust policy in a timely way. A far more important threat to central bank independence than the use of unconventional monetary policy is whether the fiscal authorities act in a manner consistent with the central bank’s objectives. As recent history has shown, central banks may not be able to achieve their objectives when an inconsistent fiscal regime is in place. That is, monetary and fiscal authorities need to share the same objectives. When the objectives differ, fiscal dominance can become a major problem for the central bank. For example, if the budget trajectory were clearly unsustainable, then monetary policy may no longer be able to credibly act in a way that keeps inflation expectations in check. But I don’t think the issue of fiscal dominance is linked back to whether the central bank pursues unconventional monetary policies or not. At the end of the day, I think that the best way to maintain independence is for central bankers to use all their available monetary policy tools, including unconventional monetary policy tools when needed, to best achieve their objectives. The historical record is clear: Central bank independence tends to lead to better monetary policy outcomes. But, the causality also runs in reverse: Good monetary policy outcomes help ensure monetary policy independence. Thank you for your attention. 1 However, it is important to note that some of those interventions did indeed result in tighter limits on the central bank’s authority as a lender of last resort. For example, the Fed’s scope to provide liquidity to troubled firms in unusual and exigent circumstances—under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act—was curtailed somewhat by the Dodd-Frank Act. This underscores the fact that central bank actions can have consequences with respect to independence. 2 While I have categorized providing a forecast for the future path of the policy rate as a form of unconventional monetary policy, this may be a misnomer in that some central banks use this form of forward guidance as part of their standard communication strategy, and the Federal Reserve may choose to continue to provide this form of forward guidance even after its policy rate is no longer constrained by the zero lower bound. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

October 18, 2013 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at 2013 Resolution Conference: Planning for the Orderly Resolution of a Global Systemically Important Bank, Washington, D.C. As prepared for delivery The topic of how systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) will be resolved is a very important subject. As we saw during the financial crisis, the failure of Lehman Brothers generated huge shocks across the global financial system that led to a deep global downturn. That is not an acceptable regime and I am very glad we are working hard to change it. I thank the organizers for giving me the opportunity to make some short remarks. Today, I’m going to take a somewhat broader view than some of the other speakers, focusing on two issues: Some outstanding questions about how the "single point of entry" strategy under the Title II resolution regime would work in practice. How the resolution regime fits within the broader supervisory agenda of ending “too big to fail” and making the financial system more resilient and robust. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System. The first point I’d make is that I very much endorse the single point of entry framework for resolution as proposed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). I think it is the best plan for implementing Title II given the complexity and scope of large, global financial institutions and I also think it is well-suited to the U.S. bank holding company framework. By assigning losses to shareholders and unsecured creditors of the holding company and transferring sound operating subsidiaries to a new solvent entity, such a "top-down" resolution strategy will facilitate continuity for the critical services performed by the firm’s subsidiaries. This will reduce the costs associated with the failure of the parent company and reduce the degree of disruption to financial markets and financial stability. While the Title II single point of entry strategy holds tremendous promise, I think it is important not to declare victory prematurely. First, there are still significant issues about how the resolution of a large systemically complex firm would work in practice. Second, even assuming that our efforts to overcome these challenges are ultimately fully successful, resolution is still likely to represent a "second best" outcome compared to preventing a systemically important financial institution from failing in the first place. After first describing some of the current implementation challenges associated with Title II resolution, I will return to this second issue. Implementing the resolution regime on a cross-border basis remains one of the most significant challenges. U.S. authorities are working with authorities abroad on the issues that require international collaboration, but the financial industry also has a role to play in overcoming these challenges. I encourage the industry to promptly address the matters that require action on their part. In particular, I am worried about two current shortcomings: The reach of Title II’s one-day stay on the close-out of qualified financial contracts is incomplete and does not extend to contracts governed by non-U.S. law with non-U.S. counterparties. The placement of the parent company into receivership may be treated by these counterparties as an event of default due to the presence of a parent guarantee or other cross-default provisions triggered by the parent-level insolvency. Unless market participants make the appropriate contractual changes that will ensure that the entry of the parent company into Title II will not trigger the close-out provisions of those over-the-counter derivatives and other qualified financial contracts that are outside the reach of Title II’s U.S. application, foreign counterparties to the systemically important firm will tend to exercise this right whenever it is in their individual economic interest to do so. This would create significant difficulties because such actions could greatly complicate the operations of the firm during a time when it is already under considerable stress and would propagate stress more broadly in financial markets. There are two main options for addressing this issue, and they are not mutually exclusive. Existing derivative contracts need to be amended and future contracts need to provide that the parent’s entry into the Title II proceeding does not trigger the close-out option, or legal changes need to be implemented abroad so that the "one-day stay" that applies to qualified financial contracts governed by U.S. law is enforceable against those contracts governed by foreign law. Only by making these changes can we avoid the potential for disruptive close-outs. I strongly encourage the ongoing efforts to address this critical issue. A second issue with respect to Title II resolution is that we cannot be certain how foreign authorities will react when the parent is put into the Title II proceeding. While the U.S. authorities have been in discussion with our colleagues abroad to enable the coordination needed for a smooth cross-border resolution process, we cannot always be certain of the circumstances under which host authorities may choose to take or be required to take actions such as unilateral "ring-fencing" that might disrupt the implementation of the single point of entry approach. Thus, we need to continue to work with foreign regulators to iron out any issues ahead of time so that the resolution regime will work well for global, systemically important firms. The smooth operation of a resolution proceeding also depends on the existence of adequate liquidity in the early days of the process. One of the key pillars of Title II is that, unlike a bankruptcy proceeding, the FDIC will have access to liquidity from the U.S. Treasury to help ensure an effective resolution. While this access provides significant support for an effective resolution, it will still be important for the resolution authorities to provide clarity about the timing and the amount of liquidity resources that will be made available after a firm enters into resolution. This clarity will likely be necessary in order to calm creditors and markets at the time of resolution. Under the single point of entry framework, the intent is to create a highly capitalized bridge entity so that counterparties will be willing to stay engaged based upon the improved creditworthiness of the bridge parent and its recapitalized subsidiaries. If successful, this will reduce the need for the up-front provision of external liquidity resources. Nevertheless, to make the viability of the bridge entity fully credible, market participants must believe that the bridge company has access in a timely way to whatever additional liquidity resources might prove necessary. In addition, under the Dodd-Frank Act, Title II is not the baseline or preferred approach for dealing with the failure of a large complex firm. For a firm to go through Title II, a determination must first be made that the failure of the firm and its resolution would have serious adverse effects on U.S. financial stability under the insolvency law that would otherwise apply. Because market participants will not know for certain which path U.S. authorities will ultimately take—allowing resolution under ordinary insolvency law, as contemplated under Title I, or instead initiating a Title II resolution—this uncertainty in and of itself could cause investors in short-term obligations that are likely to be protected under Title II to run. Several other issues are also worthy of note. First, for the Title II single point of entry strategy to work properly, there needs to be a sufficient amount of debt outstanding at the parent company that can be converted by the FDIC into equity to ensure that the bridge company will be demonstrably well-capitalized. We don’t yet have a long term debt requirement—this is an area where we are still working out the details. My own view is that a holding company needs a substantial amount of long term-debt to ensure that the newly created bridge company is viewed as fully viable by its counterparties. We also need to ensure that the holding company is structured so that the bridge bank formed upon resolution can easily downstream capital to its operating subsidiaries. The ability to do this will help reduce the risks of preemptive ring-fencing by foreign regulators and runs by counterparties of the foreign operations of U.S. firms. Turning to the second main theme I would like to discuss, resolution is being offered up by some as not only a necessary element of the solution to the too big to fail problem (a proposition I agree with), but also as an entirely sufficient solution that eliminates the need for heightened prudential standards to reduce the probability of failure in the first place. The argument is based on the view that, in resolution, shareholders’ equity will be wiped out and that some portion of the long-term debt will be converted to equity. The prospect of this outcome will, it is argued, lead to a disciplining effect by the parent company’s long-term debt holders, who will demand higher yields now that the prospect of failure is credible. This, in turn, will help to eliminate the implicit subsidy of too big to fail. Under this theory, Title II would also limit the incentives for firms to become larger and more complex in order to gain this funding subsidy. By itself, however, Title II does not entirely eliminate the advantages of being large and complex. That is because large, complex firms are more likely to go through Title II than smaller, less complex bank holding companies, who will generally go through a Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceeding. Also, only large firms will benefit from Title II’s one-day stay on qualified financial contracts. Finally, under the Title II resolution regime, the businesses and the franchise value of the subsidiary-level customer relationships will be maintained relative to a traditional bankruptcy proceeding, which in the past has often led to the liquidation of the bankrupt entity. As we saw in the case of Lehman Brothers, for financial firms, bankruptcy can destroy considerable value. This isn’t an argument against Title II resolution. Dodd-Frank’s addition of Title II to the resolution toolkit was an important advance to regulators’ ability to mitigate financial instability. But we must recognize that Title II by itself it is not sufficient to eliminate the advantages of being perceived as too big to undergo ordinary bankruptcy at the holding company level. Moreover, even with a viable Title II resolution regime in place, we must recognize that there still will be disruption to the financial system when a large firm fails. This suggests to me that while a Title II single point of entry resolution is a very useful tool that we should continue to develop, we should view it as more preferable to prevent the failure of the SIFI in the first place. In this regard, I think we have made considerable progress by raising capital and liquidity requirements for large, complex firms. In addition to the role of these requirements in reducing the probability of failure, higher capital and liquidity requirements for large, complex firms also have the ancillary benefit of offsetting any residual competitive advantage that might remain for SIFIs because of how they are likely to be treated under Title II resolution. The Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) stress tests are important in this regard because they make the capital requirements for large, complex institutions forward looking. What matters is not just the current capital ratio, but also what the capital ratio could be if a stress environment were to materialize. The CCAR process is also useful because it focuses on the quality of the bank’s capital planning processes. It is not sufficient just to have enough capital; the bank’s management and directors need to be able to evaluate the bank’s ongoing capital needs in a thoughtful and thorough manner. The responsibility of the management of a large, complex firm does not end with capital planning. Firms’ managers need to ensure that they can respond to financial or operational weakness of any type by having robust recovery plans that get triggered long before resolution becomes necessary. Firms should develop and track metrics that not only identify when they are on the verge of insolvency or default, but also trigger appropriate remediation actions whenever the firm begins to become stressed. These plans should identify actionable options that the firm can take in response to financial weakness that will restore the confidence of the firm’s counterparties in the firm without the need for extraordinary official sector support. Firms must also have disciplined processes that analyze the root causes of their problems and identify longer-term strategies that will need to be employed as other recovery options to restore capital and liquidity are being executed. And firms must support the viability of their contingency and recovery plans by implementing the internal governance necessary to develop, test, update and implement them credibly. There is also more work that we, as supervisors, can do to reduce the probability of failure and to incent firm managers to act well before resolution becomes necessary. We need to do more to create incentives to force banks to act sooner to steer away from impending icebergs—cut capital distributions earlier, raise new capital faster, restructure businesses sooner, and restructure senior management and boards of directors more radically when the firm is not performing well. For example, one approach might be to implement a long-term debt requirement in a way that enhances market discipline. Another reform would be to reduce the incentives of large, complex firms to rely on short-term wholesale funding to finance longer-term, illiquid assets. Among other benefits, reducing a firm’s susceptibility to sudden runs associated with short-term wholesale funding will lengthen the "runway" for management to implement the strategic actions that would restore the firm to health. Let me conclude by emphasizing that these two paths—reducing the financial stability costs associated with the failure of a systemically important financial firm versus applying tougher capital and liquidity standards for such firms that reduce the probability of failure—are complements not substitutes. We need to keep pushing forward with both approaches in order to make the financial system more resilient and robust. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

and shifting the emphasis to longer-term sustainability will encourage the needed cultural shift necessary to restore public trust in the industry. One alternative strategy for dealing with too big to fail is to reduce the size of large banks by imposing size limits. While I understand the motivation, it is important to recognize that imposing size limitations might not be a very efficient means of making the financial system more stable. First, it could sacrifice some socially beneficial economies of scale and scope, especially to the global clients of large financial institutions, depending on how the size limits were implemented. Second, the resulting benefits in terms of reducing systemic risk might be quite small. As demonstrated by the thrift crisis, if many firms are all vulnerable to the same shock, ensuring that these firms are small and numerous won’t necessarily reduce the systemic risk they collectively pose to the financial system. Third, the costs incurred in breaking up such firms also need to be considered. Others have argued in favor of separating commercial and investment banking activities of the large banks. In my opinion, there are shortcomings to re-imposing Glass-Steagall-type activity restrictions. It is not obvious to me that the pairing of securities and banking businesses was an important causal element behind the financial crisis. In fact, independent investment banks were much more vulnerable during 2008 than the universal banking firms which conducted both banking and securities activities. More important is to address the well-known sources of instability in wholesale funding markets and to give careful consideration to whether there should be a more robust lender of last resort regime for securities activities. Evaluating the socially optimal size, scope and organizational structure of financial firms is a complicated exercise, and so is establishing a viable transition path to a system of much smaller banks. It would be helpful in this regard if advocates of the break-up solutions would develop detailed proposals that address the essential questions of how such downsizing or functional separation would be accomplished, and what the expected benefits and costs could be from such a restructuring. The recent financial crisis underscores the importance of financial stability as a necessary condition for a vibrant economy. An important element in improving financial stability is to reduce the expected loss associated with the failure of any financial firm to the point where default does not imperil the financial system and the real economy. A holistic approach is needed that both provides a credible resolution process for large, complex and interconnected banks, uses enhanced prudential standards and initiatives to further reduce the probability of default and the social losses associated with a default, and that incents management to intervene early to address incipient problems before they threaten the viability of the firm. Relying solely on resolution is not sufficient. Until the Title II resolution process is used, there will remain uncertainties regarding how well this approach will work in practice—especially in a time of market stress. For this reason it is also important to continue to pursue a number of alternative approaches. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to answer a few questions. 1 New liquidity requirements such as the liquidity coverage ratio also work to reduce the risk of failure by giving firm management more time to address problems before a funding squeeze becomes acute. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 18, 2013 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Queens College, Flushing, New York As prepared for delivery Good afternoon. It is always a pleasure to speak with the different communities that make up our region, and it is especially gratifying to have the opportunity to speak with you, our future leaders. So thank you for inviting me. I am especially pleased to be here at CUNY (City University of New York) Queens College, given the relationship that we have developed with CUNY through our educational and regional outreach. This academic year we are hosting, at the Bank, a Queens College student participating in the CUNY Service Corps which is a program to provide students with work experiences in regional and economic outreach. We also collaborated with CUNY for this year’s College Fed Challenge , our yearly competition where teams of students from area universities take on the roles of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and debate the appropriate next step for U.S. monetary policy. A number of CUNY schools competed and professors served as judges, including your own Professor Thom Thurston. My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts to understand what is going on at the grassroots level of our economy and to share what we are seeing. Earlier today, I met with a number of Queens business leaders, and the leadership of HANAC, the Hellenic American Action Committee. Following this visit to Queens College, I’m headed to the Queens Chamber of Commerce to meet with others in the business community. Subsequently, I’ll tour the manufacturing floor of Steinway & Sons piano factory. The agenda for these visits is always packed, but that’s part of the point—to meet with a diverse array of people in order to get a comprehensive picture of economic conditions and issues in the regions we serve and a fuller understanding of the major concerns. This is our second trip to the Borough of Queens in the past few years and recent trips have also taken us throughout our District, to Upstate New York, Northern New Jersey, Long Island, Fairfield County, Staten Island, Brooklyn and the Bronx. These outreach trips complement the ongoing efforts of the New York Fed to assess conditions in our region, which I will discuss shortly. Among our activities, we monitor economic performance on a monthly basis, we tap into the insights of the members of our Small Business and Agriculture Advisory Council and Upstate Advisory Board, we have constructed a consumer credit panel that allows us to better understand the financial condition of homeowners and students, we have developed a “Regional Mortgage Conditions” dataset and other housing tools at the county and zip code level to ensure that policymakers and counselors are well informed, and we conduct a biannual poll of small businesses to understand their credit needs and availability. Interestingly, our most recent poll, released in May of this year, shows improvements in small businesses’ ability to get credit throughout the region, though it remains a major growth challenge for these types of firms. As you can see, we have a lot to keep us engaged with the region. Much of this information can be found on our website, which I would invite you to visit and use as a resource. Now, I’d like to review recent developments in the local and national economies, and at the end of my talk will be happy to answer any questions you have. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. Regional Economic Conditions Starting with the area’s economy, one of the greatest challenges in the City over the past year has been the massive disruption and destruction caused by Superstorm Sandy. While areas of the New York City metropolitan region were hard hit by the storm, the devastation was particularly severe along the waterfronts of Queens—and in particular in Far Rockaway. We saw and heard about the devastation of the storm first-hand from many of those affected, through a series of support clinics that we held in the storm’s immediate aftermath, as well as from many of our own employees who lived in some of the hardest hit areas. The good news is that a little more than one-year later there has been a significant rebound in employment and economic activity across the five boroughs. New York City has continued to see pretty solid job creation through this past summer, and, in stark contrast with past economic expansions, this is happening without any direct contribution from the securities industry—or, more colloquially, Wall Street. So far this year, the city’s job gains have been broad-based, led by strong growth in industries such as education and health, advertising, computer services, leisure and hospitality, wholesale and retail trade, and, especially, construction. Of course, while it is reassuring that most of the city has bounced back strongly from this historic natural disaster, it is important to remember that the hardest hit communities, and the residents and businesses there, who lost so much, are still struggling to recover. Many of those communities are right here in Queens: the whole Rockaway peninsula—from Breezy Point to Arverne—was completely flooded, as were neighborhoods like Howard Beach, Springfield Gardens, Lindenwood, and even parts of Flushing, Long Island City, Astoria and Maspeth. Still, Queens as a whole showed strong resilience—employment bounced back from Sandy fairly quickly, and as of early 2013 it had already surpassed its pre-Sandy level. While many residents here commute to work in other boroughs, primarily Manhattan, Queens has a formidable industrial base of its own. Jobs are prevalent in industries ranging from medical care to construction, not to mention printing and a number of other manufacturing industries that benefit from being in a large population center. But Queens’ most concentrated industry is transportation—specifically air transportation which employs about 27,000 workers, about five percent of Queens’ jobs. Education is another key industry in Queens and the city as a whole. And it is not just a job creator. The investment in human capital that education entails makes it a socially desirable activity. There is considerable value from a college education both to the person that has been educated and to society as a whole. The Great Recession and sluggish recovery that has followed has made it difficult for people to find jobs, and I’m sure you may be wondering about whether going to college will turn out to be a good investment, especially if faced with the burden of student debt, something we track quite closely. Let me reassure you, the benefits of a college degree remain significant. Research we have undertaken at the New York Fed shows that young people with a college degree are more likely to have a job and they tend to earn considerably higher wages than those without degrees—and this is true even for those who may be underemployed initially when they first enter the labor market after graduation. Although the labor market has been challenging for college graduates in recent years, I am confident that most will find work and transition into higher-skilled jobs as they gain experience and as the labor market improves. Now, I’d like to turn my attention to recent developments in the national economy. National Economic Conditions Let me begin by taking stock of where we are at the moment. Then I will address my expectations for the performance of the economy in 2014 and 2015. Since the end of what is now called the Great Recession in mid-2009, the U.S. economy has experienced 17 consecutive calendar quarters of positive growth of real GDP. However, the compound annual rate of growth over that period has only been around 2 ¼ percent, close to prevailing estimates of the economy’s potential growth rate. Thus, we have made limited progress in closing the substantial output gap that was created during the recession. A similar conclusion is drawn from an assessment of labor market conditions. Although the unemployment rate has declined by about 2 ¾ percentage points since peaking at 10 percent in October of 2009, a significant portion of that decline reflects the substantial decline of the labor force participation rate over that period. It should also be noted that since the previous business cycle peak at the end of 2007, the decline of the labor force participation rate has been more than accounted for by a decline in participation of people in the prime working age of 25 to 54. The inflation data are also consistent with this overall picture of an economy operating well below its full potential. Total inflation, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator, has been quite volatile in recent years due to sharp fluctuations in energy prices. Core inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy components and thereby may be a better guide as to underlying inflation, slowed from around 2 percent in early 2012 to just above 1 percent in mid-2013. In recent months it has shown signs of stabilizing, but remains well below the FOMC’s expressed goal of 2 percent for total inflation. Fortunately, inflation expectations remain relatively stable at levels somewhat above the current inflation rate. This stability should help prevent an undesirable further drop in inflation relative to our 2 percent objective. That said, there are some nascent signs that the economy may be doing better. For example, based on the first estimate, which is subject to revision, real (gross domestic product) GDP increased at a 2.8 percent annual rate in the third quarter of 2013, above the trend of the past four years. And the most recent payroll employment report showed a pickup in the monthly pace of job gains. The 3-month moving average rose back above a 200,000 pace after slowing to about 150,000 as of July of this year. I hope that this marks a turning point for the economy. But before we rush to this conclusion a few more cautionary comments are appropriate. With respect to GDP growth, it turns out that inventory investment contributed ¾ of a percentage point to that overall growth rate. Thus, because this impetus from inventories will likely reverse this quarter, the real GDP growth rate is likely to slow to around a 2 percent annual rate or a bit less in the fourth quarter. With respect to payroll employment, we have seen such bursts in payroll growth before over the past few years and have been disappointed when the pickups proved temporary and did not lead to a rise in the overall growth rate. But, I have to admit that I am getting more hopeful. Not only do we have some better data in hand, but also the fiscal drag, which has been holding the economy back, is likely to abate considerably over the next few years at the same time that the fundamental underpinnings of the economy are improving. The first thing to note is that federal fiscal policy in 2013 has been unusually contractionary. At the beginning of the year the payroll tax cut expired while tax rates on higher income households were raised, a series of taxes associated with the Affordable Care Act took effect, and spending was reduced due to the sequester and the gradual winding down of foreign military operations. According to the Congressional Budget Office, the cyclically-adjusted or full-employment budget balance increased by roughly 1 ¾ percentage points of GDP in fiscal year 2013. Over the past 50 years there have been only two other episodes of fiscal contraction of this order of magnitude, and both of those occurred when the unemployment rate was substantially lower than it has been of late. Under current law, the amount of federal fiscal restraint will decline in 2014 and then decline further in 2015. At the same time, the sustained contraction in spending and employment by state and local governments appears to be over. The fact that the U.S. economy has continued to grow at around a 2 percent pace in 2013 despite this quite intense fiscal restraint provides evidence to the second key point, which is that the private sector of the economy has largely completed its healing process and is now poised to ramp up its level of activity. Key measures of household leverage have declined and are now near the lowest levels they have been in well over a decade. Household net worth, expressed as a percent of disposable income, has increased back to its average of the previous decade, reflecting rising equity and home prices and declining debt. Recently, banks have eased credit standards somewhat after a prolonged period of tightness. As a result, we are now experiencing a fairly typical cyclical recovery of consumer spending on durable goods. For example, sales of light-weight motor vehicles have increased steadily over the past four years, reaching an annual rate of 15.7 million in the third quarter of 2013, though sales in September and October have been somewhat below that average. Similarly, after five years in which housing production was well below what is consistent with underlying demographic trends and the replacement demand for houses, it now appears that we have worked off the excess supply of housing built up during the boom years of the last decade. Housing market activity has begun to recover, and a widely followed national home price index is up 12 percent over the 12 months ending in September. 1 Anecdotal reports suggest that this higher-than-expected increase in home prices is due to a relatively low number of homes for sale. Due to this shortness of supply, there is reason to expect increases in starts going forward. Yet another bright spot on the horizon is the fact that growth prospects among our major trading partners have improved following a few years of lackluster performance which induced a sharp slowing of growth of U.S. exports. In particular, the euro area appears to have emerged from a protracted recession and is experiencing modest but positive growth. To summarize, while growth in 2013 has been disappointing, I believe a good case can be made that the pace of growth will pick up some in 2014 and then somewhat more in 2015. The private sector of the economy should continue to heal, while the amount of fiscal drag should subside. Despite near-term concerns, growth prospects among our major trading partners will improve further next year. This combination of events is likely to create an environment in which business investment spending will strengthen. As growth picks up, I expect to see more substantial improvement in labor market conditions and a gradual updrift in inflation back towards the FOMC’s target rate. However, the notion that the economy will grow more swiftly remains a forecast rather than a reality at this point. As is always the case, there is substantial uncertainty surrounding this forecast. Moreover, there is always the possibility of some unforeseen shock. Thus, we will continue to monitor U.S. and global economic conditions very carefully and will adjust our views on the likely path for growth, inflation and the unemployment rate accordingly. Thank you for your kind attention and I will now be happy to take some questions. 1 Based on the CoreLogic home price index including distressed sales. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 20, 2013 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on Private For-Profit Institutions in Higher Education, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning and welcome once again to the New York Fed’s Regional Economic Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak with you—and, through you, to the people in our District. I am going to discuss conditions in the national economy and then on conditions in our region, with a focus on private, for-profit institutions, which have become more visible in the U.S. higher education market. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. National Economic Conditions Let me begin by taking stock of where we are at the moment. Then I will address my expectations for the performance of the economy in 2014 and 2015. Since the end of what is now called the Great Recession in mid-2009, the U.S. economy has experienced 17 consecutive calendar quarters of positive growth of real GDP (gross domestic product). However, the compound annual rate of growth over that period has only been around 2¼ percent, close to prevailing estimates of the economy’s potential growth rate. Thus, we have made limited progress in closing the substantial output gap that was created during the recession. A similar conclusion is drawn from an assessment of labor market conditions. Although the unemployment rate has declined by about 2 ¾ percentage points since peaking at 10 percent in October of 2009, a significant portion of that decline reflects the substantial decline of the labor force participation rate over that period. It should also be noted that since the previous business cycle peak at the end of 2007, the decline of the labor force participation rate has been more than accounted for by a decline in participation of people in the prime working age of 25 to 54. The inflation data are also consistent with this overall picture of an economy operating well below its full potential. Total inflation, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator, has been quite volatile in recent years due to sharp fluctuations in energy prices. Core inflation, which excludes the volatile food and energy components and thereby may be a better guide as to underlying inflation, slowed from around 2 percent in early 2012 to just above 1 percent in mid-2013. In recent months it has shown signs of stabilizing, but remains well below the FOMC’s expressed goal of 2 percent for total inflation. Fortunately, inflation expectations remain relatively stable at levels somewhat above the current inflation rate. This stability should help prevent an undesirable further drop in inflation relative to our 2 percent objective. That said, there are some nascent signs that the economy may be doing better. For example, based on the first estimate, which is subject to revision, real GDP increased at a 2.8 percent annual rate in the third quarter of 2013, above the trend of the past four years. And the most recent payroll employment report showed a pickup in the monthly pace of job gains. The 3-month moving average rose back above a 200,000 pace after slowing to about 150,000 as of July of this year. I hope that this marks a turning point for the economy. But before we rush to this conclusion, a few more cautionary comments are appropriate. With respect to GDP growth, it turns out that inventory investment contributed ¾ of a percentage point to that overall growth rate. Thus, because this impetus from inventories will likely reverse this quarter, the real GDP growth rate is likely to slow to around a 2 percent annual rate or a bit less in the fourth quarter. With respect to payroll employment, we have seen such bursts in payroll growth before over the past few years and have been disappointed when the pickups proved temporary and did not lead to a rise in the overall growth rate. But, I have to admit that I am getting more hopeful. Not only do we have some better data in hand, but also the fiscal drag, which has been holding the economy back, is likely to abate considerably over the next few years at the same time that the fundamental underpinnings of the economy are improving. The first thing to note is that federal fiscal policy in 2013 has been unusually contractionary. At the beginning of the year the payroll tax cut expired while tax rates on higher income households were raised, a series of taxes associated with the Affordable Care Act took effect, and spending was reduced due to the sequester and the gradual winding down of foreign military operations. According to the Congressional Budget Office, the cyclically-adjusted or full-employment budget balance increased by roughly 1 ¾ percentage points of GDP in fiscal year 2013. Over the past 50 years there have been only two other episodes of fiscal contraction of this order of magnitude, and both of those occurred when the unemployment rate was substantially lower than it has been of late. Under current law, the amount of federal fiscal restraint will decline in 2014 and then decline further in 2015. At the same time, the sustained contraction in spending and employment by state and local governments appears to be over. The fact that the U.S. economy has continued to grow at around a 2 percent pace in 2013 despite this quite intense fiscal restraint provides evidence to the second key point, which is that the private sector of the economy has largely completed its healing process and is now poised to ramp up its level of activity. Key measures of household leverage have declined and are now near the lowest levels they have been in well over a decade. Household net worth, expressed as a percent of disposable income, has increased back to its average of the previous decade, reflecting rising equity and home prices and declining debt. Recently, banks have eased credit standards somewhat after a prolonged period of tightness. As a result, we are now experiencing a fairly typical cyclical recovery of consumer spending on durable goods. For example, sales of light-weight motor vehicles have increased steadily over the past four years, reaching an annual rate of 15.7 million in the third quarter of 2013, though sales in September and October have been somewhat below that average. Similarly, after five years in which housing production was well below what is consistent with underlying demographic trends and the replacement demand for houses, it now appears that we have worked off the excess supply of housing built up during the boom years of the last decade. Housing market activity has begun to recover, and a widely followed national home price index is up 12 percent over the 12 months ending in September. 1 Anecdotal reports suggest that this higher-than-expected increase in home prices is due to a relatively low number of homes for sale. Due to this shortness of supply, there is reason to expect increases in starts going forward. Yet another bright spot on the horizon is the fact that growth prospects among our major trading partners have improved following a few years of lackluster performance which induced a sharp slowing of growth of U.S. exports. In particular, the euro area appears to have emerged from a protracted recession and is experiencing modest but positive growth. To summarize, while growth in 2013 has been disappointing, I believe a good case can be made that the pace of growth will pick up some in 2014 and then somewhat more in 2015. The private sector of the economy should continue to heal, while the amount of fiscal drag should subside. Despite near-term concerns, growth prospects among our major trading partners will improve further next year. This combination of events is likely to create an environment in which business investment spending will strengthen. As growth picks up, I expect to see more substantial improvement in labor market conditions and a gradual updrift in inflation back towards the FOMC’s target rate. However, the notion that the economy will grow more swiftly remains a forecast rather than a reality at this point. As is always the case, there is substantial uncertainty surrounding this forecast. Moreover, there is always the possibility of some unforeseen shock. Thus, we will continue to monitor U.S. and global economic conditions very carefully and will adjust our views on the likely path for growth, inflation and the unemployment rate accordingly. Regional Economic Conditions Let me turn now to the regional economy. A year has passed since Superstorm Sandy devastated the tri-state region. And even today, many of the hardest-hit places are still struggling to recover and rebuild from the storm. In fact, reminders of the storm’s damage remain visible in neighborhoods across Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island, as well as along the coasts of Long Island and New Jersey. On a more encouraging note, however, the broader regional economy has proven to be remarkably resilient. After a brief dip following the storm, the regional economy quickly rebounded and has continued to add jobs at a reasonably good pace. Moreover, the region’s housing markets have continued to show steady improvement throughout the year. To help monitor the performance of the regional economy more generally, the New York Fed produces economic activity indexes for New York State, New York City and New Jersey. Based on these measures, New York City’s economy has continued to grow strongly throughout the year, and both New York State and New Jersey have seen some pickup in growth in recent months. As a result, a growing number of places in the region have either recovered or are close to recovering the jobs that were lost during the Great Recession. More troubling, however, is that Puerto Rico’s economy remains exceptionally weak; activity and employment on the Island continue to decline. Our economists will elaborate on these trends this morning. Private For Profit Institutions in the Higher Education Landscape The important role of post-secondary education is undeniable given the key role that human capital plays in economic growth. However, the higher education landscape comprises different types of post-secondary institutions that provide different educational experiences. One such group of institutions—private for-profit institutions—have progressively become more visible in the U.S. higher education market. For-profit institutions and their growth in the market for student loans and federal need-based aid is the subject of the special topic in today’s briefing. Analysis done here at the New York Fed reveals that enrollment in for-profit colleges showed explosive growth nationally during, and for some time after, the Great Recession. Interestingly, this growth in enrollment has leveled off perceptibly as the economic recovery has taken hold. These patterns suggest that workers who were displaced from their jobs during the Great Recession chose to enroll in two-year and less-than-two-year colleges, mostly in for-profits but also in public community colleges. Now, with improved labor market conditions, individuals have less reason to get a short-term degree or may have returned to the labor force. Stark patterns are also observed in the market for student loans. Both the incidence of student loans and average loan size are by far greater in for-profit institutions than in comparable public colleges. Given the importance of post-secondary education in our nation’s future, and the key role that human capital plays in our nation’s growth, we at the New York Fed will continue to analyze the growth of the private for-profits in particular, and post-secondary institutions in general, in our region and the nation. I will now ask Jaison Abel to discuss economic conditions in our region. 1 Based on the CoreLogic home price index including distressed sales. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
