, and at the end of my talk, I will be happy to answer questions you may have about the economic outlook. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 1 National Economic Conditions After growing at just a 2 percent annual rate from 2010 through 2012, real GDP expanded more quickly in 2013 and 2014, rising at a 2.7 percent annual rate. This was sufficient to push the unemployment rate down by more than two percentage points over this period. This firming in growth reflected several important developments that, in my view, are likely to continue through 2015. The data we follow suggest that the household deleveraging process has largely run its course and the imbalances in the housing market have been mostly worked off. Federal fiscal consolidation appears to be over for now, and employment and spending are increasing at the state and local government level. That said, economic performance in this cycle has been disappointing compared to historical patterns. Even though household wealth relative to disposable income is nearly at its pre-financial crisis level and conditions in labor markets are substantially improved, consumer spending growth has been slower and the personal saving rate higher than what we would have expected based on past historical relationships. Similarly, even with low mortgage rates, single-family housing construction has been surprisingly sluggish. And, despite very accommodative financial conditions and record corporate profits, growth of business fixed investment has been tepid. Looking forward, my outlook for 2015 is that economic growth will be close to the pace of the past two years, supported by continued solid fundamentals and accommodative financial conditions. If I am correct, then this would lead to a further reduction of labor market slack, with the unemployment rate approaching 5 percent by the second half of the year. An important element of this forecast is continued strength in household spending. This strength is supported by the restored health of household balance sheets, improved household income prospects and the benefit of significantly lower energy prices. The data for the second half of 2014 reflect these positive forces: real personal consumption expenditures grew at a 3.2 annualized rate in the third quarter and a 4.4 percent rate in the fourth quarter. This strength in consumption was accompanied by solid income growth, as real disposable income increased at a 3.6 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter, reflecting the stronger labor market. The pace of improvement in the labor market has slowed in recent months from the strong pace at the end of last year. Nonfarm payroll employment increased in the first quarter by about 200,000 per month, well below the pace of the fourth quarter. This slowdown was broad-based, with job growth slowing in both the goods-producing and the service-providing sectors. The unemployment rate was 5.5 percent in March: analysis by my staff suggests that the unemployment rate is nearing the point where we may begin to see a pickup in the pace of real wage gains. If this proves correct and unemployment continues to decline as I expect, then these stronger wage gains could help support solid income growth even if the pace of employment growth slows. However, it will be important to monitor developments to determine whether the softness in the March labor market report evident on Friday foreshadows a more substantial slowing in the labor market than I currently anticipate. The March labor market report is another indicator that the first quarter is likely to be quite weak. Our current projection is that the economy will grow at about a 1 percent annual rate in the first quarter of 2015. This softer performance is suggested by a wide range of recent indicators that have surprised to the downside over the past couple of months. Examples of such indicators include retail sales, the ISM manufacturing index, manufacturing production and orders, and single-family housing starts. Overall, I view these downside surprises as reflecting temporary factors to a significant degree. For example, some of the recent softness is likely due to yet another harsh winter in the Northeast and the Midwest. My staff’s analysis of a measure of both the amount of snow and the population affected indicates that January and February weather was 20 to 25 percent more severe than the five-year average. Such large deviations appear to have meaningful negative impacts on a number of economic indicators. Even so, there are some downside risks to the growth outlook. In particular, the steep decline in crude oil prices is likely to lead to a further sharp drop in U.S. oil and gas investment. Additionally, the significant rise in the value of the dollar is likely to lead to weaker U.S. trade performance. Let me discuss each of these in more detail. Energy prices have declined sharply since mid-2014. In recent weeks, the benchmark West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil price has been hovering in a range of $45 to $50 per barrel, less than half the price in June of last year. This creates both positives and negatives for the U.S. economy. Starting with the positives, since the U.S. is still a net importer of petroleum, this development has provided substantial benefits, with our oil import bill down by about a ½ percentage point of GDP. As I indicated earlier, that represents a significant boost to real disposable income for households. How much this energy windfall boosts consumption will depend, though, on how much is spent versus saved. Turning to the negatives, the support to growth from rapidly rising U.S. oil production almost certainly will fade away. U.S. oil production has been rising rapidly for several years, due largely to new technology that has expanded the amount of oil that can be recovered from existing wells and that has facilitated shale oil production by fracking. Now, with prices dramatically lower, U.S. oil exploration and drilling activity is falling off very sharply. This will exert a meaningful drag on economic activity. Another significant shock is the nearly 15 percent appreciation of the exchange value of the dollar since mid-2014. Such an appreciation makes U.S. exports more expensive and imports more competitive. My staff’s analysis concludes that an appreciation of this magnitude would, all else equal, reduce real GDP growth by about 0.6 percentage point over this year. Turning to inflation, the data continue to come in below the FOMC’s objective of a 2 percent annualized rate for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. The twelve-month change of the total PCE deflator was 0.3 percent in February, with the core PCE deflator at 1.4 percent. Despite this, my expectation is that inflation will begin to firm later this year. In particular, most of the impact from the decline in energy prices that has weighed down overall inflation is likely over. Although the appreciation of the dollar is likely to cause some further softness in import prices, the continued decline in resource slack as the economy expands should push in the opposite direction. In addition, longer-term household inflation expectations have been well maintained through this period of very low inflation, as indicated by our Survey of Consumer Expectations . The combination of stable expectations and declining slack should push inflation slowly back towards the FOMC’s objective. Monetary Policy As the FOMC has consistently communicated, the timing of lift-off will depend on how the economic outlook evolves. As I have discussed, the labor market has improved substantially and I expect to see inflation begin to firm later this year. If this labor market improvement continues and the FOMC is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium-term, then it would be appropriate to begin to normalize interest rates. At the March meeting, the FOMC removed language from the statement that indicated that we would be patient in beginning the process of normalizing monetary policy. But, as Chair Yellen remarked in her most recent press conference, removal of “patient” from the statement does not indicate that we will be “impatient” to begin to normalize monetary policy. Rather, the timing of normalization will be data dependent and remains uncertain because the future evolution of the economy cannot be fully anticipated. Whenever the data support a decision to lift off, I think it is important to recognize what this would signify. It does not mean that monetary policy will be tight. We will simply be moving from an extremely accommodative monetary policy to one that is slightly less so. It also will be a positive signal about the progress we have made in restoring the economy to health. In my view, it would be a cause for celebration, because it would signal that the FOMC believes that slightly higher short-term interest rates are consistent with its objectives of maximum employment and price stability. Near-zero short-term interest rates and a larger Federal Reserve balance sheet were designed to be a temporary extraordinary treatment to help the economy regain its vitality, and not a permanent palliative. I remain confident that when the FOMC does decide to begin to remove policy accommodation that we have the requisite tools to effectively support this decision. We have tested numerous tools including overnight reverse repurchase operations, term reverse repurchase operations, and term deposit facilities to ensure that, when the time comes, lift-off can be managed smoothly. The primary tool will be interest on excess reserves (IOER), with overnight reverse repurchases as a supplemental tool to be used as needed to ensure a firm floor under short-term interest rates. For financial markets, the likely path of short-term rates after lift-off is just as important as the timing of lift-off. Here, I anticipate that the path will be relatively shallow. Headwinds in the aftermath of the financial crisis are still in evidence, particularly the diminished availability and tougher terms for residential mortgage credit. How fast the normalization process will proceed depends mainly on two factors: how the economy evolves and how financial market conditions respond to movements in the federal funds rate. If financial market conditions do not tighten much in response to higher short-term interest rates, we might have to move more quickly. After all, the point of raising short-term interest rates is to exert some restraint on financial market conditions. In contrast, if financial conditions tighten unduly, then this will likely cause us to go much more slowly or even to pause for a while. At the end of the day, we will move short-term interest rates to generate the set of financial market conditions that we deem is most consistent with our employment and inflation objectives. How high will short-term rates ultimately need to go? I think this issue is very difficult to judge for a number of reasons. First, it depends on how financial market conditions evolve in response to our monetary policy adjustments. Second, it depends on other factors, such as real potential GDP growth, which, in turn, depends on the growth rates of the labor force and of productivity. My current thinking is that the long-run nominal federal funds rate consistent with 2 percent inflation is somewhat lower than in the past. My point estimate is 3½ percent, but I wouldn’t bet the farm on this. I have considerable uncertainty about this estimate. Regional Economic Conditions Now let’s turn to the New Jersey economy. One feature of the state’s economy is its industrial diversity. A sizeable number of jobs in the state are in the healthcare, professional and business services, wholesale and retail trade, and leisure and hospitality categories. When we look at the northern part of the state, we see a greater concentration of jobs in finance, particularly in Hudson County. Also prominent are goods distribution jobs related to the ports, rail lines, trucking and warehousing. Other large sectors include pharmaceuticals manufacturing and research and development, as well as private education. Looking at recent trends in northern New Jersey, the recovery in the economy in general—and in employment in particular—is lagging the nation and is not going as well as we would like. The Garden State’s economy lost a quarter of a million jobs during the recession, and employment didn’t begin to recover until 2011, and even then it was slow getting started. However, the latest annual employment revisions—released just a few weeks ago—show job gains in 2013 and 2014 were a bit stronger than previously reported. Nevertheless, four years into the recovery, employment has recovered less than two-thirds of the job losses from the recession. This contrasts notably with both New York State and the U.S. as a whole, where employment has far surpassed its earlier peaks. Moreover, here in Essex County, there has yet to be any significant upturn in jobs, although neighboring Hudson County has seen a fairly strong rebound. That’s not to say that there aren’t any strong industry sectors here in New Jersey: job growth has been quite robust in health services, transportation and warehousing, construction and a number of business service industries. There has also been steady job creation in retail trade and leisure and hospitality, though these tend to be low-paying sectors. On the other hand, employment remains depressed in other industries such as finance, publishing, telecommunications and manufacturing. So why is New Jersey not keeping pace with New York in terms of job growth? Well, much of the strength in New York State has been driven by New York City; other parts of the state have seen similar, if not weaker, job growth than New Jersey. Of course, this raises the question: why has New York City’s economy been so much stronger? In fact, there is a body of research suggesting that the long-term drift of economic activity and jobs from cities to suburbs has subsided, and that there is a growing trend toward re-urbanization—a preference for both people and businesses to locate in cities, like New York. Yet there is also a strong tendency for persistent strength in an urban hub to gradually spill over into nearby areas. With both commercial and residential rents, not to mention sales prices, high and rising in Manhattan, northern New Jersey has an opportunity to capitalize on its widening cost advantage by attracting companies and residents that value an urban location, but find New York City to be too pricey. And if preferences are indeed in the midst of a long-term shift toward urbanization, this bodes particularly well for New Jersey’s own cities. With a major international airport and seaport, a 20-30 minute train ride from most of Manhattan—but much cheaper rents—as well as a number of universities and a solid infrastructure, Newark has strong potential to develop its prominence as a major local business, economic and cultural hub. Concluding Thoughts To conclude, I would like to say a few words concerning proposals to reform the Federal Reserve System. First, I concur with Chair Yellen that the Federal Reserve already is very transparent and accountable to Congress and to the public. I share her strong belief that the independence of the central bank to make appropriate policy decisions consistent with its legislated mandates is essential to a nation’s economic well-being. With regard to the structure of the Federal Reserve System and the role of the regional banks, including the New York Fed, I also agree with Chair Yellen that the system is working well, and I do not see a need for any substantive changes. I believe that the System has been designed appropriately so that a wide range of regional views are represented. At the same time, I believe that the Federal Reserve System’s monetary policy responsibilities are allocated appropriately by the Federal Open Market Committee, with New York playing an important role to ensure that monetary policy is executed effectively even during periods of duress. Of course, the Federal Reserve System and the New York Fed are not perfect institutions. That is why we always must strive, in an open and transparent manner, to improve what we do and how we do it, for the benefit of the American people. Thank you for your kind attention. I would now be happy to take some questions. 1 Jason Bram, Chelsea Cruz, Tony Davis, Jonathan McCarthy, James Orr, Richard Peach, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Opening Remarks for the Chapter 9 and Alternatives for Distressed Municipalities and States Workshop - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks for the Chapter 9 and Alternatives for Distressed Municipalities and States Workshop April 14, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Chapter 9 and Alternatives for Distressed Municipalities and States Workshop, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning and welcome to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. I am especially happy to welcome this group, with its focus on the finances of state and local governments. We at the New York Fed are committed to playing a role in ensuring the stability of this important sector. To this end, we supported the outstanding work of the Volcker-Ravitch state fiscal crisis taskforce. In addition, we conduct ongoing outreach activities with local officials and produce research on the subject of local fiscal conditions. We do these things because we recognize the critical role of state and local governments and their fiscal health to the overall well-being of the economy and its citizens. In my remarks today I will touch on the importance of the state and local public sector for the economy, its fiscal health and the need for proactive efforts to address the emerging fiscal stresses in the sector. As always, what I have to say represents my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The importance of state and local governments manifests itself in different ways, which are really different sides of the same coin. First, the sector directly produces a very large amount of economic activity. In 2014, state and local governments generated output valued at about $2 trillion. This represents over 11 percent of total U.S. GDP and is more than 50 percent higher than the federal government's contribution. And, even after years of retrenchment following the financial crisis, state and local governments employ almost 20 million individuals—nearly one in seven American workers. Clearly, a successful and stable state and local government sector is a vital contributor to overall output and employment. On the other side of the coin, we find the real effects of this activity: the provision of public safety, education, and health; as well as water, sewer and transportation services. These are the core public services that our citizens need, and which are absolutely fundamental to support private sector economic activity. So, as a central banker, I recognize the essential role that state and local governments play in the economy. Without successful state and local governments, the Fed’s dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment with stable prices would be much more difficult to attain. A final important dimension of the state and local sector—and the one that is perhaps most obviously front and center for today’s discussion—is its debt. The municipal bond market is very large, with outstanding issues totaling over $3.5 trillion. Now this large dollar amount in and of itself is not a problem. When governments invest in long-lived capital goods like water and sewer systems, as well as roads and bridges, it makes sense to finance these assets with debt. Debt financing ensures that future residents, who benefit from the services these investments produce, are also required to help pay for them. This principle supports the efficient provision of these long-lived assets. Unfortunately, as the Volcker-Ravitch task force emphasized, issuing debt to finance infrastructure investments is not the only reason that states and localities borrow from the future. Governments have also borrowed to cover operating deficits, and this kind of debt has a very different character than debt issued to finance infrastructure. Let me take a moment to explain what I mean and why I think this distinction is important. When a jurisdiction borrows to invest in infrastructure, the cost of the debt to local residents—and those considering locating in the jurisdiction—is offset by the value of the services that the infrastructure provides. This tradeoff is part of the “fiscal surplus” that a jurisdiction offers: the value of the services minus the tax price that residents have to pay. A well-run capital budget will match these costs and benefits over the life of each project to ensure that the jurisdiction remains attractive to current and future residents. That is, both current and future residents are willing to pay the tax cost of servicing this debt because of the benefits that they receive from the services supported by that debt. Now consider a different scenario—one in which the jurisdiction is borrowing to pay for a current year operating deficit. This kind of borrowing is inconsistent with running a balanced budget, which is in principle required in all but one state. But, as people in this room are well aware, states and localities can often find ways to “get around” balanced budget requirements if they are determined to do so. One example of this was New York City in the 1960s and early 1970s, where annual operating deficits were repeatedly financed with short-term debt, until the fiscal crisis exploded in 1974-1975. The key distinction between these two types of borrowing is that in the former case an asset is producing services that help to offset the cost of the debt, but this is not so in the latter case. Indeed, using debt to finance current operating deficits is equivalent to asking future taxpayers to help finance today’s public services. When this occurs, it means that the fiscal surplus offered by the jurisdiction in the future will be diminished by the value of these additional debts. That is, in the future, the cost of servicing this debt will drive a wedge between the taxes paid by households and businesses, and the current services provided to them. Of course, within the U.S., households and businesses can react to this wedge by choosing to locate elsewhere. And because the tax base of any jurisdiction depends on the level of local economic activity, this out-migration can lead to ever-higher tax rates or ever-diminished services for those who still remain—typically those with fewer opportunities or resources to relocate. Today, there are several ways that states and localities can borrow to cover operating deficits; and the relatively slow economic growth since the financial crisis has increased pressure on their budgets, making such measures more appealing. One mechanism for doing this is to treat borrowed funds as revenues that can be used to balance the budget. Another form is asset sales. Here the jurisdiction receives cash today in exchange for a reduction in its future assets—sometimes physical like an office building, sometimes financial like tobacco settlement funds—and an increase in its future costs. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, is the practice of pushing the cost of current employment services into the future. Let me elaborate on this last method. Here I’m referring to the underfunding of public employee pensions and other post-retirement benefits for current employees. Both of these practices add to the indebtedness of the state and local governments with the employees playing the role of creditors. To be clear, while unfunded promises to cover retiree health insurance are very common, unfunded pension liabilities are probably much larger in aggregate magnitude. Estimates of unfunded pension liabilities range up to several trillion dollars. While widespread, underfunding of public pensions is not universal. Many states have found ways to keep their public pensions reasonably well funded, demonstrating that pushing today’s costs into the future is not an inevitable outcome of a democratic government. Nonetheless, we have seen evidence that high debt levels combined with diminished services provision can, in cases such as Detroit and Stockton, make the public sector finances unsustainable. At a certain point, the debt service burden clashes with maintaining a sufficient ongoing provision of services to forestall people from voting with their feet. This may occur well before the point that debt service capacity appears to be fully exhausted. In other words, the prioritization of cash flows to debt service may not be sustainable beyond a certain point. While these particular bankruptcy filings have captured a considerable amount of attention, and rightly so, they may foreshadow more widespread problems than what might be implied by current bond ratings. We need to focus our attention today on addressing the underlying issues before any problems grow to the point where bankruptcy becomes the only viable option. So, I am especially pleased to see that your agenda today focuses, in part, on helping cities and states avoid such levels of fiscal stress, where the risks of going past such a tipping point become significant. In summary, state and local governments have enormous financial obligations, as well as critical service delivery responsibilities. Managing their liabilities in such a way as to ensure that these vital services continue to be provided, and citizens view that they are getting appropriate value in exchange for their taxes is a daunting challenge. I am happy to see such a distinguished group assembled here at the Bank to address this challenge. Good luck in your work and I look forward to learning of the results of today’s discussions. 1 Andrew Haughwout and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

April 20, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Bloomberg Americas Monetary Summit, New York City As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak with you here today. In my remarks, I will assess the outlook for the U.S. economy and the progress that the Federal Reserve has made toward its dual mandate objectives of maximum employment in the context of price stability. Over the past few years, the U.S. economy has made considerable progress toward achieving these goals. Yet we still have further to go—the unemployment rate is still too high and the inflation rate too low. Because the economic outlook is uncertain, I can’t tell you when normalization will occur. The timing is data dependent. We will have to see what unfolds. Whenever such a shift in policy occurs, we need to be mindful that it most likely will be accompanied by some degree of market stress and turbulence. Moreover, the normalization of U.S. monetary policy could create significant challenges for those emerging market economies (EMEs) that have been the recipients of large capital inflows in recent years. This leads to an important question: What can the Federal Reserve do to address these risks? While tightening cycles by the Fed can pose challenges for EMEs, these need not be disruptive. The combination of stronger U.S. growth, improved EME fundamentals and effective Fed communications can limit the stresses caused by the onset of tightening. The experience will vary across EMEs, but EMEs as a group are better equipped today to handle the challenge than they were in the past. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The U.S. Economic Outlook Since the end of the Great Recession more than five years ago, the U.S. economy has grown at a disappointing 2.3 percent annualized rate. Several times over that period, it appeared that growth was strengthening, but each time such hopes were subsequently unfulfilled. We appear again to be at a similar junction. Real GDP growth accelerated over the last two years, rising at a 2.7 percent annual rate. However, the first quarter of 2015 is expected to be quite weak with growth only at around a 1½ percent annualized rate. What does this portend for growth going forward? Despite the weak performance of the first quarter, I believe that the growth prospects for the U.S. economy over the remainder of 2015 will improve. I expect that the first quarter weakness will prove to be largely temporary. The winter weather was quite severe in the eastern two-thirds of the United States and bottlenecks at the West Coast ports disrupted both sales and production. More important in assessing the growth potential of the U.S. are the improved underlying fundamentals. The firming of growth in 2013 and 2014 reflected several important developments that, in my view, are likely to continue to support growth over the remainder of this year and into 2016. Those developments include the fact that the household deleveraging process has largely run its course and the imbalances in the housing market have been largely worked off. In addition, federal fiscal consolidation appears to be over for now, and employment and spending are again increasing at the state and local government level. My outlook for 2015 as a whole is that economic growth will be close to the pace of the past two years, supported by continued solid fundamentals and accommodative financial conditions. If I am correct, then this would lead to a further reduction of labor market slack, with the unemployment rate approaching 5 percent by the end of the year. An important underpinning of this outlook is that, after a lull in the first quarter, household spending will move back toward the kind of growth path it was on over the second half of 2014, when real PCE grew at about a 3¾ percent annual rate. I expect stronger consumer spending to be supported by three factors: healthier household balance sheets, improved household income prospects and the benefit to purchasing power caused by the earlier declines in energy prices. The fact that the personal saving rate is somewhat above what its longer-term relationship with household net worth also suggests that consumer spending could grow a bit quicker than income growth in the year ahead. Let me elaborate on each of these three factors supporting household spending. We have documented the steady improvement in household balance sheets in our Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit . Aggregate household credit declined from the fourth quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of 2013. Since then it has increased by 6 percent. The strongest and most broad based growth of consumer credit has been for purchases of motor vehicles. In contrast, growth of mortgage debt remains relatively sluggish and is confined to those borrowers with relatively high credit scores. However, as typically occurs as an economic expansion progresses, there are signs that credit standards are easing a bit, which should promote stronger growth of household borrowing going forward. Another plus for consumer spending has been strong gains in nominal income. Over the second half of 2014, hours worked in the nonfarm business sector rose at a 3.6 percent annual rate. While wage growth has not yet picked up appreciably, this gain in hours worked resulted in a 4.7 percent annualized growth rate of labor compensation. The pace of improvement in the labor market slowed somewhat in the first quarter of 2015 from that of the second half of last year. Nonfarm payroll employment increased in the first quarter by about 200,000 per month, but a gain of only 126,000 in March. This was well below the pace of the fourth quarter. Growth in hours worked also slowed, but because wage gains picked up somewhat, the growth rate of compensation in the first quarter looks to have been about as strong as it was during the second half of last year. Moreover, the level of slack in the labor market has diminished sufficiently so that one might expect firmer wage gains going forward. The unemployment rate in March of 5.5 percent, for example, is at a level where, historically, we have seen a pickup in the pace of real wage gains. If this happens again and unemployment continues to decline as I expect, then these wage gains will help support continued solid income growth even if the pace of employment growth remains slower than last year. However, it will be important to determine whether the softness in the March labor market report was temporary, or if it foreshadows a more substantial slowing in the labor market than I currently anticipate. The final factor supporting household spending is the decline in energy prices. Recently, the benchmark West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil price has been fluctuating in the neighborhood of $50 per barrel, about half the price in June of last year. Since the U.S. is still a net importer of petroleum, this development has provided substantial benefits, with our oil import bill down by about a ½ percentage point of GDP. That represents a significant boost to real disposable income for households. The degree to which this energy dividend supports household spending will depend, though, on how much is spent versus saved. While I am relatively optimistic about the growth outlook for 2015, I also must acknowledge that there are some significant downside risks. In particular, the roughly 15 percent appreciation of the exchange value of the dollar since mid-2014 is making U.S. exports more expensive and imports more competitive. My staff’s analysis concludes that an appreciation of this magnitude would, all else equal, reduce growth of real GDP by about 0.6 percentage point over this year. Some of the recent softness in indicators of manufacturing activity is likely a reflection of this development. Additionally, the decline in energy prices, while helping to support household spending, will adversely impact business investment. The support to growth from rapidly rising U.S. oil production almost certainly will fade due to the oil price decline. Now, with prices sharply lower, U.S. oil exploration and drilling activity is falling off very sharply, and this will undoubtedly exert a meaningful drag on economic activity. Turning to the inflation outlook, the data continue to come in below the FOMC’s objective of a 2 percent annualized rate for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. The twelve-month change of the total PCE deflator was just 0.3 percent in February, with the core PCE deflator at just 1.4 percent. Despite these low readings, my expectation is that inflation will begin to firm later this year. Importantly, most of the impact from the decline in energy prices that has weighed down overall inflation is likely over. Although the appreciation of the dollar may cause some further softness in import prices, the continued decline in resource slack as the economy expands should push in the opposite direction. We are already seeing some firming in rent inflation as rental vacancy rates have returned to more normal levels and employment and income growth have strengthened. Longer-term household inflation expectations have been well maintained through this period of very low inflation as shown in our Survey of Consumer Expectations . This should reinforce the effect of a higher level of overall resource utilization in slowly pushing inflation back towards the FOMC’s 2 percent objective. Monetary Policy As the FOMC has consistently communicated, decisions on monetary policy, such as the timing of lift-off will, depend on how the economic outlook evolves—in particular with respect to the labor market and inflation. As I have discussed, the labor market has improved substantially over the past few years and I expect to see inflation begin to firm later this year. If this labor market improvement continues and the FOMC is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium term, then it would be appropriate to begin to normalize interest rates. At their March meeting, the FOMC removed language from the statement that indicated that we would be patient in beginning the process of normalizing monetary policy. But, as Chair Yellen remarked in her most recent press conference, removal of the word “patient” from the statement does not indicate that we will now be “impatient” to begin to normalize monetary policy. Rather, the timing of normalization remains uncertain because how the economy evolves is also uncertain. When, hopefully, the data support a decision to lift off later this year, it does not mean that U.S. monetary policy will be tight. Rather, we will simply be moving from an extremely accommodative monetary policy to one that is only slightly less so. I would view this as a positive signal about the progress we have made in restoring the U.S. economy to health. It is important to remember that near zero short-term interest rates and the large expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet were designed to be a temporary extraordinary treatment to help the economy regain its vitality, and not a permanent palliative. I remain confident that when the FOMC decides to begin to remove policy accommodation that we have the requisite tools to support this decision. We have tested numerous tools including overnight reverse repurchase operations, term reverse repurchase operations and term deposit facilities to ensure that, when the time comes, lift-off can be managed smoothly. As the FOMC has communicated, the primary tool will be interest on excess reserves (IOER), with overnight reverse repurchases as a supplemental tool to be used as needed to help ensure a firm floor under short-term interest rates. Once normalization has begun, two important questions will be: How fast will it proceed? And how high will short-term rates ultimately need to go? How fast the normalization process will proceed depends mainly on two factors: how the economy evolves and how financial market conditions respond to movements in the federal funds rate target. If financial market conditions do not tighten much in response to higher short-term interest rates, we might have to move more quickly to achieve the appropriate restraint on financial market conditions. In contrast, if financial conditions tighten unduly, then this will likely prompt us to go much more slowly or even to pause for a while. Our intention will be to move short-term interest rates in a manner to generate the set of financial market conditions that we deem to be most consistent with achieving our employment and inflation objectives. The question of how high short-term rates will ultimately need to go before we approach a neutral monetary stance is a difficult question, which is hard to pre-judge for a couple of reasons. First, it depends on how financial market conditions evolve in response to our monetary policy adjustments. Second, it depends on other factors, such as real potential GDP growth, which, in turn, depends on the growth rates of the labor force and of productivity. My current thinking is that the long-run nominal federal funds rate consistent with 2 percent inflation is somewhat lower than in the past. My point estimate is 3½ percent, but I place considerable uncertainty on this estimate. Global Implications of U.S. Monetary Policy Normalization Let me now turn to the implication of U.S. policy normalization for foreign economies. While our monetary policy mandate has a domestic focus, our monetary policy actions have global implications that feed back into the U.S. economy and financial markets. In some cases, these feedback effects can be disruptive. An example is the market volatility that we saw in the spring and summer of 2013 during the so-called “taper tantrum.” EME financial markets were hit the hardest, with declines in equity prices, a widening in sovereign debt spreads and a sharp increase in foreign exchange rate volatility. In the U.S., we saw a spike in Treasury yields, with the 10-year rate rising by more than 100 basis points from early May before peaking in early September. Despite the domestic focus of our policy mandate, we at the Fed take the potential international implications of our policies seriously. In part, this is out of simple self-interest, since the international effects of Fed policies can spill back onto the U.S. economy and financial markets. In part, too, it reflects a sense of special responsibility we have given the dollar’s role as the international reserve currency. We are and will remain attentive to the risk that the onset of Fed policy normalization could bring a new round of market pressures on EMEs. Yet I think there are good reasons to think that this adjustment will prove manageable and not be very disruptive. First, many EMEs appear to be better equipped today to handle the Fed's prospective exit from its exceptional policy accommodation than they were during past tightening cycles. This reflects the fundamental reforms that EMEs have put in place over the past 15 years, as well as the hard lessons learned from past periods of market stress. Among the positives are: The absence of pegged exchange rate regimes that often came undone violently during periods of acute stress; Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; Larger foreign exchange reserve cushions; Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now generally low to moderate inflation rates; Generally improved fiscal discipline; and Better capitalized banking systems, supported by strengthened regulatory and supervisory frameworks. To be sure, progress has not been uniform across EMEs, and more work remains in some countries to further strengthen institutional structures. Vulnerabilities remain in several important EMEs, and some have been hit by a sharp adverse turn in their terms of trade due to the recent fall in global commodity prices. Still, the fundamental improvements I’ve cited leave many EMEs better positioned than in the past to weather those times in the cycle when the external environment turns more challenging. Second, during previous Fed tightening cycles EME economic performance has generally been good. During the last three U.S. tightening cycles, EME industrial production growth has been between 7½ and 10 percent over the 12-months from the start of Fed tightening, while EME export volumes have risen 10 to 15 percent. The likely explanation for this favorable record is that Fed tightening generally occurs during periods of strong U.S. economic performance. Recent research from the IMF bears out this hypothesis, finding that higher U.S. interest rates associated with stronger U.S. growth represent a net positive for EMEs. 2 Financial performance of EMEs has been more diverse across Fed policy cycles. The strongest contrast is between the tightening cycle that began in 2004, and the one beginning a decade earlier, in 1994. EME asset prices strengthened considerably during the 2004 cycle, but weakened considerably during the earlier cycle. Notably, the 1994 cycle was associated with a large increase in U.S. long-term bond yields, and appears to represent a case in which there was a considerable gap between what the Fed did in terms of monetary policy tightening relative to initial market expectations. A similar gap was apparent during the taper tantrum in the spring of 2013, when our attempts to provide guidance about the potential tapering of asset purchases ended up confusing market participants, causing many to anticipate an earlier start and more rapid rollout of actual policy rate hikes. These episodes are reminders of the importance of transparency and clear messaging in how the Fed is evaluating the evolving economic landscape, a point I’ll return to shortly. Third, the stance of Fed policy will be far from the only factor affecting external financial conditions for EMEs. Even as the FOMC considers the appropriate timing and pace of moving to a less accommodative policy stance, the ECB and the Bank of Japan are implementing additional easing measures. As a result, external conditions will remain more supportive than would be indicated by a narrow focus on Fed policy alone. Finally, EME fundamentals are likely to be the most important determinant of how their financial conditions respond to Fed policy normalization. This was one of the key lessons of the taper tantrum. At first, market pressure was somewhat indiscriminant across countries. Relatively quickly, however, market pressures turned more focused, tightening more severely for countries with clear fundamental vulnerabilities: large current account deficits, a heavy reliance on portfolio inflows and high inflation rates. Markets then responded favorably as EME authorities shifted toward clearer, more consistent policies focused on inflation objectives and external sustainability, and away from policies with conflicting and sometimes competing objectives. A smooth adjustment to Fed normalization this cycle will be more likely if market participants retain this discriminating perspective. None of this is to suggest that the road ahead will necessarily be an easy one. Market participants may focus on vulnerabilities that they might have ignored prior to the taper tantrum in 2013, placing an added premium on strong fundamentals, policy coherence and predictability. There will likely be no one right answer for EMEs in managing the trade-offs that come with the changed environment, and the adjustment could sometimes be difficult. With respect to these risks, central banks in general, and the Fed in particular, play an important role. We seek to be good global stewards. As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps to increase transparency and to improve the clarity of our communications. This includes regular press conferences by the Fed chair following FOMC meetings; the publishing of growth, inflation and short-term rate forecasts of FOMC participants; and a concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts that the FOMC will look at to assess progress toward our mandate. We are, though, still learning how to more effectively communicate, especially given our new and expanded set of policy instruments. A second area in which we can and must collectively do better is safeguarding global financial stability. Simply put, we failed to act both early enough and decisively enough to stem the credit excesses that spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. While the U.S. was not alone in this shortcoming, given our position in the global financial system we especially should have done a better job. We've taken important steps through new legislative mandates and a broader effort to rethink our regulatory and supervisory framework. In particular, systemically important banking organizations must now hold higher amounts of capital and liquidity that are better aligned with their risk profiles and the official sector is making progress in ensuring no financial firm will be too-big-to-fail. Although this remains very much a work in progress, these efforts should help us to avoid repeating the mistakes of the recent past, and enable us to be more proactive in mitigating potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. Since the recent financial crisis, central banks worldwide have been engaged in a broad rethinking of how to better fulfill their mandates. Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often emanate from getting policy wrong domestically. Economic recession or financial instability at home is often quickly exported abroad. Equally important, growth and stability abroad makes all our jobs at home easier. This illustrates the externalities in the work we do, with more effective fulfillment of our domestic mandates helping to bring us collectively to a better place. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Matthew Higgins, Richard Peach, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See “Spillovers from Unwinding Monetary Support in Advanced Economies,” 2014 Spillover Report, Chapter 2. See also, “On the Receiving End: External Financial Conditions and Emerging Market Growth Before, During and After the Global Financial Crisis,” World Economic Outlook, April 2013, Chapter 4. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 8, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the 17th Annual Bronx Bankers Breakfast, Bronx, New York As prepared for delivery I am very pleased to have the opportunity to join you today at the 17th Annual Bronx Bankers Breakfast. I would like to thank Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz, Jr., the Business Initiative Corporation of New York and the Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation for the opportunity to speak about the economic outlook for the Bronx. This is my second visit to the Bronx in the past five months. When I was here last December, I had the opportunity to hear from various community and business leaders about what they were seeing and the issues they were facing. Such visits are an important part of the New York Fed’s outreach efforts to keep apprised of key developments in the Second District, and to identify areas where we should be directing our attention. In my remarks today, I will focus on the outlook for the Bronx, the important role that community banks play in the local economy, as well as specific challenges facing local small businesses. It is important to recognize that small businesses play a vital role in any economy, so fostering economic and financial conditions that allow these businesses to flourish is important to the health of the local economy. In light of recent developments, I am optimistic about the economic prospects for the Bronx and local small businesses. I also believe that community banks and community development organizations have an important role to play in paving the way forward. As always, my comments today reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The Economic Outlook for the Bronx To appreciate where we are, we need to remember where we’ve been. Those of you who are long-time Bronxites know that starting in the 1950s, but especially during the 1970s, the Bronx endured a massive economic slump. In that one decade, the 1970s, the borough’s population fell by 20 percent—and by even more in many well-established neighborhoods. As people moved out in droves, buildings were abandoned, crime increased and jobs vanished—all in a vicious cycle, creating an atmosphere of despair. Yet, the borough persevered and conditions began to stabilize and then to even improve a bit in the 1980s. Today, while there is still much progress to be made, the Bronx is in dramatically better shape on many dimensions: its economy has been growing at a brisk pace, its population is on the rise, its housing stock is being rejuvenated and many businesses are thriving, creating strong job and income growth. This is particularly evident in neighborhoods like Hunts Point and the area around Yankee Stadium, down to the Bronx Terminal Market and beyond. Between 2007—right before the last recession—and last year, employment grew by 10 percent in New York City, making it one of the best performing areas in the nation. In the Bronx, employment grew even faster, rising by more than 14 percent. While job creation in the Bronx has been quite broad-based, I would like to highlight two particular industries, each very different in nature, to illustrate the diversity of Bronx’s economy. Both health services and wholesale food distribution have been flourishing here. These sectors, on average, pay relatively well and both have been contributing strongly to overall job creation and to the borough’s economic resurgence. By health services, I don’t just mean hospitals and clinics serving the local population. For example, Montefiore Medical Center is a nationally-ranked institution in a variety of specialties as well as a highly regarded teaching hospital. Additionally, the Albert Einstein College of Medicine is a graduate medical school and clinical research facility. And, of course, the Hunts Point Food Distribution Center houses institutions such as the Fulton Fish Market, which moved here from lower Manhattan about a decade ago. But, of course, these aren’t the only industries driving the Bronx economy. Just last November I visited OnForce Solar, an installer of solar heating systems located in the Port Morris section of the South Bronx. There has also been a great deal of retail development over the past decade—most notably, perhaps, the Bronx Terminal Market just south of Yankee Stadium. A little known fact is that, on average, jobs pay more in the Bronx than in any other of the five boroughs, except for Manhattan. And my regional economists assure me that it’s not just the Yankees that bring up the average, although they do make a difference. This, of course, is not to say that all is well in the Bronx. Its poverty rate and unemployment rate are both roughly twice the national average, and higher than in any of the other boroughs. While crime has fallen dramatically over the past two decades, it also remains higher than in the rest of the city. Debt is also burdensome for many Bronx residents. Delinquency rates on household debt are relatively high, suggesting that many people are financially “distressed.” All this makes it especially important to maintain the economic momentum that is improving the quality of life in the Bronx. Community banks have an important role to play in this process. Bank lending can help businesses—especially new and small businesses—expand and grow jobs, and help residents invest in improving their homes, neighborhoods and communities. Lending to small businesses and entrepreneurs requires deep knowledge of local business conditions and potential borrowers, both of which community banks have a comparative advantage in acquiring. Former Chairman Ben Bernanke in a 2012 interview summarized this point quite well. He stated that “community banks have the capacity to respond with greater agility to lending requests than their national competitors; they have more detailed knowledge of the needs of their customers and closer ties to the communities they serve.” 2 Given this critical role played by community banks for localities such as the Bronx, it is important to ensure that the local banking sector remains vibrant. The financial crisis offers important lessons for community banks in this regard. Lessons for Community Banks from the Financial Crisis America’s banking system began with community banks, and today they continue to play a critical role in the financial system. However, the number of commercial bank charters has declined by 50 percent since 1985, with the recent financial crisis contributing to this decline. A total of 417 banks and thrifts failed between 2006 through 2011. 3 Many community banks, though, not only survived but also thrived during the crisis. Why? What sets those banks apart from others that failed, or that survived but did not thrive? What were some common characteristics across the successful banks? These characteristics are undoubtedly important and will be an essential element of success in the future. Some factors that one might think are important turn out not to be critical in determining performance. For example, asset size was generally not a factor in performing well during, and following, the financial crisis. Community banks that thrived varied in asset size—from below $50 million, to as large as $10 billion in assets. Geography, though, did matter to a degree. By definition, community banks are not geographically diversified, so those located in states that were most severely affected by the financial crisis and the recession faced the largest challenges. However, there are examples of banks that performed well in Michigan despite the severe economic problems that Michigan experienced; and there are examples of banks that floundered in Texas despite the solid economic performance that Texas experienced. Here in the Second District, while we had relatively modest declines in real estate values on average, some local areas saw house price declines as serious as in the worst hit states such as Arizona, California, Florida and Nevada. Recent research has identified several characteristics common to community banks that prospered during and following the financial crisis. 4 First, thriving banks exercised a comparatively conservative growth strategy during good times, with a management culture that focused on long-term franchise value and not short-term profitability. Successful banks had lower concentrations in commercial real estate lending generally; and much lower concentrations in construction and land development loans specifically. While profitable during the boom, these loan categories suffered the greatest losses as real estate values declined and the recession set in. As the boom progressed, the more conservative underwriting standards of successful banks led to declines in their market shares as other banks competed for business by relaxing their standards. However, successful banks were able to gain back this market share and then some after the bust due to the relative strength of their balance sheets. The successful community banks were patient and conservative regarding investments—desiring reasonable, sustainable returns, not necessarily “spectacular” returns. It seems that their managers devised their business plans heeding Friar Lawrence’s advice to Romeo as he devised his courtship plan for Juliet: “Wisely and slow; they stumble that run fast.” Other noteworthy characteristics also identified in this research were an engaged board of directors, talented staff who were familiar with the community, sound senior management oversight and thorough due diligence before offering a new product or service. The studies further cited successful community banks as having a strong and localized customer service focus—that is, avoiding the temptation to expand into new, less familiar areas and markets—and high community visibility, with staff members heavily involved in community activities, which in turn, created customer relationships built on trust. 5 So what did we learn from the experience of community banks with the financial crisis? A foundation built on good risk management practices and intimate local knowledge helped the successful banks to thrive during one of this country’s most difficult financial periods. The banks that prosper in the future will likely have characteristics similar to those that outperformed during the financial crisis. It bears repeating that community banks are critical in keeping local economies vibrant and growing. Strong community banks are essential to the provision of credit to small businesses in their localities. Importance of Small Business Lending It is often noted that small businesses contribute disproportionately to employment growth in their communities. When you dig a little deeper into this stylized fact, you discover that it is new small businesses that are responsible for this growth. Upon reflection, this makes sense given that, by definition, old small businesses are not growing. If they had been growing fast, they would no longer be small. A related fact is that the failure rate is quite high for new small businesses. Taken together, this implies that it is important to provide an environment that is conducive to new business formation. The more new businesses that are created, the more that have a chance of surviving and growing into larger, prosperous members of the local economy. On earlier visits in the District, I heard several small business owners voice their concern over their ability to access credit. Based on these conversations, I asked my research staff to investigate the degree to which they could substantiate with data whether Bronx small businesses seem credit-constrained relative to other boroughs or relative to other comparable counties across the country. They first looked at the share of small business loan amounts made in each borough relative to the share of small businesses located in each borough, using data for 2013 (the latest available at the time). If small business credit is equally available, then we would expect to see ratios of approximately one for each borough. What the data show is that the ratio is well below one for the Bronx and Staten Island, with the Bronx being the lowest. This is consistent with what I heard during my last visit. Broadening the lens of the analysis, my staff then compared the Bronx to a random sample of comparable low income counties that were located in urban areas, again using data for 2013. They looked at the ratio of the volume of small business lending per small business. The ratio for the Bronx was $9,900 as compared to a mean ratio of $10,400 across the sample of other counties. While lower by $500, this difference is not large. Taken together, the evidence suggests that while access to small business credit in the Bronx seems more constrained relative to Brooklyn, Manhattan and Queens, it is relatively consistent with what is typically available in lower income counties across the country. Of course, this may simply indicate that small businesses in lower income areas of the country are generally constrained in their credit access. Another way to investigate the question of credit constraints is to look for evidence that would reflect the consequences of these constraints. For example, more constrained access to credit might result in a slower rate of new business formation. My staff analyzed small business starts between 2010 and 2013. For the Bronx, the number of small businesses per capita grew at a 12 percent rate over that period, double the average rate for the sample of 50 lower income counties. This evidence can be viewed in multiple ways. My take is that, in general, it is difficult to prove or disprove the presence of credit constraints with the available data, especially at the county level. In the case of the Bronx, we found evidence both for and against the proposition. In either case, we take seriously the feedback from local businesses that they perceive access to credit to be a problem. The question then becomes what can be done to improve the situation going forward. Not surprisingly, most loans to small businesses tend to be small. Microloans—defined $100,000 or smaller—make up 90 percent of all loans to small businesses. These loans tend to be labor intensive and costly to underwrite relative to the returns they generate. This combined with the higher risk associated with these loans present challenges to banks. Community development financial institutions (CDFIs) can help fill this space. CDFIs are specialized financial institutions that target their efforts to areas underserved by traditional financial institutions. They provide a range of financial products including capital for investments to start-up or expanding businesses in low-income areas. Most CDFIs tend to be nonprofit organizations, but some are regulated institutions such as community development banks and credit unions. Examples of CDFIs operating in the Bronx include the Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation, the Bethex Federal Credit Union and Spring Bank. However, CDFIs tend to make loans smaller than $50,000. A challenge, then, is bridging the gap between the maximum loan amount typically provided by a CDFI and the minimum loan amounts typically provided by a bank. Since the CDFIs have the relationships with the small businesses, partnerships between banks and CDFIs that increase the lending capacity of the CDFIs could be helpful. Possible avenues to achieving this include partnerships between CDFIs and banks, as well as assisting CDFIs to better access funding from the Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) system. I would like to touch on three additional issues that I think would assist small businesses to be successful: financial education, certification of community organizations that assist small businesses and greater transparency for small business lending. Establishing a thriving small business takes more than a good idea and hard work. While both of these are essential, there are many other factors that come into play. It is important that people starting businesses have access to financial information that will assist them in navigating the difficult way forward. This assistance can include how to develop a sound business plan, how to enhance their credit profile, how to avoid early pitfalls such as obtaining financing with punitive interest rates and how to cultivate a banking relationship. These will all increase the likelihood that the small business will have access to the credit it needs over time to grow and thrive. CDFIs have been an important source of this financial education to small businesses, and these efforts should be supported and expanded. It is critical that small businesses also know that the organizations they work with are reputable and knowledgeable. Unfortunately, there are individuals who try to take advantage of owners of new businesses by providing them with poor advice or overcharging them for credit. Researching the backgrounds of these service providers and lenders is difficult and time intensive, leaving small business owners too often uncertain as to who to deal with. In some cases, this uncertainty can discourage a business owner from seeking assistance. I believe that we need a better system of certification for organizations that work with small businesses. The certification will assure a business owner that the organization has been properly vetted and has the requisite skills to assist the owner. This not only provides assurances to business owners, but saves them the time and resources required to do this due diligence on their own. Finally, in addition to certification, it would be helpful to have consistent standards and transparency requirements for organizations that lend to small businesses. Such standards and requirements exist for lending to households, and I believe the same justification exists to extend these requirements to small businesses. As a result, small business owners would have greater confidence that they fully understand the terms and conditions of their loan. This, in conjunction with the access to more financial information and education, will help small business owners make better decisions about their use of credit. Conclusion In summary, economic conditions in the Bronx are improving but more progress is necessary. Community banks will play a key role in spurring this progress, so it is essential that they remain financially sound and engaged. The financial crisis provides many lessons for how banks can thrive even in turbulent economic conditions. The vitality of the Bronx and other communities depends on the ability of entrepreneurs to establish and grow new businesses. While access to credit is important, success depends on a wide range of factors, and we need to make sure new business owners have the help they need to prosper. 1 Jason Bram, Christopher Calabia, Tony Davis, Jacqueline Fenton, Claire Kramer Mills, Don Morgan, James Orr, Joseph Tracy and Luis Uranga assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 The Importance of Community Banking: A Conversation with Chairman Ben Bernanke , Community Banking Connections, Third Quarter 2012 3 The Future of Community Banks: Lessons Learned from Banks That Thrived During the Recent Financial Crisis by R. Alton Gilbert, Andrew P. Meyer, and James W. Fuchs all of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 4 See United States Government Accountability Office, Financial Institutions: Causes and Consequences of Recent Community Bank Failures , Statement of Lawrance L. Evans, Jr., Director Financial Markets and Community Investment, June 13, 2013. Also see Gilbert et al. (2013). 5 St. Louis Federal Reserve Study Shows Community Bank Model Can Thrive in Good Times and in Bad . By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 12, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Panel Remarks at the Sixth High Level Conference on the International Monetary System: Monetary Policy Challenges in a Changing World, Zurich, Switzerland As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to participate in today’s conference. In keeping with this session’s mandate, I will focus my remarks on the global implications of U.S. monetary policy normalization—paying particular attention to the potential implications for emerging market economies (EMEs). I put the focus here because these economies were greatly affected in 2013 during the so-called “taper tantrum” and many of these economies have been under stress from the weakness in global commodity prices. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve. But before I get to the implications for EMEs and what the Fed should do or not do to mitigate the impact, a few words on the timing of normalization. To be as direct as possible: I don’t know when this will occur. The timing of lift-off will depend on how the economic outlook evolves. Since the economic outlook is uncertain, this means the timing of liftoff must also be uncertain. At the same time, though, I can be clear about what conditions are needed for normalization to begin. If the improvement in the U.S. labor market continues and the FOMC is “reasonably confident” that inflation will move back to our 2 percent objective over the medium-term, then it would be appropriate to begin to normalize interest rates. Because the conditions necessary for liftoff are well-specified, market participants should be able to think right along with policymakers, adjusting their views about the prospects for normalization in response to the incoming data. This implies that liftoff should not be a big surprise when it finally occurs, which should help mitigate the degree of market turbulence engendered by lift-off. Nevertheless, I think it would be naïve not to expect some impact. After more than six years at the zero lower bound, lift-off will signal a regime shift even though policy would only be slightly less accommodative after lift-off than it is before. I expect that this will have implications for global capital flows, foreign exchange valuation and financial asset prices even if it is mostly anticipated when it occurs. Which leads to the key question I want to address in the remainder of my remarks: What should the Federal Reserve do to minimize the impact? Like other central banks, our monetary policy mandate has a domestic focus. Our monetary policy actions, though, often have global implications that feed back into the U.S. economy and financial markets, and we need to always keep this in mind. From one perspective, the unconventional nature of monetary policy around the world adds little that is fundamentally new to the challenges that face EMEs. Today’s monetary policies simply represent a way of easing that was necessitated by hitting the zero lower bound here and elsewhere. Central bankers have managed differences across countries in cyclical positions and policy stances many times in the past. This time should not be fundamentally different. But, from another perspective, we have less experience operating with unconventional monetary policy, we have been in this regime for a long time and this creates more potential uncertainties. These uncertainties put a premium on clear communication among central bankers as well as between central bankers and market participants. In my view, an important fact is that the large scale asset purchase programs undertaken in the United States and elsewhere have dramatically shrunk the size of bond risk premia globally. This new set of monetary policies affects financial asset prices in a different way compared to changes in short-term interest rates, and we should be humble regarding what we claim to understand about this distinction. Looking ahead, it seems likely that markets will remain focused on those vulnerabilities that they might have ignored prior to the taper tantrum in 2013. The greater premium on strong fundamentals, policy coherence and predictability will likely remain. Although we will undoubtedly experience further bumps in the road. I think we can remain generally optimistic about the prospects for adjustment. But for this to occur, it will be important for market participants to appropriately discriminate across countries, rather than treating EMEs as a single group. The good news is that many EMEs generally appear to be better equipped today to handle the Fed's prospective exit from its exceptional policy accommodation than they were during past tightening cycles. This reflects the fundamental reforms that EMEs have put in place over the past 15 years, as well as the hard lessons learned from past periods of market stress. Among the positives are: The absence of pegged exchange rate regimes that often came undone violently during periods of acute stress; Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; Larger foreign exchange reserve cushions; Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now generally low to moderate inflation rates; Generally improved fiscal discipline; and Better capitalized banking systems, supported by strengthened regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Of course, progress has not been uniform across EMEs, and more work remains to further strengthen institutional structures in some countries. In particular, vulnerabilities remain in several important EMEs, and some have been hit by the sharp adverse turn in their terms of trade due to the recent fall in global commodity prices. Still, the fundamental improvements I’ve cited leave many EMEs better positioned than in the past to weather those times in the cycle when the external environment becomes more difficult. The impact that changes in Fed policy can have beyond our borders has led to calls for us to do more to internalize those impacts, or even further, to internationally coordinate policymaking. As I’ve already noted, we are mindful of the global effects of Fed policy, given the central place of U.S. markets in the global financial system and the dollar’s status as the global reserve currency. Accordingly, we seek to conduct monetary policy transparently and based on clear principles. Promoting growth and stability in the U.S., I believe, is the most important contribution we can make to growth and stability worldwide. There is, of course, the argument that Fed policy has been too accommodative for too long, creating risks for financial stability worldwide. Here, I think it’s important to consider carefully the counterfactual. Would countries beyond our borders really have been better off with a weaker U.S. economy—an economy that might have required exceptional monetary policy accommodation for a much longer period of time? The fundamental issue is whether U.S. monetary policy has helped support our dual objectives of maximum employment in the context of price stability, and whether this support is consistent with a healthy global economy. While explicit coordination looks neither feasible nor desirable, there may be more that central banks in general, and the Fed in particular, could do to be better global stewards. As an example, I would emphasize the importance of effective Fed communication. It is clear, in retrospect, that our attempts in the spring of 2013 to provide guidance about the potential timing and pace of tapering confused market participants. Market participants seemed to conflate the prospective tapering of asset purchases with monetary policy tightening, and pulled forward their expectations about the likely timing of liftoff and raised their expected paths for policy rates. Lately, we seem to have done better: the tapering down of the Fed’s asset purchase program went smoothly and market participants now seem to share the assessment embodied in the FOMC’s March Summary of Economic Projections that lift-off is likely to begin sometime later this year. As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and improve our communications. This includes regular press conferences by the Fed chair following FOMC meetings; the publishing of growth, inflation and short-term rate forecasts of FOMC participants; and a concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts that the FOMC will look at to assess progress toward our mandate. We also have explained in considerable detail what tools we will use and how we will likely use them to ensure to ensure a smooth lift-off. A second area we have focused on is doing a better job safeguarding financial stability. Simply put, we failed to act both early enough and decisively enough to stem the credit excesses that spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. The U.S. was not alone in this shortcoming, but given our position in the global financial system, we especially should have done better. We've taken important steps through new legislative mandates and a broader effort to rethink our regulatory and supervisory framework. In particular, systemically important banking organizations must now hold amounts of capital and liquidity that are better aligned with their risk profiles. Other changes have also been implemented, such as central clearing of standardized OTC derivatives contracts, that should make the global financial system more resilient and robust. Although this effort remains very much a work in progress, I think it will enable us to avoid repeating the mistakes of the past decade, and enable us to take a more proactive stance toward mitigating potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. Since the recent financial crisis, central banks worldwide have been engaged in a broad rethinking of how to better fulfill their mandates. Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often emanate from getting policy wrong domestically. Recession or instability at home is often quickly exported abroad. Equally important, growth and stability abroad makes all our jobs at home easier. This illustrates the externalities in the work we all do, with more effective fulfillment of our domestic mandates helping to bring us collectively to a better place. Thank you for your kind attention. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Observations on Community Banking Supervision in the Second District - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Observations on Community Banking Supervision in the Second District May 14, 2015 Posted May 19, 2015 F. Christopher Calabia , Senior Vice President Remarks at the Community Bankers’ Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Welcome to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. We are pleased to continue our annual tradition of inviting community and regional bankers from across New York, northern New Jersey, southern Connecticut, and Puerto Rico to share perspectives on opportunities and challenges for smaller banks in the Second Federal Reserve District. Community banks—which we define generally as institutions with total assets under $10 billion—remain an important focus for the Federal Reserve System and for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and not simply because of our statutory responsibility to ensure that state member banks and bank holding companies are managed safely and soundly and treat consumers fairly. Community banks also help to inform one of the Federal Reserve System’s roles as our nation’s central bank. For me, it’s quite simply the Federal Reserve’s “dual mandate” that makes community banks an important area of focus for the Reserve Bank and the System. As you know, the dual mandate expressed in a 1977 amendment to the Federal Reserve Act requires the central bank to promote maximum employment and price stability in the United States, commensurate with moderate long-term interest rates. Yet it would be impossible for the Federal Reserve to promote price stability and maximum employment without understanding the demand and supply for credit across all parts of our country and all segments of our economy. Consequently, under our dual mandate we must understand the important segment of the economy that community banks and other smaller firms serve, which generally comprises household lending, small business lending, and commercial real estate. In my remarks today, I’d like to offer three sets of observations on community banking supervision in the Second District. First, I’ll discuss the importance of community banking from our perspectives as both supervisors and central bankers. Second, I’ll update you on practical initiatives we have launched in our District to tailor our supervisory approach better to our sense of the actual risks that community banks present. Finally, I’ll share some observations on how community and larger regional banks (which we define generally as having $10 to $50 billion in assets) have performed in our District over the past two years. As these observations reflect my personal experiences with community and regional bank supervision, I’d like to stress that these views are my own and may not reflect the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. 1 To begin, when it comes to the importance of community banks, we know that it is because of you that more Americans are able to purchase homes for their families. It’s because of you that more entrepreneurs are able to pursue their ideas and create small businesses—and those small businesses matter because historically small businesses have provided one of the largest sources of new jobs for our country’s economy. We know that your competitive advantage in local markets is that you know your local business conditions and your customers better than anyone else. We know that other, larger firms may tend to overlook the customer base you serve best. When the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, as both a central bank and a supervisory authority, understands not just your firms’ financial health, but importantly the health of your customers as well, we develop a deeper appreciation of how the economy is faring in your part of our District. When Reserve Banks gather similar information from community banks across the country, we can foster powerful insight for the Federal Reserve System in achieving our dual mandate. Our chair, Janet Yellen, spoke at a conference of the Independent Community Bankers of America last year in great detail about the special role that community banks play in lending to Main Street: she said she believes that “a healthy financial system relies on institutions of different sizes performing a variety of functions and serving different needs.” 2 Consequently, from the Federal Reserve’s perspective, we need diversity in the size and scope of financial institutions to ensure that all participants in our economy can be served. Beyond the critical financial services that community banks provide to depositors and borrowers in your communities, community bankers in our District have been highly engaged in sharing perspectives with us on the economy and on business conditions outside of the supervisory process. You do so by participating actively in this annual conference; by joining community outreach meetings that the New York Fed holds across the District; and, for some, by sharing perspectives with us through a more formal consultative body called the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC). President Dudley convenes the Second District’s CDIAC twice per year to seek insights from leaders in community banks, credit unions, and thrifts. CDIAC members offer their views about what’s actually happening on Main Street regarding business conditions, the demand for credit, and market practices. And yes, they share their concerns about supervisory practices, too. Ultimately these views are reported to a national-level CDIAC body that advises Chair Yellen and other governors. Regardless of how you share insight with us, I know from my visits across our District with you and your staff, as well as with your firms’ directors, that you are not a silent bunch. We welcome your candor and honesty. We need to hear your concerns so that we can better conduct our statutory mandates and minimize the burden on your businesses, consistent with your firms’ individual risk profiles. This leads to my second set of observations, which concerns how we tailor our supervisory programs to your firms and our best sense of the actual risks community banks present. One of the themes I’ve heard repeatedly from directors and senior leaders at community and regional banks in our District is the strong sense that you are struggling with the volume and weight of new regulations. U.S. supervisory authorities and other stakeholders, including Congress and state legislatures, are still evaluating the lessons learned from the financial crisis and its aftermath. It is indeed important to ensure that our laws and regulations reflect our best understanding of what can go wrong and how we can mitigate those risks from threatening the broader economy. Still, we understand that community banks do not generally pose a systemic threat to the stability of the U.S. financial system. Consequently, the Federal Reserve and other supervisory agencies have long sought to differentiate and distinguish our supervisory programs for the largest firms versus those of our smaller community banks. To illustrate these initiatives, one of our Governors, Daniel Tarullo, gave a speech to the Independent Community Bankers of America two weeks ago. 3 In his remarks, he reviewed a number of changes we have made or are making to tailor our supervisory approaches for community banks. I’d like to share my observations on the experiences we have had in our District related to some of those changes that Governor Tarullo cited in his speech. One of the important initiatives that Governor Tarullo mentioned concerns our conscious effort to limit the length of examinations and the period of time that community bank staff must devote to them so that we do not disrupt your businesses significantly. Whenever I think about the amount of time that we spend onsite at community banks, I always remember Ben Franklin’s adage that fish and visitors stink in three days. I realize that Ben Franklin’s timetable may be accelerated for bank examiners. While I am relatively confident that we will not be able to reduce our full scope examinations to three days or less at a typical community bank in the near future, the New York Fed is undertaking several steps to reduce the time spent onsite. One initiative includes doing more homework in advance of arriving at your front door to evaluate your firms’ financial condition and performance with regard to capital adequacy, earnings, and liquidity. We can then spend the time onsite asking more focused questions about the concerns we have rather than trying to update ourselves while we are onsite and then asking questions later, which could otherwise extend the duration of an onsite examination. In addition, we’re adopting a variety of automation tools to simplify the examinations process and make it more efficient. Increasingly, we are using a secure online platform to facilitate the electronic receipt of your responses to our requests for information in advance of our arrival onsite. Receiving critical data and information on the firm electronically should additionally reduce both the cost to community banks of shipping boxes of information to the Reserve Bank in advance of our onsite visits and the risk of losing confidential information en route. These secure online platforms may furthermore enable us to share information more efficiently with other responsible supervisory agencies, reducing the need for a community bank to send similar information to two or more agencies and increasing our ability to collaborate with other agencies. On a related note, Governor Tarullo mentioned that the Federal Reserve is experimenting with the use of electronic loan files to facilitate offsite reviews of a firm’s loans. In the New York District, we know that many community banks have not yet adopted the use themselves of digital loan files, and this is not a supervisory requirement for the time being. Consequently, we at the New York Fed do not yet have much experience with conducting loan reviews for community banks offsite using electronic files. Some of our fellow Reserve Banks have piloted such examinations in their Districts, and we’ve heard encouraging results about how conducting at least part of our regular loan reviews offsite has reduced the stress and burden on community bank staff. We remain eager to talk to any community bank in our District that may be interested for its own purposes in moving to digital loan files, as we would like to pilot an examination in which we conduct at least part of our loan review process offsite. Beyond the initiatives that Governor Tarullo mentioned, we have a massive effort underway in the Regional, Community, and Foreign Institutions Supervision and Consumer Compliance Function (RCFI) of the New York Fed to look at all of our internal processes with a fresh eye. We are working to eliminate unnecessary steps, smooth out cumbersome internal processes, and increase efficiency so that we can conduct our examinations and share our findings with you more efficiently and effectively. But what does all this mean practically? Are we able to limit the length of examinations and thereby provide community bankers with feedback sooner and reduce the burden on their daily operations? It’s still early days for our efforts, but we have documented two pilot examinations using as many of the automation tools and business process improvements as possible. I won’t cite the names of the firms involved, and I want to stress that the pilot examinations were conducted at firms that did not have serious supervisory issues. The measure of efficiency that we are monitoring is the number of days from the start of the examination at a community bank—namely, the first day our examiners arrive onsite at your firms—to the close of the onsite portion of the examination. At one firm, our adoption of new automated tools and our own internal business process improvement efforts reduced the time spent onsite at the firm from 32 days in 2011 to 18 days in 2013. That represents just over a 40% reduction in time spent onsite over just a two-year period. But it’s even more dramatic if we look back further to a period before we were implementing these new automated tools and process improvements. In 2009, it took us 81 days from the start of the onsite examination to conclude all of our onsite work at that same firm, compared to just 18 days in 2013. Now admittedly 2009 represented a difficult time in our nation’s and region’s economic history, so it may not be the best baseline of comparison. But we found similarly material reductions in time spent onsite at a second firm: in 2012, we had spent 39 days onsite at the second firm, and after adopting these improvements, spent just 31 days onsite in 2014. I would remind you that we conducted the two pilot examinations at community banks that were generally in sound condition. The efficiencies we gain may depend greatly on the underlying condition and performance of the firm we are examining. Consequently, I cannot predict how much time we’ll be able to save at future examinations as more of the tools become available. Still, the improvement in efficiency reflects our efforts to bring community bank supervision into the twenty-first century and transform what had been a highly manual process for decades into a more automated and risk-focused process. I should also note that some community banks don’t want us to conduct all of our work offsite. They don’t want our examiners to reduce their firms to a data set that we process in an offsite supervisory model. That’s certainly not how community banks do business, as it is not how you treat your customers. So the onsite portion of examinations will remain an important supervisory tradition: we simply want to have a better strategy for our time spent onsite so that our discussions will be more focused and meaningful for both the examiners and the bankers. Governor Tarullo similarly mentioned in his remarks the Federal Reserve System’s adoption of a new risk-focused supervision program with regard to our consumer compliance work. 4 I’d like to share our experiences in the Second District with adopting this approach. From my perspective, our consumer compliance examinations fit in well with our role as both a supervisory authority and a central bank: if consumers feel that banks do not treat them fairly, the Federal Reserve will not be able to foster public confidence in the banking system, no matter how much capital banks have. Still, we’re working hard to adjust our supervisory programs for consumer compliance matters so that they make sense for the scale and risk profiles of community banks. Please allow me to mention just two examples. First, in years past, we usually included all lending areas and some deposit areas in our reviews of consumer protection matters. By adjusting our scope to focus on the higher risk lending and deposit areas, we’ve found efficiencies in terms of the numbers of examiners sent onsite and the number of weeks spent onsite. In one case, we sent eight examiners for four weeks to a community bank under our former approach, yet more recently we were able to scale that back to about half the number of examiners and one week less onsite at that particular firm. We’re still developing experience with the new approach, and I want to emphasize, as always, that when risks are higher or problems have been identified, we will devote the appropriate time and resources to understand those challenges. As a second example, the Federal Reserve System is currently testing an automated tool to help us analyze institutional risk factors from a consumer compliance perspective. The tool helps us to look across many firms in our District simultaneously to identify potential outliers and new products that should draw more of our examiners’ attention. This tool and others should put us in a better position to focus our consumer reviews appropriately and in a more risk-sensitive way. So far, I’ve discussed some observations about why community banks matter to us as supervisors and central bankers, and I’ve also discussed some of the practical efforts underway to tailor our supervision to the general lower risks that community banks pose to the economy. Now I’ll move on to my third set of observations, namely what we’ve observed in community banks’ performance in our District; I’ll broaden this group to include regional banks ($10 to $50 billion in total assets), as they present similar stories overall. With regard to the financial condition of community and regional banks in our District, it’s been our sense that many have experienced gradual stabilization in their financial health over the past two years. Challenges do remain in the District, as evidenced by the fact that some firms continue to have somewhat lower capital ratios. Interestingly, capital ratios on average for our community and regional banks remain slightly below those of national peer group averages; the good news is that we’ve seen few signs of deterioration in the solvency of supervised firms in our District over the past two years. This more stable performance contrasts with a more volatile period prior to two years ago. The key business for most community and many regional banks has historically been lending, and consequently credit risk is typically the most significant risk for such firms. Over the past two years, we have found that indicators of credit risk as evidenced in the quality of assets on the balance sheets of regional and community banks in our District (such as weighted classification ratios of troubled loans to total lending, various measures of the ratio of the allowance for loan and lease losses related to loans, etc.) tend to compare slightly more favorably than those of peer banks nationwide. This slightly stronger risk profile may explain why some Second District regional and community banks hold a little less capital. To some degree, asset quality in the Second District may reflect the somewhat greater stability experienced in real estate values in our District, especially in the metropolitan area surrounding New York City, compared to other markets of the country where values fell precipitously—such as Florida, Las Vegas, Phoenix, or Atlanta—and for a prolonged period of time during the financial crisis. However, we have to temper even that statement, as some individual communities in our District did experience worse shocks in housing or real estate prices during the crisis, including some that were more akin to some of the most troubled real estate markets in the country. Earnings levels for regional and community banks in the District have tended to remain positive and show some recent signs of greater stability, possibly reflecting the somewhat better quality assets underwritten and held in many firms’ portfolios. If we look to the other side of the balance sheet, we see that core deposits continue to fund the majority of assets for many Second District regional and community banks. That’s a healthy sign, as one independent study 5 suggests that community banks that were more dependent on this traditionally sticky and usually well-priced sources of funding fared better than those that relied more on wholesale funding sources during the financial crisis. So I’ve shared with you why we view community banks as important to informing our work as supervisors and central bankers; I’ve talked about how we are tailoring our supervisory approach to reflect the actual risks that community banks present to the economy, which generally are lower compared to that of larger firms; and I’ve shared some observations that community and regional banks in our District are showing signs of stabilization over the past few years, though the story remains mixed. What does all of this mean? It means that those of you who have been leading community and regional banking organizations in our District have steered your firms through one of the toughest financial crises in generations. Moreover, you are still navigating well the fog-covered waters of continued economic challenges. Your accomplishments remind me of one of the observations that Will Rogers, the cowboy humorist of the 1920’s and 30’s, once said. For those who may not be familiar with him, Will Rogers was an actual cowboy who gained fame for his lasso and rope tricks in vaudeville circuses. But he was also a largely self-educated man who took a great interest in the events of the day and quickly became known for his witty and folksy observations on politics, business, international affairs, and culture. He was once asked how it was that he could be so funny, all the time, when discussing current events. His answer was that “There's no trick to being a humorist when you have the whole government working for you." I should stress that I’m quoting his view rather than my own. Despite his wry and witty daily commentary, Will Rogers was a keen observer of people and famously said that he never met a man he didn’t like. There’s one observation from Will Rogers that I think is most appropriate today. He said once, “There are basically two types of people. People who accomplish things and people who claim to have accomplished things. The first group is less crowded.” So, looking around this room, you count yourselves among that smaller group of people who have actually accomplished something. Critically, you’ve accomplished something important. By steering your firms through the challenges of recent years, you continued to safeguard the hard-earned savings of consumers and businesses alike in your communities. You provided credit and other financial services to them when other, larger firms might have otherwise overlooked them. You can be proud of that accomplishment and of the impact that you have had on your communities. But the message I want to leave you with is that your work is not finished. We need community bankers to continue to demonstrate sound judgment and prudent business sense in your communities. We need you to continue to provide credit and other services to businesses and consumers alike. We need you to offer your services in a manner that is safe, prudent, and fair. We need you to continue to maintain close ties to your neighbors and neighboring businesses so that you can leverage your special ability to understand and build sound business relationships with community members. The Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies at the state and federal levels will still be there to encourage you to maintain safe and sound operations. We’ll be especially active in doing so when things may appear to be going wrong. But ultimately only you can ensure that your firms thrive, even when times get tough. And when you manage your firms prudently, you can continue to play a vital role in serving the banking needs of those businesses and families who call your communities their home towns. When you thrive, you can help your communities to thrive as well. I hope that you find our conference to be useful and informative. Thank you for joining us today. 1 Deborah Arndell, Jacqueline Fenton, Jordan Light, and Wilma Sabado provided input and advice for these remarks. 2 See Tailored Supervision of Community Banks . Remarks by Janet Yellen at the Independent Community Bankers of America 2014 Washington Policy Summit, Washington, D.C., May 1, 2014. 3 See Tailoring Community Bank Regulation and Supervision . Remarks by Daniel Tarullo at the Independent Community Bankers of America 2015 Washington Policy Summit, Washington, D.C., April 30, 2015. 4 See Consumer Affairs Letter 13-19, Community Bank Risk-Focused Consumer Compliance Supervision Program , Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 18, 2013. 5 See Financial Institutions: Causes and Consequences of Recent Bank Failures , United States Government Accountability Office, January 2013. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

June 5, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Economic Club of Minnesota’s June Luncheon, Minneapolis As prepared for delivery Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here in Minneapolis today and to have the chance to speak to all of you. As chairman of the Economic Club of New York, I particularly appreciate the role that the Economic Club of Minneapolis has played in organizing this event. In my remarks, I am going to focus on the economic outlook and the implications of that outlook for monetary policy. Today, I come before you as the proverbial two-armed economist. On one hand, the economy’s forward momentum has slowed sharply during the first half of the year and inflation remains below the level the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) views as consistent with price stability. On the other hand, I think it is also fair to say that we are still making progress towards our dual mandate objectives. However, recent solid job gains and a further decline in the unemployment rate have occurred only because productivity growth has slowed markedly. During the remainder of the year, I expect growth to pick up somewhat. However, productivity growth will also likely rise. So there remains some uncertainty about whether growth will be strong enough to lead to further improvement in the labor market. With respect to inflation, as long as growth remains strong enough to lead to further improvement in labor market conditions—and this is an important caveat—I am becoming more confident that inflation will move up toward the FOMC’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. The firming of inflation that I anticipate reflects my expectation that resource utilization will increase and the fact that some of the factors that have pulled down inflation, such as lower oil and gas prices and a firmer dollar, have already stabilized or partially reversed. Putting this all together, I still think it is likely that conditions will be appropriate to begin monetary policy normalization later this year. But the likelihood and timing will depend on the economic outlook, and that will be largely shaped by the incoming economic data. When the FOMC begins to raise short-term interest rates, this will occur in a very different environment than in the past. Reserves in the banking system are very plentiful, reflecting the large increase in the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet over the past few years. But this circumstance should not adversely affect our ability to push the federal funds rate into a higher target range. We have the appropriate tools to push up short-term interest rates. However, lift-off may not go so smoothly in terms of the impact on financial asset prices. After all, lift-off will represent a regime shift after more than six years at the zero lower bound. More important for financial market asset prices than the precise timing of lift-off is the expected trajectory of short-term rates over the next few years following lift-off. Most likely, this will be a shallow, upward path. Because of the persistent headwinds associated with the recent financial crisis, the level of real short-term interest rates consistent with a neutral monetary policy seems considerably lower now than in the past. And, if potential GDP growth is much lower—due to slower labor force growth and productivity growth—the long-run equilibrium real short-term rate is also likely to remain lower than normal in the future even after those headwinds fully dissipate. But there must be considerable uncertainty about the path for short-term interest rates. After all, the economic outlook is uncertain. Moreover, the appropriate stance of monetary policy will be influenced by how financial market conditions respond to the Federal Reserve’s actions. All else equal, if financial conditions tighten sharply, then we are likely to proceed more slowly. In contrast, if financial conditions were not to tighten at all or only very little, then—assuming the economic outlook hadn’t changed significantly—we would likely have to move more quickly. In the end, we will adjust the policy stance to support the financial market conditions that we deem are most consistent with our employment and inflation objectives. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the FOMC or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The Economic Outlook Turning first to the economic outlook, the real GDP growth rate appears to have slowed sharply during the first half of 2015. Based on the revision we received last week, first-quarter real GDP fell by 0.7 percent at an annualized rate. Although most projections anticipate a pickup in growth to around 2 percent or slightly higher in the current quarter, there is little question that economic growth has slowed significantly from last year’s second-half pace. What’s going on? Why has growth slowed and what does this portend for the remainder of the year? As I see it, the contraction in GDP growth in the first quarter represents a mix of factors. These include another unseasonably cold and snowy winter, a sharp contraction in oil and gas investment, a deterioration in the trade balance due—in large part—to the stronger dollar and sluggish foreign demand, and a slowdown in consumer spending growth after a very strong fourth quarter. After adjusting for weather effects, I think seasonal adjustment issues probably also played some role. For example, real defense spending has declined eight times in the past nine years in the first quarter, suggesting there is a seasonal adjustment issue. But I judge that this has had only a modest effect on measured real GDP growth. Because weather effects are by their nature temporary, the widely held expectation coming into the second quarter was that there would be a sharp rebound in growth similar to what took place last year. But current data suggests that the rebound has been relatively muted. I think this is because some of the non-weather factors evident in the first quarter—such as the drag from the sharp drop in oil and gas investment—have persisted into the second quarter. Also, real disposable income growth has slowed over the past three months as aggregate hours worked have grown more slowly and crude oil and gasoline prices have partially recovered. This means that the fundamentals for consumer spending are not as strong as they were at the beginning of the year. Nonetheless, my view is that growth will likely pick up further during the remainder of this year. This judgment reflects several factors. First, some of the forces that have been restraining growth are likely to fade later this year. For example, consider oil and gas investment. The U.S. oil and gas rig count dropped precipitously during the first quarter, but the rate of decline has slowed during the current quarter. Combined with the partial recovery in crude oil prices, this implies that oil and gas investment is likely to stabilize during the second half of the year. Second, business fixed investment outside of oil and gas seems likely to advance, reflecting strong fundamentals. For example, the cost of capital remains low and cash flows are high. Third, there is plenty of room for further gains in residential investment. Housing starts have been running at an annual pace of only about one million so far this year. This is low relative to both the rate of household formation that one would expect given underlying demographics and the rate of job formation. Moreover, continued improvement in mortgage credit availability should support the demand for new housing. Household credit worthiness is improving as the scars of the financial crisis heal, and underwriting standards may be relaxed somewhat in response to the excellent performance of recent mortgage vintages. Fourth, household finances generally are in good shape with debt service burdens at historically low levels. Nonetheless, household borrowing has been rising only very slowly, and the personal saving rate is somewhat elevated relative to what one would expect given the level of household net worth relative to income. This suggests that if households become more confident about their finances, consumer spending should grow at least as fast as income growth over the remainder of the year. But, I can’t be completely confident about this forecast. After all, several times during this expansion we have been fooled by sharp rises in the growth rate that appeared to presage a sustained pickup, but that subsequently proved fleeting. Moreover, faster consumption growth is not a given. It will depend, in part, on the pace of employment and wage growth. A downside risk is that wage growth remains subdued, which would undercut consumer spending. And, the trade sector looks likely to remain a drag on growth over the remainder of the year. Although the dollar has depreciated slightly on a broad trade-weighted basis recently, it still is more than 10 percent higher than it was a year ago. Despite the sharp slowdown in growth evident during the first half of the year, we have seen continued job gains and further falls in unemployment so far this year. Consequently, we still seem to be making progress toward our objective of maximum employment in a context of price stability. Today’s payroll and household employment reports indicate that this progress continued into May. Even with a weak month in March, job gains this year have been averaging almost 220,000 per month. The gain in May was even stronger at 280,000 and was widespread across industries. Although the 12-month change in average hourly earnings is still low at 2.3 percent, it is a bit higher than we have seen in recent years. At the same time, there is still some ways to go. The unemployment rate has changed little in the past four months at about 5½ percent, with the levels of part-time workers for economic reasons, and long-duration unemployed, remaining elevated. This combination of slow output growth and continued job gains has meant that productivity growth has been unusually weak, with non-farm business productivity declining significantly during the past two quarters and rising by only 0.3 percent over the past year. It also implies that the future path of productivity growth will be important in determining the outlook for employment growth and the prospects for further progress in U.S. labor market conditions. Because it is unclear exactly why productivity growth has slowed recently, it is difficult to be confident about what it will do in the future. One reading of the data is that some of the slowing seems likely to be persistent. For instance, the weakness in capital spending evident during much of this economic expansion means that the contribution to productivity from capital deepening has dropped sharply in recent years. 2 Also, the U.S. labor market appears to have become less dynamic—perhaps due, in part, to an older workforce. Less movement of workers across jobs could lead to a less efficient allocation of workers’ skills, which would hurt productivity growth. That said, it seems unlikely that productivity growth will remain as weak as it has been over the past year. There is considerable evidence that technological progress continues at a healthy pace. Just look at the advances that have occurred in health care, oil and gas extraction and the development of smartphones. Moreover, because it takes time for technological advances to be adopted broadly throughout the economy, it seems unlikely that the productivity gains from recent innovations have yet been fully realized. Because I am uncertain about the near-term trends of GDP growth and productivity growth, I am also uncertain about whether we will see further progress in the labor market over the remainder of the year. There are many possible outcomes to consider. For example, if real GDP growth were to pick up more than productivity growth, then employment growth would likely remain sufficiently firm to lead to further tightening of the U.S. labor market. But, if the reverse occurs, then payroll gains could slow even as GDP growth strengthens. In contrast to my uncertainties about growth and the labor market, I am becoming more confident that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective over the medium term, as long as the labor market continues to improve—an important caveat. The reasons here are straightforward. First, a number of factors that threaten to keep inflation below our 2 percent objective appear to be transitory. In this camp, I put the sharp decline in oil and gasoline prices that began in mid-2014, and the weakness we have seen in nonpetroleum import prices due to the strength in the dollar. When the effects of these transitory influences wane, inflation will begin to move closer to our 2 percent objective for the personal consumption expenditures deflator. Second, the tightening of the labor market may soon lead to some strengthening in the labor compensation trend. Although the recent data are as a whole inconclusive, I find it noteworthy that the four-quarter change of the Employment Cost Index for all civilian workers, which I view as the most reliable indicator of labor cost trends, rose by 2.6 percent as of the first quarter of this year, up from around 2 percent in the first quarter of 2014. Also, work done by my staff suggests that we are at that point in the labor market recovery where, in the past, we have typically seen a pickup in wage compensation. Third, the risk that inflation expectations, which are important in influencing inflation outcomes, might become unanchored to the downside seems to have diminished. In particular, anxieties created by the decline in breakeven inflation compensation measures based on the relative yields of nominal Treasuries versus TIPs have lessened. For example, the 5-year forward, 5-year inflation compensation measure has climbed by about 25 basis points from its low point in late January. 3 Implications for Monetary Policy So what are the implications of the economic outlook for U.S. monetary policy? As the FOMC noted in its most recent statement in late April, the Committee is looking for two conditions to be satisfied for the normalization of monetary policy to start: “further improvement in the labor market” and that the Committee “is reasonably confident” that inflation will return to the FOMC’s objective over the medium term. I think these are reasonable criteria. I would note that these criteria are not independent. All else equal, for example, further improvement in the labor market should make one more confident about the inflation outlook. But improvement in the labor market, while necessary, is not a sufficient condition. For example, if labor market improvement were not accompanied by a meaningful uptick in wage compensation and if inflation expectations also fell, then one likely would not be reasonably confident about inflation returning to 2 percent over the medium term. For me, at present, the uncertainties rest more on the outlook of the labor market. If the labor market continues to improve and inflation expectations remain well-anchored, then I would expect—in the absence of some dark cloud gathering over the growth outlook—to support a decision to begin normalizing monetary policy later this year. When the normalization process starts and we raise the target range for the federal funds rate, what should we anticipate? I anticipate a smooth lift-off in terms of the ability of the FOMC to push the federal funds rate up into a higher range. Less clear is what the financial market reaction will be. Will it be more like the turbulent taper tantrum of 2013 in response to Chairman Bernanke’s remarks that we might at some point begin to taper our asset purchases, or the benign response when the FOMC actually tapered in 2014? Let me consider these two issues in turn. I am very confident that the Federal Reserve has the tools in place to ensure that the FOMC can successfully raise the federal funds rate into a new, higher target range when the time comes to do so. This reflects several factors. Most importantly, we have demonstrated that the interest rate paid on banks’ reserve balances (IOER)—which is our primary tool to raise the federal funds rate target—and daily overnight reverse repo (ON RRP) operations—which is a supplementary tool to help put a floor under money market rates—have been effective in keeping the federal funds rate well within the FOMC’s desired target range. Moreover, in the unlikely event that the rates we initially selected for the IOER and ON RRP were insufficient to move the federal funds rate into the desired range, we could alter the level of these rates and/or the spread between these rates so as to move the federal funds rate into the desired range. Finally, we also have other tools, such as the Term Deposit Facility and term reverse repo that could be used if needed to help achieve the targeted range for the federal funds rate. While I don’t expect that these tools will prove necessary, it is nice to have them available should we need to deal with unanticipated contingencies. How will financial markets react to the onset of normalization? My own view is that there likely will be some turbulence. After all, lift-off will represent a regime change after more than six years at the zero lower bound. Recognizing this, we have a responsibility to minimize the amount of potential turbulence by communicating clearly in order to reduce uncertainty about conditions surrounding lift-off and the likely aftermath of lift-off. This means being clear about what factors are important in driving the timing of lift-off. However, this does not mean providing advance notice about precisely when lift-off will occur because the timing should depend on the incoming economic news and how this influences the economic outlook. Instead, if you pay attention to the incoming economic news and listen to our assessment about how the outlook is evolving, then I think you will be able to judge for yourself when lift-off is likely. What also matters for financial asset prices is the likely post-lift-off trajectory of short-term rates over the medium- to longer-term. In fact, this should be more important than the particular month in which the normalization process starts. On this score, I think it is hard to be precise about the expected path of short-term rates. That is because it depends on two important factors: (1) how the economic outlook evolves, which depends, in part, on how loose or tight monetary policy actually is at a given level of short-term rates, and (2) how financial conditions broadly react to changes in the level of short-term rates. My own view is that the upward trajectory of short-term rates is likely to be relatively shallow. This reflects several factors. First, the lack of strong forward momentum in the economy despite the low level of short-term interest rates suggests that U.S. monetary policy is not as accommodative as one might think. In particular, the lack of strong momentum suggests that the real equilibrium federal funds rate today is considerably lower than the 2 percent rate assumed in the standard Taylor Rule formulation. Work done by my Federal Reserve colleagues, Thomas Laubach and John Williams, suggests that the so-called neutral real federal funds rate today may be close to zero. 4 This presumably reflects still-persistent headwinds from the financial crisis, such as the constraints on mortgage credit availability to prospective borrowers with lower FICO scores. Second, one might expect that it will still take additional time for these headwinds to fully subside. This implies that the neutral short-term rate may be depressed for some time. Third, my assessment is that the long-run equilibrium real federal funds rate is lower now than in the past, reflecting the likelihood that potential real GDP growth is lower due to slower growth of the labor force and more moderate productivity growth performance. Another important factor that will affect the trajectory of short-term rates is how financial market conditions respond to a rise in short-term rates. Monetary policy works on the economy through how it affects financial market conditions. Economic conditions at any point in time warrant a particular set of financial market conditions so the FOMC can best achieve its objectives of maximum employment and price stability. The FOMC chooses a policy stance to help support financial market conditions that will lead to economic outcomes consistent with its objectives. An important aspect of current financial market conditions is the very low bond term premia around the globe. If a small rise in short-term rates were to lead to an abrupt increase in term premia and bond yields, resulting in a significant tightening in financial market conditions, then the Federal Reserve would likely move more slowly—all else equal. As an example, consider the experience of the 1994-95 tightening cycle. Bond yields rose sharply and the Federal Reserve tightened less than what was ultimately priced in by market participants. Conversely, if term premia and bond yields were to remain low and the economic outlook suggested that financial conditions needed to be tighter and a rise in short-term rates did not generate this outcome, then the FOMC would likely need to raise short-term rates further than anticipated. The 2004-07 tightening cycle might be a good example of this. The FOMC ultimately pushed the federal funds rate up to a peak of 5.25 percent, in part, because the earlier rise in short-term rates was generally ineffective in tightening financial market conditions sufficiently over this period. 5 This means that there is uncertainty about the trajectory of short-term rates from two distinct sources: (1) the economic outlook and what setting of financial conditions this implies is appropriate, and (2) what setting of short rates is consistent with the financial market conditions that the FOMC is seeking to generate. This also suggests that market participants should be cautious in interpreting the Summary of Economic Projection “dot plots” that show the FOMC participants’ modal outlooks for the short-term rate trajectory. If the participants were to provide confidence bands around their paths, they probably would be very wide because the economic outlook is uncertain and the linkage between the instrument of monetary policy—the federal funds rate target range—to financial market conditions is loose and variable. In conclusion, I believe that the FOMC is continuing to make progress towards our dual mandate objectives. However, I have become somewhat more uncertain about the growth outlook given the lack of a sharp rebound in economic activity in recent months from the weak first quarter. With respect to inflation, as long as we see further improvement in the labor market and anchored longer-term inflation expectations, I am somewhat less worried that inflation will stay too low. Thus, I continue to expect that monetary policy normalization is likely to begin later this year. Longer-term, I expect that the trajectory of short-term interest rates after lift-off will likely be relatively shallow. This is due, in part, to my reading that monetary policy today is not as accommodative as one might think judging just from the level of short-term rates. But, the path will ultimately be determined by how the economic outlook evolves and how financial market conditions respond to monetary policy. I expect that there will be many twists and turns in the road ahead. As we make this journey, I will do my best to explain what I am seeing and how I think I might react as conditions change in the future. Thank you so much for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Jonathan McCarthy, Richard Peach, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 For example, see Alan Blinder, “The Mystery of Declining Productivity Growth,” Wall Street Journal , May 14, 2015. 3 The data on inflation compensation come from the Federal Reserve Board of Governors website at www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2008/ and is based on Refet Gurkaynak, Brian Sack, and Jonathan Wright (2010), “The TIPS Yield Curve and Inflation Compensation,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 2(1), 70-92. 4 Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” Review of Economics and Statistics 85(4), 1063-70. The FRBNY DSGE model also estimates that the natural rate of interest is currently close to zero. See Marco Del Negro, Marc Giannoni, Matthew Cocci, Sara Shahanaghi and Micah Smith, Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Liberty Street Economics blog, May 20, 2015. 5 With the benefit of hindsight, one could argue that the Federal Reserve should have raised short-term interest rates more aggressively over this period. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
