(MDIs) and Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) play in their communities. It is your presence in these communities and the services you offer that support local businesses, jobs, and economic growth. I know this because before joining the Federal Reserve, I was a community banker in a small rural town and more recently served as Kansas' State Bank Commissioner. I understand what it means to try to meet the financial needs of a community, whose needs are varied and can present unique challenges to a credit underwriter. I remember working with a customer on a mortgage loan for less than $20,000 with a first-time homebuyer's credit to purchase a mobile home. It was one of the most complicated and time consuming loans that I made during my time as a banker. Some larger banks might not be able or even be interested in putting that together, but community bankers know how important this kind of service is to their lower-income customers. I'm proud to bring that perspective to the Federal Reserve Board as the first governor to fill the role designated for someone with community banking experience. One way to fulfill my responsibilities is by meeting with and listening closely to minority and community bankers, consumers, small business owners, and local leaders—all of the stakeholders with an interest in their communities. MDIs and their staff play a key role, and I will use the knowledge we gain from these interactions to improve our work at the Federal Reserve. We aim to help MDIs in three ways: by finding ways to ease your regulatory burden, by sponsoring valuable and actionable research on your contributions to your communities, and by seeking to better support you through outreach and hands-on technical assistance. To achieve these goals, the Fed has developed an extensive outreach program, the Partnership for Progress (PFP). The PFP helps MDIs confront business model challenges, cultivate safe banking practices, and compete more effectively in the marketplace—all topics that I expect will be addressed today. Regulatory Burden One of the most important ways to help MDIs is by reducing regulatory burden. We are acting to implement provisions of a new law, S-2155, and reviewing comments on several proposals made in 2018 to ensure they do not unduly burden community banks. Our community bank leverage ratio proposal would allow qualifying banks to opt out of a more complicated risk-based capital framework. Other proposals include raising to $400,000 the threshold for when an appraisal is required for a residential real estate transaction and narrowing the Volcker rule to banks engaged in riskier activities. We raised the threshold from $1 billion to $3 billion in assets for banks that could qualify for an 18-month examination cycle. Further, we raised the asset threshold to $3 billion for the Small Bank Holding Company and Savings and Loan Holding Company Policy Statement. This change, which exempts small holding companies from consolidated risk-based capital rules, fosters local ownership of small banks by allowing more banking companies with limited access to capital markets to use debt in bank acquisitions. With respect to supervision, the Federal Reserve continues to tailor and reduce burden by conducting portions of examinations offsite for community banks that prefer that option. The Bank Exams Tailored to Risk (BETR) program identifies low-risk or, conversely, high-risk activities within state member banks and appropriately streamlines or expands examination work programs commensurate with the identified risk. This minimizes the burden for banks that are well managed and directs supervisory resources to higher-risk activities where they are most needed. Related to regulatory burden is an important initiative, in concert with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to identify healthy minority banking organizations capable of acquiring or merging with MDIs in troubled condition. Our PFP team has assisted with the process for establishing new MDIs and worked with MDIs to identify advantageous federally sponsored programs with which to collaborate. I note that today's agenda includes a session on this topic. Research The Board and Reserve Banks also conduct valuable research on the impact of MDIs on underserved households and communities. Last November, we held a webinar, which I hope some of you were able to participate in, on recent research on MDIs. All of our MDI research is available on the Partnership for Progress website. The PFP continues to seek to sponsor high-quality research to enhance our understanding of the MDI business model and how MDIs serve their communities. We welcome your input on research topics you find interesting and helpful. Tech Assistance/Outreach Through this biennial conference and several PFP conferences and outreach events each year, the Federal Reserve facilitates networking among MDI institutions. District coordinators from each Federal Reserve Bank will serve on local exam teams during examinations, and collect feedback from MDIs on how the PFP can provide additional assistance. District coordinators meet regularly with MDI management to discuss emerging issues and provide technical assistance, especially to those in troubled condition, to explain supervisory guidance, discuss challenges, and respond to management concerns and inquiries. High-interest items include the Community Reinvestment Act, IT and cybersecurity, concentrations in commercial real estate, interest-rate risk, capital planning and rules, anti-money-laundering compliance, and third-party vendor management. We want to help MDIs navigate supervisory and regulatory requirements. To do that well, we want to continue to develop an open dialogue so we can better understand the challenges you face and how we can best help you wherever we have the ability to do so. Personal contact and relationship building are important to community banking and, I believe, also to community bank oversight. We want, and need, to hear your questions and concerns. Last April, we invited the leaders of all Fed-supervised MDIs to a Leaders Forum so we could spend a day and a half building relationships and talking about the needs of MDIs. We also encourage staff to reach out to MDIs and ensure that you are aware of our outreach meetings and research. Let's keep this communication going. We engage is these efforts because your institutions are vital to your communities and to the American economy. On behalf of the Federal Reserve, I'd like to once again thank you for the work you do in your communities and welcome you to this year's conference. Last Update: June 25, 2019 Back to Top

Governor Michelle W. Bowman At a Fed Listens Event sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri Share Watch Live In keeping with the purpose of Fed Listens, I would like to spend most of our time in conversation, but I do want to offer a few thoughts about why the Fed is reaching out to seek a broad range of views, and what we are trying to achieve. This kind of comprehensive outreach on monetary policy is new for the Fed. For many decades, there was a sense at the Board that the public wasn't interested or willing to dive into the complexities of monetary policy. That view has changed in a fundamental way, especially in the aftermath of the financial crisis when it was urgently important that the public understand what we were doing. So we began explaining as accessibly and clearly as we could what we were doing and why. Now we are listening broadly as well. Since I became a Board member almost a year ago, it's become clear to me that people not only are willing to engage on complex economic issues, they also want to know that their concerns are being taken into account on issues that affect their financial well-being. The movement toward greater transparency and public engagement is ongoing, and advancing that effort is one of my top priorities. At the same time, we recognize that clear communication of our policies actually helps us achieve our goals. When we communicate our views on the economic outlook and our expectations for where interest rates may be heading, consumers and businesses take that information into account when making decisions on spending, investment, and hiring. For that reason, our policy communications are themselves an important part of the Fed's toolkit for influencing the direction of the economy. Fed Listens is a natural outcome of this commitment to public engagement. We want to hear from people, from different parts of the country and different sectors of the economy, about how monetary policy affects them and their communities. It is our responsibility as a public institution to be accountable to the public. And, hearing a broad range of perspectives on these issues will help us make good decisions as we consider new approaches to monetary policy. This afternoon, individual stakeholders representing different economic sectors will meet to discuss their perspectives. Later, President Bullard and I will do what we came here to do, which is listen. I come from a background in farming and ranching, so, naturally, I am interested in hearing the St. Louis Fed's Agriculture Industry Council's priorities for the monetary policy review. And as a former community banker, I am of course interested in what your Community Depository Institution Council has to share with us today. But I am also eager for other perspectives, and I look forward to all of the presentations. I want to know, for example, how monetary policy affects rural communities, like the one I come from in Kansas, but I also want to know how it affects urban communities. Our monetary policy review will have implications for financial markets, but we also want to know more about what the effect will be on Main Street—which, by the way, happens to be the name of the street where my family's bank is located, in Council Grove, Kansas. My colleagues and I are keenly aware of our responsibility to focus on how the decisions we make affect the real economy for people in communities all across the country. And we will continue these listening sessions for the rest of this year as we consider possible changes to the Federal Reserve's approach to monetary policy. The two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices—are determined by the Congress and are not subject to our review. How we reach those goals is what is up for discussion. One question I hope to explore is whether we need new strategies to more effectively achieve our goals. For many years, inflation has run modestly below our 2 percent objective. Given that, it would be helpful to hear from you whether you think the Federal Open Market Committee should consider strategies that aim to have inflation exceed our target for a time, to make up for the earlier period of time when it fell short. Or would that threaten the decades of success the Fed has had keeping the public's expectations for inflation low and stable? A related question concerns the Fed's existing toolkit for monetary policy. Currently, our policy levers include setting interest rates, adjusting the size and composition of our balance sheet, and communicating the expected future path of policy. Are there other tools we should consider to help us reach and sustain our objectives more effectively? I also want to know how the Federal Open Market Committee's communication of its policy framework to the public might be improved. How can we help you better understand our work so you can hold us accountable? Your perspectives on questions like these are a vital part of this monetary policy review, so I want to thank you, again, for your time and your contribution. Once the policy review is complete, we will share our findings with the public, probably during the first half of next year. And now I look forward to our discussion. Related Content Fed Listens Events Last Update: September 04, 2019 Back to Top
