Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Community Banking in the 21st Century," Research Conference, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri (via webcast) Share Watch Live Thank you, it is a pleasure to join you virtually today and share a few thoughts on what I am hearing from community banks in the wake of the pandemic, and what the Federal Reserve is doing to assist in the recovery. When I addressed this conference exactly a year ago, the world was a very different place. COVID-19 has brought hardship and disruption to nearly every aspect of our lives, and even as economic conditions improve, the pandemic continues to weigh on households, businesses, and the economy. Today, I would like to offer some of my observations on current conditions and share with you what I have learned in discussions with community bankers across the nation. This input has shaped my views of how supervision and regulation are affecting community banks in these challenging times—what is working, and what needs to improve. In addition to the Fed's usual consultation with community banks, I have separately embarked on an effort to meet directly with the CEOs of all 685 community banks supervised by the Fed, an undertaking that has already provided valuable insights that I will relate in these remarks. What Community Banks Have Achieved America has never experienced a health and economic crisis like the one we are facing. The measures taken to contain the virus and the ensuing sudden stop to the economy beginning in March were unprecedented, just as some aspects of the downturn. One of these is the extent to which small businesses have been affected. Small businesses tend to be service-oriented and clustered in retail and food services, with many less able than larger companies to maintain operations via remote work. Because community banks are a major source of credit and financial services for small businesses, this crisis has had a heavy impact on their customers, and in their communities. Another unusual aspect of this event, which I have noted before, is the geographic variation in the timing and severity of the pandemic's effect. 1 Given the widely varying rates of infection, and the distinct approaches of states and localities in dealing with the virus, we are seeing divergent experiences in economic performance in different areas of the country. As a result, and to a greater extent than in the past, this slowdown is being felt differently from community to community, and is being responded to differently from community to community. So it is no surprise that community banks are standing shoulder to shoulder with their customers, on the front lines. You have done this before, of course, during past recessions, but for the reasons I've outlined, your role this time has never been more critical. That is why one of the government's first responses to the pandemic was the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), geared to small business, and necessarily dependent on community banks. So let me start there, and review what has been accomplished through PPP and discuss the role of community banks in that program. Based on preliminary results, it appears PPP was timely and effective in helping millions of businesses weather the lockdown period. It was also designed in a way that made community banks integral to its success. The first funds reached businesses roughly three weeks after the need for that relief was recognized. To provide perspective, $525 billion, or roughly 19 times the value of all Small Business Administration lending in fiscal year 2019, was distributed in the four months from April through August 8. 2 , 3 Community banks with $10 billion or less in assets made about 40 percent of the overall number and value of PPP loans. 4 Community banks were absolutely essential to the success of this program. This outcome is probably not surprising to this audience, because when it comes to lending to small businesses, community banks have always been an outsized source of credit, relative to their size in the banking system. Before the pandemic, community banks accounted for over 40 percent of all small business lending, while they only accounted for roughly 15 percent of total assets in the banking system. Community banks know their individual and small business customers, and they know their communities. In my conversations with community bank CEOs, several reported to me that early in the pandemic they directly contacted every single one of their business and consumer loan customers, taking the time to check in with each one to see how they were doing, and what they needed. They encouraged customers to keep in touch with the bank, and they noted the available opportunities for payment deferrals that customers might not have been aware of. They asked, "Do you need us and how can we help?" In this pandemic, it means going further, than other banks could or would. According to the 2020 national survey conducted by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, more than one-third of community banks reduced or eliminated penalties or fees on credit cards, loans, or deposits. 5 One banker in Colorado told me that his bank called 3,700 individual borrowers offering deferrals—and that 2,000 of them accepted. Let me highlight the role of smaller community banks in the PPP, because they demonstrate the agility and close relationships with customers that was so important in connecting with the businesses most threatened by the lockdowns. Banks with less than $1 billion in assets have made a million loans under the PPP, about one-fifth the total, delivering $85 billion in relief to their customers. 6 Additionally, as shown in figure 1 , the smallest banks made the smallest PPP loans on average, illustrating that these banks play a key role in serving businesses that may be outside the focus of larger banks. The average PPP loan size at banks with total assets under $500 million was just $72,000, about half the size of the average loan at banks with total assets between $10 billion and $100 billion. Additionally, preliminary data based on an Independent Community Bankers of America report indicates that community banks have been the main source of lending for minority-owned small businesses during the pandemic, accounting for 73 percent of all PPP loans made to small businesses owned by non-whites. Early estimates also suggest that community banks provided 64 percent of PPP loans to majority veteran-owned businesses. 7 Within the broader community banking sector, there are banks that have the mission to serve low-income and minority communities. Specifically, I am referring to minority depository institutions (MDIs) and community development financial institutions (CDFIs). These institutions had previously established relationships with minority and low-income small business owners and were quickly able to provide them access to PPP loans. Additionally, as trusted institutions in their communities, new businesses sought them out as lenders who understood their unique, and sometimes challenging, business needs. The Cleveland Fed recently published an article entitled "I can't believe I got a real person," which describes one minority-owned small business's experience successfully getting a PPP loan from an MDI in Los Angeles. 8 The title alone captures why community banks were so important for small businesses seeking PPP loans—small banks offer a personalized level of customer service that big banks do not. It is also striking that smaller community banks were the predominant lenders despite having a smaller staff and while facing lobby closures and other workforce challenges due to COVID-19. Several of the bankers I spoke with worked from home, when they couldn't open their banks. They worked overtime in drive-through facilities. They worked, in one case, inside a makeshift "disaster recovery site." Through all the ups and downs and closures and reopenings, they persevered. "We closed lobbies," a banker from Nebraska told me, "but we never closed the bank." Actions like these highlight the importance and value of relationship banking, which is so central to the mission of community banks. According to the Call Report data, community banks held roughly $400 billion in small business loans in June 2020, as shown in figure 2 . Loans made under the PPP totaled $197 billion—an amount representing about 40 percent of all funding provided under this program. A banker from Virginia told me, "It was a great opportunity for the community banks to show their strength." The Federal Reserve's Small Business Credit Survey shows that over one-third of small businesses turn to small banks for their lending needs. 9 The survey data indicate that these borrowers are far more satisfied with their banks than the businesses who borrowed from other sources, and three out of five small businesses cite an existing relationship as a key reason they continue to do business with their bank. The PPP program strengthened many preexisting relationships between community banks and their borrowers, but community banks also met the needs of new customers facing stress from COVID-19. One bank reported 3,000 new customers from a total of 15,000 PPP loan originations. Over time, the establishment of these new relationships is likely to benefit both the community bank and the small businesses they serve. Community Bank Supervision during the Pandemic Now let me turn to the question of how the Federal Reserve is approaching community bank supervision during the pandemic, and how that aligns with my philosophy about how the Fed should always conduct supervision. As you well know, community banks form a critical part of a strong and stable financial system, and they are vital to their surrounding communities. Supervising community banks requires us to strike a delicate balance between ensuring their safety and soundness and ensuring that they are able to continue serving those vital functions. This is especially true now, when community banks are supporting the businesses bearing the brunt of the economic effects of the pandemic. This situation strongly argues for flexibility in supervision. In each of my conversations with community bank CEOs, I ask what they are experiencing and what they need, while sharing a very clear message about the Fed's flexibility: Given the challenging environment, the Fed will take into account good faith efforts by banks affected by COVID-19. In this pandemic, our common goal is to support individuals, businesses, and communities. This approach is reflected in an April 2020 statement issued by the Fed and other bank supervisors. 10 In that statement, we instructed bank examiners not to criticize bank management for taking prudent steps to support their communities, and we underscored that we would not expect to take a consumer compliance public enforcement action against an institution that has made good faith efforts to comply. This message has been getting through to examiners. One community banker in Texas that I spoke to recently said he had been feeling the justifiable concern that granting the kind of forbearances that everyone recognizes are essential to keep businesses open will eventually come back to haunt him in an examination. When he aired this concern to the Fed, he said he felt "incredible support" when the message he received back was, "Bank your customers." This assistance is helping homeowners. A recent Federal Reserve survey found that 5 percent of homeowners with a mortgage had received a payment deferral from their lender. 11 So let me extend the same message to others who might be worried: "Bank your customers." Now let me tell you how these actions fit into my overall view of how to conduct effective bank supervision. Our goal as regulators is to ensure that each institution under our supervision is successful in managing the risks present within its operations and product offerings. Effective supervisory practices are not static. They evolve over time as lessons are learned. That includes learning by supervisors. As one example, the volume of PPP lending has driven meaningful asset growth, especially for smaller banks. We recognize that for some institutions, this asset growth has caused many banks to exceed or nearly exceed certain asset-based thresholds contained in statutes, regulations, and reporting requirements. We are currently exploring how to address regulatory and supervisory challenges caused by this temporary asset growth. Supervisors encourage banks to adopt best practices, and I believe that we should also seek to achieve the highest supervisory standards. First, we should clearly communicate our expectations. It is wasteful, costly, and unnecessary when compliance activity occurs because expectations have not been clearly articulated or understood. Examiners should always be able and available to explain written guidance. A second consideration is that communication must also be timely. Supervisors should promptly communicate the findings of off- and on-site analyses, which will further improve the process of answering questions and addressing issues thereby improving compliance. A third principle is transparency. The key goal here is to promote a clear and transparent supervisory process so bankers know and understand how we form our expectations and judgments, and that they will receive this information in a timely manner. Overall, I think it is entirely appropriate to regularly ask whether our approaches to supervision are consistent with the stated policy objectives of efficiency, safety and soundness, and financial stability. One of those objectives is a healthy community banking sector that can continue to serve its customers. The pandemic has emphasized just how important that is. The Leading Challenge for Community Banks Another theme I have heard repeatedly from CEOs is the strong message that they are struggling with the cost and burdens of regulatory compliance. Many bankers have said they consider this the most significant threat to their existence. According to the CSBS National Survey, relative compliance costs actually decreased modestly in 2019, which may be a sign that some of the steps we are taking are helping. This is consistent with what I heard from one Oklahoma banker, who said the biggest threat to his long-term survival was regulatory burden—but "not so much in the last few years." We know examinations are top of mind for every community banker, and we are aware some bankers are also concerned with the length of time associated with the examination process. Community bank exams generally consist of phases—pre-exam contact, scoping, conducting the exam, and, finally, the drafting and delivery of the report. From a banker's perspective, the exam begins with the first day letter or perhaps the first contact of an examiner with the bank, and ends with receipt of the report of exam. From a banker's perspective, exams can seem as though they last for many months, which can strain resources for community banks that are unable to dedicate staff exclusively to managing the examination process. This is a valid concern, and achieving an appropriate timeframe for the length of exams, whether that be safety and soundness or consumer compliance, is very important to me. We are committed to evaluating our policies, practices, and implementation processes to understand and identify opportunities to address these concerns. There are other significant concerns for community bankers, but these only compound the challenge posed by regulatory burden. Bankers worry about competition from larger banks with economies of scale that are sufficient to drive consolidation. One of the biggest advantages from scale comes in regulatory compliance. As one banker in Wyoming told me: "Consolidation is a huge threat as larger banks can deliver at a far lower cost." One of the biggest costs, of course, is regulatory compliance. Researchers from the St. Louis Fed found that compliance expenses averaged nearly 10 percent of total non-interest expenses for banks with less than $100 million in total assets. For banks with between $1 billion and $10 billion in total assets, compliance expenses averaged 5.3 percent of total non-interest expense. This suggests that the regulatory cost burden for the smallest community banks is nearly double that of the largest community banks. In a speech about community banking regulation, it is entirely appropriate to point out our work on tailoring efforts. However, on its own, tailoring does not ensure that existing regulations are not unduly burdensome for smaller banks. These banks may benefit from further regulatory relief, without undermining the goals of safety and soundness, consumer protection, and financial stability. Regulatory burden can be manifested in multiple ways, including the attitude that examiners have in their interactions with banks. That is why the supervision principles I outlined earlier are so important. Supervisors need to communicate intentions clearly, in a timely manner, and in a transparent way. Doing so consistently can significantly lighten the regulatory burden that is such a challenge for banks. Current Economic and Financial Conditions for Banks I will conclude with a few comments about economic and financial conditions as they affect community banks. Our nation has suffered the sharpest drop in economic activity in U.S. history, and while unemployment remains quite high, the recent economic data have been encouraging and suggest that our national economy has been recovering at a rapid pace. The substantial and timely fiscal stimulus provided by Congress and the Administration has made a meaningful contribution to this recovery. Looking ahead, continued monetary and targeted fiscal policy support will likely be needed. Even with this support, however, I anticipate that the path toward full recovery will be bumpy, and that our progress will likely be uneven. Asset prices in particular, remain vulnerable to significant price declines should the pandemic seriously worsen. Some hotels and other businesses are in arrears on rent and debt service payments, and we are watching the commercial real estate market closely for signs of further stress. I also expect the pace of the recovery will continue to vary from area to area, and will be heavily influenced by not only the course of the virus, but also the public policy decisions made across all levels of government. Before the COVID-19 pandemic began, all of the data told us that community banks began this year in excellent shape—by some measures the strongest in decades. Ninety-six percent of community banks were profitable; nonperforming assets neared historical lows, and capital ratios were strong. More than 95 percent of small banks were rated as 1 or 2 under the CAMELS rating system. These banks built strong capital positions and substantially improved asset quality metrics in the years following the last crisis. They also entered the pandemic with high levels of liquidity that have been augmented by deposit inflows associated with the pandemic-related stimulus programs. Finally, credit concentrations were generally much lower, especially in construction and commercial real estate, and broadly speaking, concentration risk management practices significantly improved since the financial crisis. Following a weak first quarter that included higher credit loss provisions, second-quarter earnings showed improvement. Aggregate return on assets recovered more than two-thirds of the decline reported during the first quarter, driven by higher noninterest income and lower operating expenses. Origination fees and interest income from PPP lending fueled some of this improvement, with many community banks reporting substantial loan growth as a result of the program, and a few actually doubling their balance sheets. As seen in figure 3 , the quarter-over-quarter loan growth would have been negative, absent the PPP loans. As origination fees and interest income are generally recognized over the life of these loans or when they are forgiven, PPP loans will continue to push up bank earnings in the next several quarters. The origination fees earned by community banks this year will mitigate the impact of provisions for credit losses, and in turn, may support further lending by these banks. Despite improvement in these areas, the operating environment remains challenging. The average net interest margin at community banks tightened during the second quarter, and it is likely that margins will remain under pressure given the low interest rate environment. But community banks have historically performed well even when interest margins were under pressure, and they entered into the pandemic in sound financial condition. So what do we take away from this review of bank numbers and performance? In all, I expect community banks will face challenges during what could be a slow return to a full economic recovery, but I also expect that this sector is well prepared to deal with these challenges and will continue to perform the vital role it has played during the response to the pandemic. My hope is that at next year's conference we will have additional data and research that paint a fuller picture of the role community banks played in our nation's response to and recovery from COVID-19, and that we have gained further insights into the role of all community banks, including MDIs and CDFIs, in ensuring access by all to credit and financial services. 1. Michelle W. Bowman, " The Pandemic's Effect on the Economy and Banking " (speech at Kansas Bankers Association CEO and Senior Management Forum/Annual Meeting, Topeka, Kansas (via webcast), August 26, 2020). Return to text 2. Small Business Administration, Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Report (PDF) (Washington: Small Business Administration, August 8, 2020). Return to text 3. Small Business Administration, Agency Financial Report: Fiscal Year 2019 (PDF) (Washington: Small Business Administration, November 15, 2019). Return to text 4. Call Report for commercial banks, state savings banks, and thrifts as of June 2020. Return to text 5. Conference of State Bank Supervisors, "National Survey of Community Banks" Return to text 6. Small Business Administration, Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) Report. Return to text 7. Independent Community Bankers of America, " Data Show Community Banks Lead Economic Recovery ," news release, August 19, 2020. Return to text 8. Michelle Park Lazette, "'I Can't Believe I Got a Real Person': Small Bank Answers Businesses' Cries for Help," Medium , September 3, 2020, https://medium.com/new-york-fed/i-cant-believe-i-got-a-real-person-small-bank-answers-businesses-cries-for-help-844b482ab5ba. Return to text 9. Federal Reserve, " Small Business Credit Survey (PDF) ," (2020). Return to text 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, " Interagency Statement on Loan Modifications and Reporting for Financial Institutions Working with Customers Affected by the Coronavirus (Revised) (PDF) ," news release, April 7, 2020. Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Update on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households: July 2020 Appendixes (PDF) ," (September 2020). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: September 30, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Michelle W. Bowman At "Opportunities and Challenges for Homeownership," a Virtual Roundtable Discussion, Jake Jabs College of Business and Entrepreneurship, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana (via webcast) Share Watch Live Good afternoon, everyone. Thank you to Montana State University (MSU) for hosting today's event and for that very kind introduction. It is wonderful to see the success of your Community Banking Program here at MSU and your commitment to investing in the education of future generations of community bankers. Throughout the response to the pandemic, community bankers have continued to serve as the primary source of credit to small businesses and have continued to provide economic and financial support to communities across our nation. Young people, like all of you engaged in this program, will very likely become the future leaders of these institutions, which are critical to their communities and to our economy and financial system. One of the most significant challenges facing community bankers today is navigating the complex regulatory framework. One area that has become more complicated is a line of business that has traditionally been the foundation for community banking, home mortgage lending. Community bank leaders consistently tell me that significant regulatory burden related to making home mortgages has been a major reason they have scaled back their mortgage lending activities or exited the market altogether. Along with tightened lending standards, this trend has made it harder for middle- and lower-income borrowers to obtain mortgage credit since the global financial crisis. Fortunately, work is under way to relieve that burden, and I will highlight one effort in particular. But before I do, let me provide some context by reviewing the current state of the economy and its effect on homeowners and would-be homeowners. The COVID-19 Pandemic and Homeownership in the U.S. The COVID-19 pandemic is having a profound effect on individuals and families across the U.S. and throughout the world. While a strong recovery has begun, it is clear that there is still a way to go before we are back to the robust economy we experienced at the beginning of the year. These challenges are affecting homeowners and the lenders that provide credit to support them. Many homeowners who have lost a job or have had their income affected by economic conditions have been able to work with their lenders, but such help may not be a long-term solution for many borrowers. Fortunately, the housing market as a whole is a bright spot for the economy. Higher home prices are improving the balance sheets of many households, even those that may face income and employment challenges, and new construction activity is generating new job opportunities. While affordability remains an important consideration, it is encouraging that housing has performed well in response to low interest rates. Mortgage Regulations and Access to Mortgage Credit However, even during this period of strong performance in the housing market, access to affordable mortgage credit remains a barrier to homeownership for some borrowers, due in part to regulatory burden. Since the last financial crisis more than a decade ago, there have been a number of new mortgage regulations that added requirements for both borrowers and lenders. While many of these requirements have contributed to a safer and more consumer-friendly mortgage market, they have also introduced significant paperwork and delays that can present roadblocks for many borrowers. These new rules have also made it more difficult and costly for small banks to originate mortgage loans, leading many community banks to scale back on home lending activity or abandon it altogether. Homeownership is as important to communities as it is to individuals, and access to credit for rural and low-to-moderate income communities often depends on community banks. In many communities, especially rural communities, if the local bank has been forced out of mortgage lending due to burdensome regulation, it means little or no access to mortgage credit, preventing buyers from financing home purchases and homeowners from selling their homes. Many leaders of small community banks have told me that the compliance costs for originating smaller mortgages are prohibitive, and that the staffing and training required to meet the strict requirements are extraordinary in relation to the limited number of mortgages they originate. As one state banking commissioner said to me recently, "It doesn't make a lot of sense that you can make an $80,000 truck loan on two sides of a sheet of paper, but that many, many pages of paperwork are required to make a $40,000 loan on a mobile home or trailer." In fact, I have been told by community bankers that they are sometimes compelled to make loans for lower-priced home purchases that are backed by other collateral, such as a car or equipment, because of the excessive burden of complying with the many residential home mortgage regulations and time frames for such small transactions. As a result, these consumers may not have the benefit of the important consumer protections that having a home mortgage loan provides. Reducing mortgage compliance burden would allow community banks to better meet the critical need for home lending in their communities. Because of their local knowledge and strong customer relationships, community banks are often more willing to work with borrowers to get through difficult times. Taking steps to simplify and lower this regulatory burden for small community banks and their customers would help to ensure that homeowners can stay in their homes during times of stress, like the one we are facing currently due to COVID-19. One Area to Consider in Easing Burden The TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure, or TRID, is one of the real estate regulatory requirements that smaller banks cite most frequently as creating a heavy burden. Commissioner Melanie Hall and the Montana Independent Bankers have been particularly helpful in highlighting the importance of this issue. Therefore, I am very pleased that the Independent Community Bankers of America is engaged in ongoing conversations and activities to address the more burdensome aspects of this requirement on community banks while importantly retaining key consumer protections. Efforts like these that aim to reduce the compliance burden for critically important services will enable many community banks to return to doing what they do best: meeting the needs of their communities. Again, thank you for inviting me to join you today, and I look forward to engaging on this important topic. Last Update: October 01, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the “Financial Stability: Stress, Contagion, and Transmission” 2020 Financial Stability Conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research, Cleveland, Ohio (via webcast) Share Watch Live Good afternoon, everyone. It is a pleasure to join you here today and to share a few of my thoughts on financial stability issues with you. I would like to thank the Cleveland Fed and the Office of Financial Research for hosting this conference and for that very kind introduction. It is encouraging to see so many great minds devoting their time and attention to studying financial stability. At the Board, we dedicate considerable attention to this topic as well, and I would like to thank my colleagues, Vice Chair for Supervision Randy Quarles, Chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and Governor Lael Brainard, for their leadership on these issues both internationally and at the Board. It seems especially relevant to look closely at financial stability at this time, as the COVID-19 pandemic has had a profound impact on the U.S. economy and has tested the resilience of our financial system over the past nine months. Efforts to contain the virus triggered an economic downturn that was unprecedented in both its speed and its severity. Early on, more than 22 million jobs were lost in March and April, and though a significant number of people have returned to work since that time, we still face a shortfall in employment relative to its level before the onset of the pandemic. Fortunately, both our economy and our financial system were very strong when the pandemic hit. Most banks began 2020 with higher capital ratios and more liquid assets than they had in previous downturns, which helped them remain a source of strength in March and April. As the crisis intensified in March, serious cracks emerged in several areas of financial intermediation crucial to the health of the economy, including Treasury markets, corporate and municipal bond markets, money market mutual funds, mortgage real estate investment trusts, and residential mortgage markets. Today I am going to focus on the strains in mortgage markets. To address strains in mortgage finance, the Federal Reserve took prompt action to purchase large quantities of agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS), because as we learned during the previous financial crisis, the proper functioning of mortgage markets is necessary for monetary policy to support the economy. Unfortunately, the problems in mortgage finance in this crisis were broader than just the MBS markets. This crisis period has also revealed a number of new—or, in some cases, renewed—vulnerabilities related to lending and loan servicing by nonbank mortgage companies, which I will refer to from here on as mortgage companies. These vulnerabilities were not entirely a surprise to me. When I served as a banker and, subsequently, as the state bank commissioner in Kansas, I saw firsthand the increasing share of mortgage companies in mortgage origination and servicing as well as some of the weaknesses in the mortgage company business model. And in my role as a Board member with a focus on community banks, I frequently hear about the issues that have caused some regional and community bankers to pull back from originating and servicing mortgages. I view this as a significant problem, because I believe firmly that a healthy financial system must have a place for institutions of many different types and sizes that are able to serve the varying needs of different customers. I will begin today by describing the evolving role of mortgage companies in mortgage markets and the risks to financial stability that activity entails. I will then focus on developments in mortgage markets during the COVID-19 pandemic and discuss how actions by the Federal Reserve and the other parts of the government helped stabilize financial markets and prevent more severe damage to the economy. Finally, I will explain how vulnerabilities associated with mortgage companies could pose risks in the future, and I will review ongoing work across the regulatory agencies to monitor and address these vulnerabilities. I will end by enlisting your help. Figuring out how to achieve a balanced mortgage system—one that delivers the best outcomes for consumers while being sufficiently resilient—is a highly complex task that could benefit from the insights of those of you here today. The Role of Nonbank Financial Institutions in Mortgage Markets In the 1980s and 1990s, the share of mortgages originated by mortgage companies increased considerably, as expanded securitization of mortgages allowed mortgage companies, which lack the balance sheet capacity of banks, to compete with banks in the mortgage market. The role of mortgage companies increased further in the 2000s with the growth of the private-label mortgage market, where MBS sponsors are private firms without government support. But the last financial crisis and the prolonged housing slump that followed led to a sharp contraction in mortgage company activity. In 2006, mortgage companies accounted for around 30 percent of originations; by 2008, at the bottom of the housing crisis, this share had fallen to around 20 percent. In the past few years, the market share of mortgage companies has risen sharply, well surpassing their share before the housing crisis. Today these firms originate about half of all mortgages, including more than 70 percent of those securitized through Ginnie Mae and the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. 1 Nonbanks also service roughly three-fourths of mortgages securitized through Ginnie Mae and about one-half of those securitized through the GSEs. 2 Although some mortgage companies specialize in origination or servicing, most large firms engage in both activities. The expanding presence of mortgage companies has brought benefits to consumers and the economy. Among the benefits are increased competition and technological innovation. Mortgage companies are generally able to react more nimbly to changes in market conditions and have been faster to deploy new technologies such as online mortgage origination platforms. But the rising market share of mortgage companies has also brought with it increased risks. I will focus here on the risks most relevant to financial stability. One major vulnerability of mortgage companies is liquidity—that is, their ability to finance their portfolios of assets. 3 Unlike banks, mortgage companies typically do not have access to liquidity from the Federal Home Loan Banks or the Federal Reserve System. Mortgage companies also do not have access to deposits as a stable funding source. So while banks will hold some originations on their balance sheets, mortgage companies first fund their originations on warehouse lines of credit that are usually supplied by banks. Typically, after a couple of weeks, the mortgage company repays the warehouse line and securitizes the mortgages. During the last financial crisis, when the private-label mortgage securitization market started to freeze, mortgage lenders could not transition their originations from the warehouse lines to securitization. Warehouse lenders became concerned about their exposures to the nonbank companies and cut off their access to credit. As a result of this funding crunch and other factors, many lenders failed, including household names like New Century Financial Corporation. The risk of events like this one repeating is probably more limited today because mortgage companies primarily originate mortgages that are securitized through the far more stable GSE or Ginnie Mae markets. Instead, the main liquidity concern today comes from mortgage servicing. If borrowers do not make their mortgage payments, mortgage servicers are required to advance payments on the borrowers' behalf to investors, tax authorities, and insurers. Although servicers are ultimately repaid most of these advances, they need to finance them in the interim. The servicers' exposure is greatest for loans securitized through Ginnie Mae, as they require servicers to advance payments for a longer period than the GSEs. In some cases, servicers may also have to bear large credit losses or pay significant costs out of pocket. Because mortgage companies are now the major servicers for Ginnie Mae, this liquidity risk—and possibly solvency risk—is a significant vulnerability for these firms if borrowers stop making their payments. If these firms collapse, what are the repercussions? Clearly, there is considerable potential for harm to consumers, and that harm would likely be concentrated in communities that are traditionally underserved. In recent years, mortgage companies originated the majority of the mortgages obtained by Black and Hispanic borrowers as well as the majority of mortgages to borrowers living in low- or moderate-income areas. What does this have to do with financial stability? One aspect of financial stability is the amplification of shocks—in other words, how a problem initially confined to one part of the financial system can spread to involve broader swaths of borrowers and investors. During the housing crisis, the fragility of mortgage companies was an important source of this kind of amplification. In particular, rising mortgage defaults led to the collapse of many mortgage companies, which in turn was one of the key drivers of a significant pullback in the supply of mortgage credit. That tightening in credit then weighed on house prices, as potential homebuyers, who once would have been able to get a loan, found mortgages expensive or impossible to obtain. As a result, even families who had not been involved in the mortgage frenzy of the mid-2000s found the prices of their homes falling sharply. Today's housing market is much more robust, and the risk of a financial crisis originating from this sector is currently low. Nonetheless, if some large mortgage companies fail and other firms do not step in to take their place, we could see adverse effects on credit availability. Policy Responses to the COVID-19 Crisis Against this backdrop, the massive economic shock triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic broadly tested the resilience of our financial system. As the pandemic unfolded, strains occurred across financial markets as investors dashed for cash amid widespread lockdowns and fears about the economic and financial outlook. Mortgage markets, in particular, began to show significant signs of stress. The MBS market, like those for other fixed-income securities, became extremely volatile, and with the unemployment rate spiking, market participants worried that borrowers would be unable to make their mortgage payments. The Federal Reserve's response to the crisis, which was prompt and forceful, included moving the policy interest rate to the effective lower bound, conducting large-scale purchases of Treasury securities and agency MBS, and implementing a number of emergency lending facilities to support the continued flow of credit to families, businesses, nonprofits, and state and local governments. On the fiscal policy front, the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) provided economic stimulus checks and enhanced unemployment benefits to individuals as well as eviction moratoriums for renters and a requirement that mortgage servicers grant borrowers up to 12 months of forbearance. All of these policy responses were crucial in easing the stresses in financial markets and helping us weather the period when much of the economy was shuttered. An unfortunate consequence of the mortgage forbearance measure was the pressure it put on the funding needs of servicers, particularly mortgage companies, which are required to continue advancing payments on loans in forbearance. In April, Ginnie Mae alleviated these strains somewhat by announcing a program that provides servicers with financing for principal and interest advances, and which would not be considered a default by the servicer. 4 Similarly, in April, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) announced that servicers would be required to advance only four months of missed payments for GSE loans. 5 Looking Back and Taking Stock Although we continue to closely monitor the path of the virus and the public response to it, economic and financial conditions have improved much more than many had expected in the spring. It is a great relief that the most dire scenarios that seemed possible in the spring have not come to pass, which is largely due to supportive fiscal and monetary policy. In addition, the near-term stresses in financial markets have abated, providing support for the very strong recovery to date. The Federal Reserve's interest rate actions and MBS purchases have contributed to exceptionally low mortgage rates, which have boosted housing demand and the associated mortgage originations for new home purchases. We are also seeing a surge in mortgage refinancing. As a result, mortgage companies have experienced an influx of cash and an increase in profitability, and they have not had difficulties financing the advance payments. To date, mortgage delinquencies and the take-up on forbearance appear to be limited and well below early fears of significant problems. The increase in employment since April, income support from stimulus payments, programs such as the Paycheck Protection Program that helped small businesses retain workers, and enhanced unemployment insurance all helped borrowers continue making their mortgage payments. And forbearance provisions in the CARES Act to homeowners with mortgages securitized by the GSEs or Ginnie Mae (around 65 percent of outstanding mortgages in the United States) have, so far, helped prevent foreclosures, which also supports home prices. The share of mortgages in forbearance rose above 8 percent last spring, but it has since fallen to below 6 percent. And of those loans in forbearance, about one in six are current in their payments, reflecting the broader economic recovery. 6 This improvement has not been uniform, though, and the decline in the forbearance rate for loans in Ginnie Mae pools has been slower than those in GSE pools. And, of course, significant uncertainties remain, including the fact that forbearance for federally backed mortgages is set to expire in the first quarter of next year. Some Lessons Learned Even as we take some comfort in these positive developments, we are also giving due consideration to the financial market vulnerabilities that were made evident in this crisis, and we are examining ways to address them. One prominent vulnerability, which I have described here today, relates to the funding and liquidity profile of mortgage companies. In different circumstances, the large-scale delinquencies and defaults we saw last spring could have caused some mortgage companies to fail, especially if the surge in origination and refinancing income had not materialized. Because many mortgage companies both originate and service mortgages, strains in these firms' servicing books could also weigh on their origination activities. As I noted a moment ago, any reduction in credit availability would be most acute for borrowers from traditionally underserved communities, where mortgage companies have a particularly high market share. Even before the pandemic, regulators had widely recognized that the oversight and regulatory infrastructure for mortgage companies is much less well developed than for banks, and it could benefit from an update. To that end, Ginnie Mae announced new requirements for its servicers last year; the FHFA announced that it will propose updated minimum financial eligibility requirements for the GSE loan sellers and servicers; and, more recently, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors proposed a set of prudential standards for state oversight of nonbank mortgage servicers. 7 And, finally, the Financial Stability Oversight Council has been working closely with regulatory agencies to analyze risks related to nonbank servicers and to facilitate coordination among agencies. 8 An encouraging feature of all of these proposals is that they recognize the complexity of the mortgage company regulatory structure. The states are the primary regulators, but most large mortgage companies operate in multiple states and are also subject to counterparty requirements from the GSEs and Ginnie Mae. These proposals have all moved toward being more consistent with each other, which should reduce regulatory complexity and burden for mortgage companies and regulators. The harder task, however, is thinking about what the overarching regulatory framework should be for mortgage companies. The risks that mortgage companies face are different from those that banks face. Mortgage companies will be more affected by shocks to the mortgage market than banks, which have much more diversified portfolios. As I have mentioned, mortgage companies have less access to liquidity than banks; at the same time, they do not pose the risk of a claim on the deposit insurance fund. These factors suggest that the optimal regulatory framework for mortgage companies should differ from that of banks. These are difficult questions, and a casual observer might wonder if it is really necessary to grapple with them, especially as the industry appears to have successfully weathered the strains of the past few months. But I would argue that this "success" was reliant on rising home prices, low defaults, and massive fiscal and monetary stimulus. But we certainly can't count on all of these factors being present in future periods of economic stress. Around the world, regulators are deliberating about how to address a variety of nonbank entities that can pose systemic risks. In work published last week, the FSB highlighted the need for a macroprudential approach to nonbank financial intermediation. 9 Members of the FSB are not calling for bank-like regulation for nonbanks, but they recommend a framework of supervision and regulation that takes into account systemic risks that can be posed by nonbanks. I would also note one lesson we learned in March, which is that conditions in financial markets can deteriorate very rapidly and unexpectedly. I'm paying close attention to the issues highlighted in my remarks today, and keeping an open mind. But I think it's clear, that doing the hard thinking and planning now—at a time when conditions afford us the time do so—is a very worthwhile investment. Our financial system and our mortgage market will be more resilient when they welcome and appropriately manage the risks associated with both bank and nonbank mortgage firms. 1. See You Suk Kim, Steven M. Laufer, Karen Pence, Richard Stanton, and Nancy Wallace (2018), " Liquidity Crises in the Mortgage Market (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 347–413; and Laurie Goodman, Alanna McCargo, Jim Parrott, Jun Zhu, Sheryl Pardo, Karan Kaul, Michael Neal, Jung Hyun Choi, Linna Zhu, Sarah Strochak, John Walsh, Caitlin Young, Daniel Pang, Alison Rincon, and Gideon Berger (2020), Housing Finance at a Glance: A Monthly Chartbook, October 2020 (PDF) (Washington: Urban Institute, October 27). The expansion of mortgage companies in this market partly reflects a decision by many banks to exit that market to avoid regulatory complexity and the financial, compliance, and reputational costs associated with default servicing and foreclosure. Return to text 2. The data are Federal Reserve Board staff calculations based on Recursion Co. (2020), Agency Mortgage Market Monthly Update, November. Return to text 3. See Financial Stability Oversight Council (2019), 2019 Annual Report (PDF) (Washington: FSOC, December), p. 42. Return to text 4. See Ginnie Mae (2020), " Ginnie Mae Approves Private Market Servicer Liquidity Facility ," press release, April 7. Return to text 5. See Federal Housing Finance Agency (2020), " FHFA Addresses Servicer Liquidity Concerns, Announces Four Month Advance Obligation Limit for Loans in Forbearance ," news release, April 21. Return to text 6. The data are from Mortgage Bankers Association (2020), MBA's Weekly Forbearance and Call Volume Survey, November 9. Return to text 7. See Ginnie Mae (2019), " All Participant Memorandum (APM) ," webpage (Washington: Ginnie Mae, August 22); Federal Housing Finance Agency (2020), " FHFA to Re-Propose Updated Minimum Financial Eligibility Requirements for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Seller/Servicers ," news release (Washington: FHFA, June 15); and Conference of State Bank Supervisors (2020), " Comments Requested: Prudential Standards for Non-Bank Mortgage Servicers " (Washington: CSBS, September 29). Return to text 8. See Financial Stability Oversight Council (2020), " Minutes of the Financial Stability Oversight Council: March 26, 2020 (PDF) " (Washington: FSOC). Return to text 9. See Financial Stability Board (2020), Holistic Review of the March Market Turmoil (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November 17). Return to text Last Update: November 19, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Michelle W. Bowman At Independent Community Bankers of America ThinkTECH Policy Summit (virtual event) Share Thank you to the Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) for inviting me to address this year's policy summit. I am delighted to be speaking with you and especially pleased to see the summit's focus on innovation. The ThinkTech accelerator represents the type of resourcefulness necessary to help community banks tackle their greatest challenges, among them ensuring that banking services and credit support are available to customers in all communities, regardless of where they are located. Today, I will share my perspective that technological innovation is essential to the future of community banking in America, and reiterate my intent to elevate those issues related to innovation to the top of the regulatory agenda. There are certain points in history when an event can fundamentally change how society and entire industries function. In addition to the other ways that COVID-19 has affected us, this could be one of those moments. The pandemic has demonstrated the importance and unique role of technology in responding effectively to new challenges. In this case, the challenge has been an unprecedented disruption in our lives. One year ago, it would have been difficult to imagine the extent to which we are now working and conducting routine aspects of our lives from home and online. Take health care as an example. One recent report on telemedicine trends notes that the number of patients treated through video-enabled physician visits has increased between 50 percent and 175 percent compared to before the pandemic. 1 While virtual consultations with a health care professional haven't replaced physical examinations and medical procedures, they are serving a vital role in the industry's response to the pandemic and they will likely play a significant role in how the health-care industry serves its customers in the future. When this health emergency has come to an end, I expect that telehealth, home grocery delivery, and a variety of online services and communications will continue at a higher frequency than before our recent experience. In the financial sector, I believe we may be seeing a quantum leap in the use of digital deposit, digital payments and online lending. One large financial service provider reported a 200 percent increase in new mobile banking registrations during the early phases of the pandemic. 2 Customers who reacted to the physical limitation on visiting a bank branch or ATM are learning to bank using online banking or through an app on their smartphone may not be as willing to stand in line or wait for in-person service at their bank branch in the future. Recent surveys show that consumers with access to digital and mobile banking are more likely to continue using those convenience products and services in a post-pandemic world. 3 The adoption of digital banking services can also be essential for historically underserved and disadvantaged communities, assuming they have bank accounts and access to internet-based tools like smartphones. In some cases, fintech can lower costs and improve services, particularly for small businesses or lower-income consumers who are less likely to have access to credit. While electronic banking certainly didn't start with the pandemic, acceleration of its adoption has undoubtedly led banks of all sizes to rethink how they will meet their customers' needs in the long term. I have noted on many occasions how vital community banks are to those they serve and to a strong and stable financial system. Successful innovation is not just about adopting the latest technologies. It involves aligning a bank's strategy with its innovation plans to clearly map a purpose and desired outcome for the adoption of new technology. The continued success of many community banks depends on their willingness to engage in strategy-based innovation-led growth. We have seen and are encouraged by many examples of entrepreneurial community banks embracing technological innovation. Developments such as digital deposit and lending products, regulatory technology solutions, and application program interfaces (APIs) have increasingly become more popular in the banking industry. When implemented effectively, they can result in greater efficiencies and effectiveness. A number of community banks have already taken advantage of these opportunities. Still, perspectives on the need for change vary across the industry. I recognize that while it seems clear that the industry is changing, there remains a wide distance between fintech's promise of a future driven by technology and what many community bankers experience today. From my perspective, it is unlikely that fintech will ever completely eliminate what is the hallmark of community banking—personal interaction and building relationships with customers and communities. One trend is clear, however: more and more community banks are expressing interest in fintech partners to help them open new lines of business, help with customer acquisition, enhance customer service, and improve operational functions. Through the Fed's engagement with fintech companies and small banks during our Innovation Office Hours, we learned that a wide range of partnership models are emerging, with varying benefits and challenges. Some banks are engaged in customer-oriented partnerships, where a bank selects a fintech partner to improve the customer experience, develop new products or services, or acquire new customers. In one case, a bank partnered with a fintech company to centralize each customer's financial data and provide personal financial management tools. Other banks are engaging fintech partners to automate or improve the efficiency and effectiveness of compliance and regulatory processes, which is often referred to as "regtech." For example, a fintech partner automating the Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money-laundering process may be able to provide notable cost savings and enhance compliance, while freeing up resources for other areas. We have also seen instances where a bank offers its financial services to a fintech partner that, in turn, offers financial products or services to its customers. In this type of relationship, a bank plays an important part in the delivery of products and services. The list goes on. My point is there is great possibility and a wide variety of options for engagement. And everyone, from the banks to customers to the regulators, needs to be thinking about these changes and their implications. With the emergence of additional core-service providers, we are also seeing more opportunities for community banks to access the technology infrastructure they need to improve basic banking activities. These basic banking activities include tasks like reconciling transactions to the general ledger or simply offering expanded digital services. Furthermore, there are new opportunities for integration of cloud-based platforms and APIs. Community banks should take advantage of the new technologies that make sense for their business and the communities they serve. Still, even as community banks prepare for the future, there is the very real challenge of finding partners and knowing how to navigate the regulatory environment once an institution has identified a potential partnership arrangement. We certainly understand this concern. From the fintech perspective, one provider noted the challenges they face during the onboarding process with financial institutions, including struggles to navigate siloed compliance and risk-management functions. Participants in the Fed's Innovation Office Hours told us that they would benefit from the Fed broadly sharing information on the current landscape of such partnerships, on a range of practices, and on relevant guidance for banks to consider. In response, early next year we plan to publish a white paper that documents examples of community bank partnerships with fintech companies and outlines effective practices for managing those arrangements. This white paper would describe a range of distinct options for such partnerships and seek to identify benefits and challenges of the different approaches. We are also continuing to pursue a range of community bank projects to provide pathways to innovation that I mentioned earlier this year. While it is essential to safety and soundness that banks understand, monitor, and mitigate risks associated with their third parties, I am sensitive to the burden that due diligence can pose. Being unsure of the questions to ask a third-party vendor, or whether a response is sufficient, should not keep community banks from accessing innovation, yet we continue to hear that these are real challenges. To address this problem, I have directed Federal Reserve staff to work with their interagency colleagues to develop a vendor due diligence guide, aligned with existing supervisory expectations, which would include sample questions for vendors and guidance on appropriate responses. This guide would also be specific about the documents and information that community banks need in order to successfully complete their due diligence. In addition to the due diligence guide, I expect that Federal Reserve staff will work with our colleagues at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to enhance and align interagency guidance for third-party risk management. The guidance would eliminate the need for community banks to navigate multiple supervisory guidance documents on the same issue. It is my expectation that the combination of refreshed and aligned interagency guidance and the community bank due diligence guide will meaningfully enhance clarity on supervisory expectations for community bank partnerships with fintech companies. There are also opportunities within our existing supervisory program to improve our regulatory response to innovation, without creating additional burden for community banks. The federal banking agencies' service provider supervision program plays an important role in assessing the rigor of risk management and controls at key service providers. It is important that reports of supervisory assessments be readily available to banks that rely on service providers so that banks can use the reports to support their third-party risk management. Since I last spoke about the program in February, the federal regulatory agencies have made notable progress in creating a process to automatically distribute those reports to all client banks. Proactively sending reports to community banks removes the inefficient step of each bank hunting for reports on their own. For banks supervised by the Fed, the aim is to begin automatic distribution in the first quarter of 2021. Finally, I would note that as we consider the types of financial services technology that may be useful to the banks we supervise, our rules and guidance need to keep pace. The Federal Reserve is also considering whether the rise of artificial intelligence and machine learning in banking might require an adjustment in regulation and supervision. AI is becoming more prevalent in customer service and machine learning can offer real opportunities to assess risk and find new customers. Community banks face limits on the resources they can dedicate to researching and evaluating third party providers of these new services. Regulators and supervisors should consider ways to encourage innovation by simplifying the process of third party selection, due diligence and monitoring. 4 To that end, staff from the Federal Reserve and other agencies have been jointly conducting significant outreach to industry and other stakeholders over the past several months. We want to hear from you. In addition to this outreach, a conference planned for January, 2021 will include views from academic researchers on the potential benefits and risks posed by artificial intelligence for banks of all sizes. Technological innovation holds great promise to help community banks compete and succeed in the evolving financial services landscape. I look forward to continuing to engage on these issues in 2021 and to work with the ICBA and other stakeholders to foster an environment where communities and the banks that serve them continue to thrive. 1. McKinsey & Company, "Telehealth: A Quarter-Trillion-Dollar Post-COVID-19 Reality?" May 29, 2020, https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/healthcare-systems-and-services/our-insights/telehealth-a-quarter-trillion-dollar-post-covid-19-reality. Return to text 2. CNBC, "Coronavirus Crisis Mobile Banking Surge Is a Shift That's Likely to Stick," May 27, 2020, https://www.cnbc.com/2020/05/27/coronavirus-crisis-mobile-banking-surge-is-a-shift-likely-to-stick.html. Return to text 3. American Banker, "Consumers Are Relying More on Finance Apps, Survey Finds," September 15, 2020, https://www.americanbanker.com/news/consumer-reliance-on-finance-apps-spiked-because-of-coronavirus. Return to text 4. Michelle W. Bowman, " Empowering Community Banks ," speech at the Conference for Community Bankers sponsored by The American Bankers Association, Orlando, Florida, February 10, 2020. Return to text Last Update: December 04, 2020 Back to Top
