1 Economic Outlook, December 2012 December 17, 2012 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Charlotte Chamber of Commerce Annual Economic Outlook Conference Charlotte, N.C. Good afternoon. I am pleased to be with you again to discuss the economic outlook, although I must say that the recent passing of Henry Faison makes this a bittersweet occasion. Henry served on the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond from 1990 to 1995, the last two years of which he served as chairman. We knew Henry as a man of drive and determination, but also principle and generosity. In addition to being an exceptionally successful entrepreneur and an outstanding Charlottean, he was also a staunch supporter of the Federal Reserve and our quest for price stability. It’s hard to picture this wonderful annual event without Henry’s charm and grace and his annual appraisal of the Fed’s inflation performance. I know I will miss him greatly. The economic outlook is the main order of business today, though, and before I begin, I should emphasize that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 1 I will begin with the outlook for inflation. Over the last 20 years inflation has averaged 2.05 percent per year. There have been year-to-year fluctuations, to be sure. But these temporary swings have evened out over time, and inflation has tended to return to around 2 percent. In fact, since the Great Recession, inflation has averaged 2.01 percent. Although inflation was running at elevated rates a few months ago, driven up by a bulge in retail gasoline prices, energy prices have subsided of late. With futures markets forecasting flat or declining energy prices, most economists expect headline inflation to average a little less than 2 percent next year. I agree with that outlook. I began with inflation to emphasize that the behavior of inflation is fundamentally attributable to the actions of the central bank. In contrast to inflation, real economic growth and labor market conditions are affected by a wide range of factors outside the central bank’s control. In fact, the effects of monetary stimulus on real output and employment, are less than is widely thought; they consist largely of the transitory byproducts of frictions that delay the timely adjustment of prices. Attempts to overstimulate real economic activity via monetary policy can instead run the risk of raising inflation. Indeed, for reasons I will discuss later on, I see material upside risks to inflation in 2014 and beyond, given the current trajectory for monetary policy, though my baseline outlook is for inflation to move toward the Fed’s long-run goal of 2 percent in coming years. Turning to the outlook for growth, the expansion in economic activity since the Great Recession officially bottomed out at the end of the second quarter of 2009 has been disappointing. Real 2 gross domestic product, for example, has risen at an average annual rate of 2.2 percent during this recovery, and job growth has averaged about 140,000 per month. Several factors appear to be impeding a more rapid recovery in the U.S. economy. First, the housing boom created a substantial oversupply of new homes, and while significant progress is evident, we have not completely worked through that oversupply. New construction activity has been gradually improving, however, and home prices in many markets have bottomed out and are on the rise. Still, we should not expect the rapid rebound in housing that we have often seen in past recoveries. A second, and related, factor behind the slow recovery was the significant shift in economic activity away from industries related to residential construction. The rapid loss of jobs in these industries, layered on top of ongoing longer-run sectoral shifts, resulted in large inflows into the ranks of the unemployed and an adverse shift in the average skill level of the unemployed. This effect is typical in a recession, but is larger now because of the magnitude of this recession. The need for capital investment and retraining as workers shift to new sectors has been slowing down recovery in the labor market. Third, the Great Recession appears to have made many consumers more cautious and less willing to spend, relative to their income and wealth. Households have become more apprehensive about their future income prospects and more interested in paying down financial obligations. So while consumer spending has grown during this recovery, the tempered pace of that growth has limited the overall pace of the expansion, relative to previous recoveries. Finally, our Fifth District business contacts have long been emphasizing that uncertainty has caused them to delay hiring and investment commitments. The uncertainty that is most on everyone’s mind at the moment concerns the looming year-end fiscal cliff. The total size of the spending cuts and tax increases slated to take effect is large enough to be at least temporarily disruptive to economic activity. But even if Congress and the administration get us past the fiscal cliff and the debt ceiling, significant uncertainty will remain about the longer-run tax and spending paths, the broad regulatory realignments that are currently in train and the uncertain prospects for European economies. In short, much of the recent sluggishness is understandable. In fact, if you look back at how other advanced economies have typically behaved following recessions associated with housing slumps, you will find that the current U.S. recovery is actually not out of the ordinary. 2 My best guess is that growth will continue into next year at an annual rate of 2 percent and that beyond 2013 we should see growth begin to firm. Several important suppositions lie behind this forecast. First, I expect to see meaningful progress on federal budget issues ― both short-run and long-run ― now that the election is behind us. Second, I expect risks emanating from Europe to continue to diminish next year as they make progress toward new institutional arrangements and emerge from recession. Third, my outlook is predicated on gradual gains in household confidence. Improvements in labor market effectiveness and modest growth in home prices should combine to reduce consumer apprehension about downside risks and thereby bolster spending. 3 This outlook is not without risks. Significant energy price increases or an unexpected downturn in some major trading partners could temporarily reduce overall U.S growth. On the other hand, a stronger-than-expected resurgence in confidence is not inconceivable; rapid and convincing progress toward fiscal sustainability, for example, might release a rush of pent-up spending. Even though growth has been below our long-run trend rate since the recession, I believe that the fundamental prospects for longer-term U.S. growth remain quite strong. The flexibility and resilience of our markets, along with a relatively well-educated population, make this an advantageous place to implement innovations. Our major challenge over the longer haul is to find effective ways to deepen the knowledge and skills of our people because expanding our human capital is fundamental to improving our standards of living. What role does monetary policy play in this outlook? Our primary responsibility at the Federal Reserve is to keep inflation low and stable; this allows businesses and consumers to make economic decisions without needing to worry about inflation. The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC (the body that determines monetary policy), took an important step to solidify confidence in its commitment to price stability with its January statement on “Longer- Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” 3 That document identified 2 percent inflation, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, as most consistent over the longer run with the its statutory mandate. Beyond satisfying our inflation mandate, however, it’s not clear that monetary policy, by itself, can bring about any material improvement in economic growth. At its meeting last week, the FOMC decided to continue the monthly purchases of $40 billion in agency mortgage-backed securities and $45 billion in long-term U.S Treasury securities. In my view, the supply of bank reserves is already large enough to support the economic recovery, and the benefits of further asset purchases are unlikely to be sizeable. The effects on longer-term interest rates are uncertain and likely quite small, and the potential to boost job creation seems quite limited, given the fundamental impediments that appear to be restraining growth now. At the same time, it’s important to recognize the potential costs of additional asset purchases. A larger Fed balance sheet will increase the risks associated with the timely and appropriate withdrawing of monetary stimulus by raising interest rates and selling assets. My assessment was that the costs associated with additional asset purchases outweighed the expected benefits, and thus, I dissented. In its statement following last week’s meeting, the FOMC said that “[i]n determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, [it] will, as always, take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases.” At the press conference following the meeting Chairman Bernanke noted that “[i]f future evidence suggests that the program’s effectiveness has declined or if potential unintended side effects or risks become apparent as the balance sheet grows, we will modify the program as appropriate.” I anticipate that the Committee will regularly reassess the benefits and costs of the asset purchases and make adjustments to the program as warranted. 4 The Committee also altered its description of its expectations regarding future interest rate changes, replacing its previous date-based forward guidance with guidance based on numerical thresholds. Specifically, the Committee said it anticipates the current “exceptionally low” target range for the federal funds is likely to remain appropriate “at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 percent, the inflation rate over the next one to two years is projected to be no more than half a percentage point above its 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.” I had dissented previously against the use of a date-based forward guidance, so I supported the decision to drop such language at the December meeting. I agree that it’s useful for the Committee to describe how its future actions are likely to depend on the evolving state of the economy. However, a single indicator cannot provide a complete picture of labor market conditions. More broadly, monetary policy has only a limited ability to improve the path of unemployment, and such effects are transient and generally short-lived. For these reasons I believe that tying the federal funds rate to a specific numerical threshold for unemployment is inconsistent with a balanced approach to the FOMC’s price stability and maximum employment mandates. I would have preferred to describe in qualitative terms the economic conditions under which our monetary policy stance is likely to change.4 It’s true that the Committee’s forward guidance contains a safeguard with respect to inflation, in that keeping rates low requires that inflation is projected to remain close to our 2 percent objective and that inflation expectations remain well anchored. Nevertheless, this sets up a potentially problematic tension between two competing commitments — one to price stability and the other to an unemployment rate threshold. These two commitments could well conflict because inflationary pressures can arise without triggering the inflation safety clause. In the past, we’ve had to act pre-emptively to head off incipient inflation pressures because re-establishing credibility after it has eroded is costly and economically damaging. The broader issue is that disappointing labor market outcomes have motivated a search for how much stimulus can be provided ― or promised for the future ― without diminishing the Fed’s credibility for price stability. Inflation has averaged quite close to our 2 percent objective in recent years, but continuation of that record of success should not be taken for granted. We do not really know whether monetary policy can make a sustainable difference in labor market outcomes, and we may be attempting to achieve more rapid improvement than is feasible. We need to be careful that in our zeal to promise future stimulus, we do not constrain ourselves in ways that endanger the price stability on which we’ve come to depend. 1 I am grateful to Roy Webb and John Weinberg for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different?” International Finance Discussion Papers, no. 1037, November 2011. See in particular Figure 12, page 24. The current recovery is within one standard error of the average advanced economy recovery from recessions that occur during housing slumps. 3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” News and Events, Monetary Policy Press Release, January 25, 2012. 4 Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Perspectives on Monetary and Credit Policy.” Speech at the Shadow Open Market Committee Symposium, New York, November 20, 2012.

1 Economic Outlook, January 2013 January 4, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Maryland Bankers Association’s Sixth Annual First Friday Economic Outlook Forum Baltimore, Md. Thank you for that kind introduction. It’s a pleasure to join you at the turn of the year. This traditionally is a time to reflect on the year just past and take a look at what the new year might hold in store for us. I think I can guess what many of you are concerned about regarding the year ahead, so I should warn you that I will have nothing to say about the prospects of the Ravens or the Redskins. Instead, my focus today will be on the economic outlook, and while for some that might be less interesting than pigskin prognostication, it might be a good thing to take our minds off sports for a time. Before I begin, however, I should emphasize that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.1 I will begin with the outlook for inflation, since maintaining price stability over time is really the Fed’s primary mission as the nation’s central bank. Over the last 20 years, the Fed has had a commendable record on inflation, averaging 2 percent inflation per year. There have been year- to-year fluctuations, to be sure. But these temporary swings have evened out over time, and inflation has tended to return to around 2 percent. In fact, inflation has averaged quite close to that figure since the end of the Great Recession in June 2009. Overall inflation has subsided of late, led by the recent easing in energy prices; headline inflation was just 1.4 percent, year over year, in November. But the same measure of inflation was 2.6 percent in November 2011, which is a good illustration of the short-term swings we’ve been seeing. With futures markets forecasting flat or declining energy prices, most economists expect headline inflation to average a little less than 2 percent this year. I agree with that outlook. The record of low and fairly stable inflation over the last two decades is a substantial improvement over previous decades. 2 The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC (the group that determines monetary policy), issued an important statement in January 2012 on its “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.”3 In that document, the Committee stated that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. This formally committed the FOMC to what Fed watchers had long believed was the FOMC’s unofficial target of 2 percent inflation. A formal commitment to a numerical inflation objective is important for transparency and accountability, but it’s also important for keeping expectations regarding future inflation well anchored. Because doubts about whether the Fed will keep inflation low and stable can 2 themselves give rise to inflation pressures, history has shown that restoring our credibility can be an arduous and costly process. Fortunately, current measures of inflation expectations suggest that consumers, business firms and investors anticipate continued stability in inflation in coming years. These measures include survey-based indexes and measures of inflation expectations derived from the relative yields of indexed and unindexed U.S. Treasury securities. Each of these measures has its own peculiarities, but they’re all providing readings consistent with the low and stable inflation rates of the last two decades. In contrast to inflation, real economic growth and labor market conditions are affected by a wide range of factors outside a central bank’s control. In fact, the effects of monetary stimulus on real output and employment are less than is widely thought; they consist largely of the transitory byproducts of frictions that delay the timely adjustment of prices by businesses. Attempts to overstimulate real economic activity via monetary policy can instead run the risk of raising inflation. Indeed, for reasons I will discuss later on, I see material upside risks to inflation in 2014 and beyond, given the current trajectory for monetary policy, though my baseline outlook is for inflation to move toward the Fed’s long-run goal of 2 percent in coming years. Turning to the outlook for real economic growth, since the Great Recession officially bottomed out at the end of the second quarter of 2009, economic activity has expanded at only a modest pace. Real gross domestic product, for example, has risen at an average annual rate of 2.2 percent since the end of the recession. This pace is widely viewed as disappointing, since it falls short of the average gross domestic product growth of 3-1/2 percent the U.S economy achieved over the course of the 20th century. Virtually this entire shortfall represents a difference in the average growth in employment — that is, the growth in output per worker is not terri bly different between the two periods. Typically, one would expect growth to exceed the long-run average at some point during an expansion to make up for the negative growth recorded during recessions. Several factors appear to be impeding a more rapid expansion in the U.S. economy. First, the housing boom created a substantial oversupply of new homes, and while significant progress is evident, we have not completely worked through that oversupply. Thus home construction and home prices were essentially flat for the first two years of the recovery. Last year, however, housing activity picked up and was a source of modest strength for the economy. Prices in many markets bottomed out and began to rise, and new construction activity has been steadily improving. Having said that, my sense is that there is a substantial overhang of homes that are a poor match for what consumers want and can afford right now. Thus, we should not expect, nor should we desire, a return to the booming housing market conditions that we saw prior to the last recession. A second, and related, factor behind the slow recovery was the significant shift in economic activity away from industries related to residential construction. The rapid loss of jobs in these industries, layered on top of ongoing longer-run sectoral shifts, resulted in large inflows into the ranks of the unemployed and an adverse shift in the composition of the pool of unemployed. This often occurs in recessions, when the need for capital investment and retraining to facilitate the shift of workers to new sectors slows down the decline in unemployment. The magnitude of the residential construction job loss in this recession was unprecedented, however, so this effect is likely to be significantly larger now. 3 Third, the recession appears to have made many consumers more cautious and less willing to spend, relative to their income and wealth. The magnitude of the decline in jobs and aggregate income in this recession was far larger than anything American households have seen in the prior 25 years. And it was accompanied by an unusually large decline in home equity and household net worth. Moreover, given lenders’ loss experience following the last recession, terms and qualification standards for secured and unsecured consumer credit have become more stringent. Thus households understandably have become more apprehensive about their future income prospects and more interested in paying down financial obligations and building up savings. So while consumer spending has grown during this recovery, the tempered pace of that growth has limited the overall pace of the expansion, relative to historical experience. Finally, our Fifth District business contacts have long been emphasizing that uncertainty has caused them to delay hiring and investment commitments. These reports became more frequent this past spring and more focused on the uncertainties related to the year-end “fiscal cliff.” The array of conceivable fiscal policy remedies would affect a wide range of economic decisions, and in response, many businesses have expressed a preference for sitting on the sidelines. But apart from ambiguity about how Congress and the administration will navigate past the fiscal cliff and the debt ceiling, significant uncertainty remains about the longer-run tax and spending paths, the broad regulatory realignments that are currently in train, and the uncertain prospects for European economies. In short, a range of factors appear to be restraining our current pace of economic expansion. While that pace is below the long-run average for the U.S. over the last century, it’s not hard to identify potential explanations for that shortfall. In fact, if you look back at how other advanced economies have typically behaved following recessions associated with significant housing slumps, you will find that the current U.S. expansion is actually not out of the ordinary. 4 This economic expansion, while disappointing, may be the best we should expect given the large decline in the housing market. The data we’ve seen over the course of 2012 have been consistent with this picture of an economy expanding at a moderate pace. Last year this time, growth appeared to be strengthening, and measures of output and employment were picking up pace. In the late spring and early summer, however, growth appeared to slow as business investment and exports flattened. The reluctance of businesses to invest persisted into the fourth quarter, but some of the slowdown in job growth at midyear was later revised away. Early readings on consumer spending for the fourth quarter have been encouraging, though survey measures of consumer sentiment have fallen sharply, perhaps in response to the post-election media focus on the fiscal cliff negotiations. And the modest strengthening in residential construction has continued into the last half of 2012. As for the outlook for the U.S. economy, my best guess is that growth will continue into next year at an annual rate of around 2 percent, as many of the recent impediments to faster growth continue to restrain activity. Beyond 2013, the rate of growth could rise if the effects of these restraining factors ease, which seems plausible. Meaningful progress on federal budget issues, particularly the long-run imbalance that must be addressed, would alleviate some of the policy 4 uncertainty that appears to have dampened growth in 2012. The risks emanating from Europe could diminish this year as it emerges from a recession and makes progress toward new institutional arrangements. Improved European growth prospects for 2014, which most economists are forecasting, would be a positive for U.S. exports. And I think U.S. households could well be more confident and better disposed to spending a year from now. Improvements in the effectiveness of labor markets at matching workers and job openings would lead to gains in household income. Modest additional growth in home prices, along the lines of what we saw in 2012, would add to net household wealth and aid the deleveraging process. All of these developments would tend to reduce consumer apprehension about downside risks and thereby bolster spending. This outlook is not without risks, of course. Significant energy price increases or an unexpected downturn in some major trading partners could temporarily reduce overall U.S. growth. Failure to resolve a significant measure of the uncertainty hanging over federal tax and spending policy this year would indefinitely prolong the reluctance of businesses to commit to investment and hiring in the U.S. Moreover, even with a resolution of fiscal uncertainty, significant uncertainty regarding regulatory policies could continue to dampen growth. On the other hand, a stronger- than-expected resurgence in confidence is not inconceivable; rapid and convincing progress toward fiscal sustainability, for example, might release a rush of pent-up spending, perhaps leading to the above-trend growth that has so far eluded us. Even though growth has been below our long-run trend rate since the recession, and may remain below trend for some time, I believe that the fundamental prospects for longer-term U.S. growth remain quite strong. The flexibility and resilience of our markets, along with a relatively well- educated population, make this an advantageous place to implement innovations. One sector where this longer-term strength of our economy is evident is manufacturing, where growth during the current expansion has actually been fairly strong compared to the decade leading up to the recession. The backstory in manufacturing, of course, is the global outsourcing of low-skilled operations that has occurred over the last several decades. But we’ve seen countervailing growth in cases where locating domestically has significant advantages. For some suppliers, for example, proximity to downstream operations is critical, as in the automobile industry. For others, proximity to key research and design personnel are important, as with advanced manufacturing that uses more sophisticated capital equipment. In addition, the emergence of inexpensive new energy resources in the U.S. — in the shale bed regions — could support cost - effective domestic production in industries that are relatively energy-intensive or reliant on petrochemical feedstocks. Our major challenge over the longer haul is finding effective ways to deepen the knowledge and skills of our people. Expanding our human capital is fundamental to improving our standards of living because implementing new technologies has generally required a more skilled workforce. In this arena, an array of strategies could yield beneficial returns over the long run, from ensuring the continued vitality of institutions of higher education and research to investing in high-quality early childhood education. Particular attention is warranted, I believe, to career and technical training, which can provide flexible, market-responsive skill development for both new entrants to the labor force and those workers transiting from declining to expanding sectors. 5 5 What role does monetary policy play in this outlook? Our primary responsibility at the Federal Reserve is to keep inflation low and stable; this allows businesses and consumers to make economic decisions without needing to worry about the purchasing power of money. My economic outlook presumes that the FOMC will not allow monetary instability to disrupt economic growth, as arguably took place in the 1970s. But beyond avoiding the economic damage associated with high and variable inflation, I believe it is unlikely that the Federal Reserve can push real growth rates materially higher than they otherwise would be, on a sustained basis. Nonetheless, at its December meeting, the FOMC adopted measures to attempt to bolster economic growth. Notably, the Committee decided to continue the monthly purchases of $40 billion in agency mortgage-backed securities and $45 billion in long-term U.S. Treasury securities. It also underscored its attention to real economic activity and employment by stating its forward guidance for interest rate policy in terms of a 6.5 percent threshold for the unemployment rate. I dissented from these Committee actions and have expressed my concerns at length elsewhere. 6 Briefly, as I’ve touched on today, I think that further monetary stimulus is unlikely to materially increase the pace of economic expansion, and that these actions will test the limits of our credibility. At some point, we will need to withdraw stimulus by raising interest rates and reducing the size of our balance sheet, and the larger our balance sheet, the more vulnerable we will be to seemingly minor miscalibrations in policy. Accordingly, I see an increased risk, given the course the Committee has set, that inflation pressures emerge and are not thwarted in a timely way. I intend to remain alert for signs that our monetary policy stance needs adjustment. In closing, I should reiterate that despite the unique nature of the monetary and fiscal policy challenges facing us, U.S. economic fundamentals are strong and auger well for growth possibilities in the years just ahead. To me, this suggests that the rewards are high for getting economic policy right. And as an economist, I have to believe that people, including policy officials, respond to incentives. 1 I am grateful to Roy Webb, John Weinberg and Andy Bauer for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 For an account, see Marvin Goodfriend, “Monetary Policy Comes of Age: A Twentieth Century Odyssey.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Winter 1997, vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 1-22. 3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” News and Events, Monetary Policy Press Release, January 25, 2012. 4 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different?” International Finance Discussion Papers, no. 1037, November 2011. 5 Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Technology, Unemployment and Workforce Development in a Rapidly Changing World.” Speech to business and community leaders, Greensboro, N.C., May 7, 2012; and, Jesse Romero, “Where Have All the Workers Gone?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Region Focus, Second/Third Quarter 2012, pp. 12- 16. 6 Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Richmond Fed President Lacker Comments on FOMC Dissent.” Press Room, Press Releases, December 14, 2012.

1 Economic Outlook, January 2013 January 8, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond South Carolina Business & Industry Political Education Committee’s 27th Annual Meeting Columbia, S.C. Thank you for that kind introduction. It’s a pleasure to join you at the turn of the year. This traditionally is a time to reflect on the year just past and take a look at what the new year might hold in store for us. I think I can guess what many of you are concerned about regarding the year ahead, so I should warn you that I will have nothing to say about the prospects of the Ravens or the Redskins. Instead, my focus today will be on the economic outlook, and while for some that might be less interesting than pigskin prognostication, it might be a good thing to take our minds off sports for a time. Before I begin, however, I should emphasize that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 1 I will begin with the outlook for inflation, since maintaining price stability over time is really the Fed’s primary mission as the nation’s central bank. Over the last 20 years, the Fed has had a commendable record on inflation, averaging 2 percent inflation per year. There have been year- to-year fluctuations, to be sure. But these temporary swings have evened out over time, and inflation has tended to return to around 2 percent. In fact, inflation has averaged quite close to that figure since the end of the Great Recession in June 2009. Overall inflation has subsided of late, led by the recent easing in energy prices; headline inflation was just 1.4 percent, year over year, in November. But the same measure of inflation was 2.6 percent in November 2011, which is a good illustration of the short-term swings we’ve been seeing. With futures markets forecasting flat or declining energy prices, most economists expect headline inflation to average a little less than 2 percent this year. I agree with that outlook. The record of low and fairly stable inflation over the last two decades is a substantial improvement over previous decades. 2 The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC (the group that determines monetary policy), issued an important statement in January 2012 on its “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.”3 In that document, the Committee stated that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. This formally committed the FOMC to what Fed watchers had long believed was the FOMC’s unofficial target of 2 percent inflation. A formal commitment to a numerical inflation objective is important for transparency and accountability, but it’s also important for keeping expectations regarding future inflation well anchored. Because doubts about whether the Fed will keep inflation low and stable can themselves give rise to inflation pressures, history has shown that restoring our credibility can be 2 an arduous and costly process. Fortunately, current measures of inflation expectations suggest that consumers, business firms and investors anticipate continued stability in inflation in coming years. These measures include survey-based indexes and measures of inflation expectations derived from the relative yields of indexed and unindexed U.S. Treasury securities. Each of these measures has its own peculiarities, but they’re all providing readings consistent with the low and stable inflation rates of the last two decades. In contrast to inflation, real economic growth and labor market conditions are affected by a wide range of factors outside a central bank’s control. In fact, the effects of monetary stimulus on real output and employment are less than is widely thought; they consist largely of the transitory byproducts of frictions that delay the timely adjustment of prices by businesses. Attempts to overstimulate real economic activity via monetary policy can instead run the risk of raising inflation. Indeed, for reasons I will discuss later on, I see material upside risks to inflation in 2014 and beyond, given the current trajectory for monetary policy, though my baseline outlook is for inflation to move toward the Fed’s long-run goal of 2 percent in coming years. Turning to the outlook for real economic growth, since the Great Recession officially bottomed out at the end of the second quarter of 2009, economic activity has expanded at only a modest pace. Real gross domestic product, for example, has risen at an average annual rate of 2.2 percent since the end of the recession. This pace is widely viewed as disappointing, since it falls short of the average gross domestic product growth of 3-1/2 percent the U.S economy achieved over the course of the 20th century. Virtually this entire shortfall represents a difference in the average growth in employment — that is, the growth in output per worker is not terribly different between the two periods. Typically, one would expect growth to exceed the long-run average at some point during an expansion to make up for the negative growth recorded during recessions. Several factors appear to be impeding a more rapid expansion in the U.S. economy. First, the housing boom created a substantial oversupply of new homes, and while significant progress is evident, we have not completely worked through that oversupply. Thus home construction and home prices were essentially flat for the first two years of the recovery. Last year, however, housing activity picked up and was a source of modest strength for the economy. Prices in many markets bottomed out and began to rise, and new construction activity has been steadily improving. Having said that, my sense is that there is a substantial overhang of homes that are a poor match for what consumers want and can afford right now. Thus, we should not expect, nor should we desire, a return to the booming housing market conditions that we saw prior to the last recession. A second, and related, factor behind the slow recovery was the significant shift in economic activity away from industries related to residential construction. The rapid loss of jobs in these industries, layered on top of ongoing longer-run sectoral shifts, resulted in large inflows into the ranks of the unemployed and an adverse shift in the composition of the pool of unemployed. This often occurs in recessions, when the need for capital investment and retraining to facilitate the shift of workers to new sectors slows down the decline in unemployment. The magnitude of the residential construction job loss in this recession was unprecedented, however, so this effect is likely to be significantly larger now. 3 Third, the recession appears to have made many consumers more cautious and less willing to spend, relative to their income and wealth. The magnitude of the decline in jobs and aggregate income in this recession was far larger than anything American households have seen in the prior 25 years. And it was accompanied by an unusually large decline in home equity and household net worth. Moreover, given lenders’ loss experience following the last recession, terms and qualification standards for secured and unsecured consumer credit have become more stringent. Thus households understandably have become more apprehensive about their future income prospects and more interested in paying down financial obligations and building up savings. So while consumer spending has grown during this recovery, the tempered pace of that growth has limited the overall pace of the expansion, relative to historical experience. Finally, our Fifth District business contacts have long been emphasizing that uncertainty has caused them to delay hiring and investment commitments. These reports became more frequent this past spring and more focused on the uncertainties related to the year-end “fiscal cliff.” The array of conceivable fiscal policy remedies would affect a wide range of economic decisions, and in response, many businesses have expressed a preference for sitting on the sidelines. But apart from ambiguity about how Congress and the administration will navigate past the fiscal cliff and the debt ceiling, significant uncertainty remains about the longer-run tax and spending paths, the broad regulatory realignments that are currently in train, and the uncertain prospects for European economies. In short, a range of factors appear to be restraining our current pace of economic expansion. While that pace is below the long-run average for the U.S. over the last century, it’s not hard to identify potential explanations for that shortfall. In fact, if you look back at how other advanced economies have typically behaved following recessions associated with significant housing slumps, you will find that the current U.S. expansion is actually not out of the ordinary. 4 This economic expansion, while disappointing, may be the best we should expect given the large decline in the housing market. The data we’ve seen over the course of 2012 have been consistent with this picture of an economy expanding at a moderate pace. Last year this time, growth appeared to be strengthening, and measures of output and employment were picking up pace. In the late spring and early summer, however, growth appeared to slow as business investment and exports flattened. The reluctance of businesses to invest persisted into the fourth quarter, but some of the slowdown in job growth at midyear was later revised away. Early readings on consumer spending for the fourth quarter have been encouraging, though survey measures of consumer sentiment have fallen sharply, perhaps in response to the post-election media focus on the fiscal cliff negotiations. And the modest strengthening in residential construction has continued into the last half of 2012. As for the outlook for the U.S. economy, my best guess is that growth will continue into next year at an annual rate of around 2 percent, as many of the recent impediments to faster growth continue to restrain activity. Beyond 2013, the rate of growth could rise if the effects of these restraining factors ease, which seems plausible. Meaningful progress on federal budget issues, particularly the long-run imbalance that must be addressed, would alleviate some of the policy uncertainty that appears to have dampened growth in 2012. The risks emanating from Europe 4 could diminish this year as it emerges from a recession and makes progress toward new institutional arrangements. Improved European growth prospects for 2014, which most economists are forecasting, would be a positive for U.S. exports. And I think U.S. households could well be more confident and better disposed to spending a year from now. Improvements in the effectiveness of labor markets at matching workers and job openings would lead to gains in household income. Modest additional growth in home prices, along the lines of what we saw in 2012, would add to net household wealth and aid the deleveraging process. All of these developments would tend to reduce consumer apprehension about downside risks and thereby bolster spending. This outlook is not without risks, of course. Significant energy price increases or an unexpected downturn in some major trading partners could temporarily reduce overall U.S. growth. Failure to resolve a significant measure of the uncertainty hanging over federal tax and spending policy this year would indefinitely prolong the reluctance of businesses to commit to investment and hiring in the U.S. Moreover, even with a resolution of fiscal uncertainty, significant uncertainty regarding regulatory policies could continue to dampen growth. On the other hand, a stronger- than-expected resurgence in confidence is not inconceivable; rapid and convincing progress toward fiscal sustainability, for example, might release a rush of pent-up spending, perhaps leading to the above-trend growth that has so far eluded us. Even though growth has been below our long-run trend rate since the recession, and may remain below trend for some time, I believe that the fundamental prospects for longer-term U.S. growth remain quite strong. The flexibility and resilience of our markets, along with a relatively well- educated population, make this an advantageous place to implement innovations. One sector where this longer-term strength of our economy is evident is manufacturing, where growth during the current expansion has actually been fairly strong compared to the decade leading up to the recession. The backstory in manufacturing, of course, is the global outsourcing of low-skilled operations that has occurred over the last several decades. But we’ve seen countervailing growth in cases where locating domestically has significant advantages. For some suppliers, for example, proximity to downstream operations is critical, as in the automobile industry. For others, proximity to key research and design personnel is important, as with advanced manufacturing that uses more sophisticated capital equipment. In addition, the emergence of inexpensive new energy resources in the U.S. — in the shale bed regions — could support cost - effective domestic production in industries that are relatively energy-intensive or reliant on petrochemical feedstocks. Our major challenge over the longer haul is finding effective ways to deepen the knowledge and skills of our people. Expanding our human capital is fundamental to improving our standards of living because implementing new technologies has generally required a more skilled workforce. In this arena, an array of strategies could yield beneficial returns over the long run, from ensuring the continued vitality of institutions of higher education and research to investing in high-quality early childhood education. Particular attention is warranted, I believe, to career and technical training, which can provide flexible, market-responsive skill development for both new entrants to the labor force and those workers transiting from declining to expanding sectors. 5 5 What role does monetary policy play in this outlook? Our primary responsibility at the Federal Reserve is to keep inflation low and stable; this allows businesses and consumers to make economic decisions without needing to worry about the purchasing power of money. My economic outlook presumes that the FOMC will not allow monetary instability to disrupt economic growth, as arguably took place in the 1970s. But beyond avoiding the economic damage associated with high and variable inflation, I believe it is unlikely that the Federal Reserve can push real growth rates materially higher than they otherwise would be, on a sustained basis. Nonetheless, at its December meeting, the FOMC adopted measures to attempt to bolster economic growth. Notably, the Committee decided to continue the monthly purchases of $40 billion in agency mortgage-backed securities and $45 billion in long-term U.S. Treasury securities. It also underscored its attention to real economic activity and employment by stating its forward guidance for interest rate policy in terms of a 6.5 percent threshold for the unemployment rate. I dissented from these Committee actions and have expressed my concerns at length elsewhere. 6 Briefly, as I’ve touched on today, I think that further monetary stimulus is unlikely to materially increase the pace of economic expansion, and that these actions will test the limits of our credibility. At some point, we will need to withdraw stimulus by raising interest rates and reducing the size of our balance sheet, and the larger our balance sheet, the more vulnerable we will be to seemingly minor miscalibrations in policy. Accordingly, I see an increased risk, given the course the Committee has set, that inflation pressures emerge and are not thwarted in a timely way. I intend to remain alert for signs that our monetary policy stance needs adjustment. In closing, I should reiterate that despite the unique nature of the monetary and fiscal policy challenges facing us, U.S. economic fundamentals are strong and auger well for growth possibilities in the years just ahead. To me, this suggests that the rewards are high for getting economic policy right. And as an economist, I have to believe that people, including policy officials, respond to incentives. 1 I am grateful to Roy Webb, John Weinberg and Andy Bauer for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 For an account, see Marvin Goodfriend, “Monetary Policy Comes of Age: A Twentieth Century Odyssey.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Winter 1997, vol. 83, no. 1, pp. 1-22. 3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Longer-Run Goals and Policy Strategy.” News and Events, Monetary Policy Press Release, January 25, 2012. 4 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different?” International Finance Discussion Papers, no. 1037, November 2011. 5 Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Technology, Unemployment and Workforce Development in a Rapidly Changing World.” Speech to business and community leaders, Greensboro, N.C., May 7, 2012; and, Jesse Romero, “Where Have All the Workers Gone?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Region Focus, Second/Third Quarter 2012, pp. 12-16. 6 Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Richmond Fed President Lacker Comments on FOMC Dissent.” Press Room, Press Releases, December 14, 2012.

1 Economics and the Federal Reserve After the Crisis February 12, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Franklin & Marshall College Lancaster, Pa. The invitation to address you this evening is a great honor for me. I matriculated in 1973, filled with a sense of awe and anticipation about the world of learning that was opening up before me. Little did I know that I was in for an intense period of personal growth and discovery as well. But just as important, it was here at Franklin & Marshall College that I made the choices that would set the course of my professional work for decades to come. I am very grateful to F&M for all it provided me. My topic tonight is “Economics and the Federal Reserve After the Crisis.” F&M is where I first seriously studied economics, so that seems appropriate as a subject. The financial crisis of 2007– 08 had significant consequences, to say the least, and the Federal Reserve was at the center of it all. So I thought I would share some reflections with you. But as I have thought back on those events in the intervening years, a vivid memory from my F&M days comes to mind. It was not from an economics class but a seminar in the government department — International Politics, I believe it was called, with Professor Robert Gray. We spent some time studying the Cuban missile crisis, and I believe we read Graham Allison’s book, 1 which was popular at the time. One broad insight I took away from the course was that a critical influence on the choices made by policymakers was the theory they brought to the table — their conceptual understanding of the fundamental forces at work in the world they are dealing with. Moreover, it is often the case that several plausible alternative theories are also available to policymakers. Since the recent financial crisis, I have reflected often on the role of economics in shaping the policy response. 2 There is no substitute for theorizing about how the world works because there is no other way to form a judgment about whether a given policy action will be good or bad. To put it another way, if you think you know how a policy intervention might work in the world, you have a theory in mind. The challenge for policymakers, particularly for central bankers these days, is choosing which theories to place weight on. One can search for appropriate models by comparing alternatives to real-world observations, but at times a given set of observations is consistent with several different models. Sometimes additional observations can be found that discriminate between contending theories, but if not, policymakers may be forced to choose between competing theories. In recent years, a trove of new, previously classified information about the Cuban missile crisis has been released, including transcripts of recordings President John F. Kennedy secretly made 2 of his meetings with his top advisers, the Executive Committee of the National Security Council. These have shed new light on the thinking of the president’s policy advisers during this critical episode. Our understanding of the financial crisis is similarly benefiting from the emergence of new, previously classified information. The Federal Open Market Committee, the policymaking arm of the Federal Reserve, releases transcripts of its meetings and conference calls with a five- year lag. On January 18 of this year, the transcripts were posted for 2007, the year the financial market turmoil began. 3 These records of the FOMC’s deliberations provide a fascinating window into policymakers’ thinking as the crisis began to unfold. Popular accounts of the financial crisis focus heavily on the events that took place later, in the fall of 2008. Indeed, much of the media coverage of the release of the transcripts focused on the extent to which the Committee did or did not appear to predict exactly what was just around the bend. The critiques of Monday morning quarterbacks are entertaining, to be sure, and I agree that the events of the fall of 2008 had their roots in what happened in 2007 and earlier. But it’s ultimately unproductive to act as if policymakers should have been omniscient. The transcripts show Committee participants grappling with how to interpret what was happening and what to do about it. Alternative assessments were plausible, given the information that was available in real time, although each had different implications for how the future might unfold. In my remarks tonight, I would like to provide an overview of what economics had to offer to policymakers as the financial crisis began to unfold in 2007. A wide variety of research over the last couple of decades was directly relevant to financial market instability, and I do not intend to survey it all. But, at the risk of oversimplification, I will highlight two broad alternative views that have emerged, each with significantly different implications for the handling of the crisis. In 2007, the transcripts show that one was chosen, and it guided the diagnosis and prescriptions of senior Fed policymakers for the rest of the crisis. Indeed, that view has had a major influence on the legislative and regulatory responses designed to prevent future crises. Before I begin with an overview of these two views, I need to warn you that my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve officials. If you have any doubt, the 2007 transcripts confirm this assertion. 4 Alternative Theories The banking system was obviously at the heart of the crisis, and economists have made a good deal of progress in recent decades on the theory of banking. The essence of what it means to be a bank is the use of short-term funding to invest in longer-term assets, a process called “maturity transformation.” Traditionally this would take the form of loan portfolios funded through the issuance of deposits. Immediately demandable deposits are a short-term liability, unlike bank loans that are repaid over a number of years. Maturity transformation by financial intermediaries provides the benefit of insurance to depositors who might quickly need their funds — to purchase goods and services, for example, or to pursue an unanticipated investment opportunity. By pooling the funds of many such investors, a bank can make a set of longer-term investments that individual investors on their own would view as too risky to support. Maturity transformation involves a potential risk of its own, however. If a large number of depositors sought to withdraw their deposits simultaneously, the bank might have trouble raising 3 enough funds through liquidating its asset holdings. As a result, a firm with a mismatched balance sheet is vulnerable to a “run,” in which people try to get their money out before the firm is no longer able to make immediate payment. Even though it may be individually rational, such a run can cause damage by inducing the untimely liquidation of bank assets. In economists’ terms, what I’ve just described is a situation subject to “multiple equilibria.” One possibility (equilibrium) is that depositors run, even if they don’t need their money now, because they expect other depositors are running as well. The other possibility is that depositors don’t withdraw unless they truly need their money because they expect others to behave similarly. One way to prevent the possibility of the bad outcome is to provide government-backed insurance to the depositors. In fact, in the simplest versions of this theory, such insurance has almost magical powers. The mere presence of the backstop commitment makes depositors confident that other depositors won’t be heading for the exits — with the result that people only take their funds out when they really need to. The magical aspect is that the government backstop is never actually used. This intuition may seem pretty easy to grasp, but it wasn’t until 1983 that two economists — Douglas Diamond and Philip Dybvig — published an article laying out this logic in a pre cise, rigorous fashion. 5 This insight has had a tremendous influence on economists’ thinking about banking and financial markets. And as I’ll discuss, their portrayal of inherent financial fragility has had a tremendous impact on policy during the crisis and beyond. Government-supplied deposit insurance has always been understood to carry its own risks, however. In the late 1970s John Kareken and Neil Wallace pointed out that deposit insurance created incentives that could lead to socially excessive risk-taking. 6 Banks that can raise insured deposits have less incentive to avoid large losses, and their depositors have less incentive to monitor and constrain such risk-taking, because taxpayers could end up holding the bag. Thus, deposit insurance was paired with a system of comprehensive regulatory oversight. Indeed, such oversight is today a major function of the Federal Reserve System and other bank regulators and is a significant responsibility of Reserve Banks like Richmond’s. Regulation comes with its own implications, of course. In this context, one of the most important is the incentive it provides market participants to perform functionally equivalent services just beyond the reach of regulations, effectively by-passing those regulatory constraints. This gives rise to what’s called “shadow banking” — bank-like activities conducted outside the legal confines of the banking industry. One example of shadow banking is the market for repurchase agreements, or “repos,” in which a lender purchases an asset from a borrower with a simultaneous agreement to resell it at a later date, often the next day. Maturity transformation is a key feature of the repo market and contributed to the demise of Bear Stearns in 2008. But a government backstop is not the only mechanism for preventing self-fulfilling runs. The likelihood of such behavior also can be influenced by the details of the contracts between the bank and its depositors. For instance, if the arrangement includes conditions under which the bank can suspend depositors’ right to withdraw, then the self-fulfilling run outcomes also can be averted. Such a practice was common during U.S. financial panics in the 19th century, before the advent of government deposit insurance. Banks would suspend withdrawals, for exactly the 4 purpose of interrupting the dynamics of an emerging bank run. This type of mechanism reduces somewhat the services provided by the deposit but in the interest of altering incentives and ensuring the sustainability of the overall arrangement, much the way high insurance deductibles improve the sustainability of insurance coverage. Close attention to contractual details like the ability to suspend payments highlights an important point in the study of financial institutions and their behavior. Financial contracts are not one size fits all — they vary dramatically across various settings and sectors. For example, equity contracts have long been an important source of finance for some groups, such as small high-tech startups, while in other settings, simple debt is more dominant. Economists have made progress in understanding which financial contracts are best adapted to which settings using the tools of a branch of economics known as mechanism design. 7 These tools allow you to ascertain the extent to which a given contract is consistent with opportunistic behavior by trading partners, taking into account that they may have superior information and may be able to take actions you cannot observe. In a famous example, over 30 years ago the economist Robert Townsend showed that in certain settings a plain-vanilla debt contract is exactly the optimal contract, in the sense that no other form of financial contract would make the borrower or lender better off without making the other one worse off.8 The same logic applies to financial institutions, such as banks, which can be thought of as a complex multilateral array of contracts. Equally famous work by the economist Doug Diamond showed that in certain settings banks do better than a system of bilateral lending.9 Mechanism design, as an approach to understanding financial markets, emphasizes the endogeneity of contracts and institutions. It takes into account in a systematic way the various frictions and transactions costs that make borrowing and investing challenging, such as limits to the information of various parties or the inability to precommit to future actions. It builds on the notion that contracting parties choose the form of contract for their mutual benefit. Mechanism design provides a way to understand and predict how financial contracts and institutions might adapt and evolve in response to changes in their economic environment. One important part of the economic environment to which private financial institutions and contracts adapt is the set of rules imposed and actions taken by the government in its interactions with financial markets. Take, for instance, the two means of preventing the inefficient, self- fulfilling bank runs that I discussed earlier. One relies on the expectation of government support in the event of financial stress. The other relies on the incentives of market participants to adopt contractual arrangements that are as robust as possible to potential stresses. But the private incentives that drive this second approach depend on what people believe about the likelihood of government support in the event of a crisis. If they believe such support is likely, then their incentive to adopt more resilient arrangements is weaker. The interaction between government backstops and endogenous financial arrangements poses a very general problem for policymaking. If we observe financial institutions or markets that are vulnerable to runs, it could reflect inherent fragility, or alternatively it could reflect expectations of government support that short circuit the incentive to adopt more robust arrangements. 5 As policymakers entered 2007, the economics literature offered them two broad but fundamentally different views of the world — two theories of financial instability. One tends to view market institutions and contracts as relatively fixed and the resulting financial system as inherently prone to the type of instability depicted by the simple model of bank runs. Under this theory, an expectation of government support may be necessary to make crises less likely, although that support necessitates regulatory oversight and constraints on banks to replace the market discipline that is lost when counterparties feel protected by government guarantees. In the alternative view, private financial arrangements are themselves adaptable and endogenous. Much of the vulnerability observed in financial markets is itself the induced response of market institutions and behaviors to the expectation of government backstop support in the event of distress. In the absence of that expectation, there would be stronger incentives to seek more robust arrangements. So on the eve of 2007, policymakers were faced with two broad, competing views on the origins of financial market fragility — either it was inherent in the structure of financial arrangements, or it was induced by expectations of government support. The Backstory Before discussing the policy debates of 2007, it’s worth briefly reviewing the lead up to the crisis. Three threads course through this backstory. The first consists of the instances of financial stress that recur from time to time in U.S. history. There were significant panics in the second half of the 19th century in which investors sought to convert their deposits into currency. Bank failures were widespread at the start of the Great Depression, when deflation made it hard for borrowers to repay fixed-dollar debts. Bank failures were small and isolated in the 1950s and 1960s but began growing in size and frequency in the 1970s. Inflation and subsequent regulatory forbearance led to widespread failures among savings and loan institutions in the 1980s. Forbearance also extended to large, money center institutions, which were hammered by losses on loans to less developed countries in the 1970s and 1980s. Official government support is the second thread in this backstory. The founding of the Federal Reserve in 1913 gave the Fed the capacity to act as a public sector backstop to banks — a “lender of last resort” — in the event of a run. Despite this there were widespread bank failures in the Great Depression. The associated losses of deposit savings by households and firms prompted tighter restrictions on bank activities and the creation of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., or FDIC. 10 The third key feature of the backstory is the increasing frequency, starting in the 1970s, of government support being extended beyond the official scope of deposit insurance. This involved a series of successively larger institutions, including the noteworthy Continental Illinois in 1984, which prompted Congressional testimony that saw a senior federal bank regulator acknowledge that the largest 11 banks would not be allowed to fail without government assistance. 11 This was the first public articulation of the notion of “too big to fail.” 6 Other actions, beyond traditional banking, also contributed to the perception of an implicit government commitment to dampen financial instability, most notably the handling of the collapse of Penn Central in 1970, the response to the stock market crash of 1987 and the response to financial distress at Long-Term Capital Management in 1997. This history created a situation at the beginning of this century in which it was widely acknowledged that a large fraction of our financial system was believed to be backed by explicit or implicit government guarantees.12 In fact, in 2002 at the Richmond Fed we estimated that, as of the end of 1999, the share of financial sector liabilities likely to benefit from government protection was about 45 percent. Out of this, 27 percent was explicit protection, while the remaining 18 percent was implicit. 13 August 16, 2007 Turning to the crisis itself, the story should be more familiar. As home prices crested and began to decline in many markets in late 2006 and early 2007, the cumulative rates of default on the most recent vintage mortgages began to rise precipitously, particularly for loans with nonstandard features — low credit scores, low down payments and minimal documentation, for instance. The clear implication was that that the ultimate loss rates on those mortgages were going to exceed original expectations by a significant margin. Most of these loans had been securitized and sold, which dispersed the risk across the financial system. In early 2007, several firms involved in originating and securitizing such loans experienced financial distress, and some failed. The FOMC transcripts for 2007 show that as the housing market worsened — and strains emerged in housing finance — Committee participants actively discussed the likely magnitude of the fall out for the rest of the economy. Housing-related financial market turbulence came to a head in August 2007, particularly in the market for asset-backed commercial paper, or ABCP. These securities were backed by the issuer’s holdings of a variety of assets, including mortgage-backed securities of various types. A sponsoring financial firm — typically a large commercial or investment bank — wo uld transfer a portfolio of assets into a separate legal entity, which in turn would issue the commercial paper. As the incoming housing market data called into question the value of mortgage-backed securities, the spread between interest rates on ABCP and interest rates on comparable Treasury securities began to rise. As maturing paper came due, some sponsoring firms took the underlying assets back onto their own balance sheets, and the volume of ABCP issued fell dramatically. 14 With more banks turning to the unsecured interbank markets for funding, interest rates there rose significantly on August 9 and 10. In this environment the Fed took its first official action in response to the financial crisis. The FOMC typically sets a target value for the federal funds rate — the rate at which banks lend to each other in the overnight market. For many years the interest rate that the Federal Reserve Banks set on their discount window loans to banks had been set at a fixed margin of one percentage point over the federal funds rate target. On a videoconference call the evening of August 16, the FOMC decided to lower that spread to one half of a percentage point. 7 This move reflected a judgment that deteriorating conditions in the ABCP market were creating strains in the banking system that, without an expansion of Fed lending, threatened to reduce the supply of credit to the rest of the economy. The problem was compounded, in this view, by the stigma that banks seemed to associate with the Fed’s discount window — the idea that if counterparties found out that you borrowed from the window, they might downgrade their assessment of your creditworthiness. 15 Announced at 8 a.m. the morning of August 17, the Fed’s discount rate reduction — from 6 -1/4 percent to 5-3/4 percent — was meant to encourage more borrowing. Later that morning Fed officials spoke with a group of bankers and urged them not to think of borrowing from the Fed as a sign of weakness. The following week, the four largest U.S. banks borrowed from their discount windows on a coordinated basis to demonstrate the propriety of borrowing from the Fed. The diagnosis underlying the actions taken in August 2007 set the direction for policy prescriptions as the financial crisis unfolded; central bank credit would be used to alleviate strains in an inherently fragile financial system. When the flow of borrowing from the Fed seemed to remain relatively low even after the discount rate reduction, the Fed introduced new programs to push more credit out to the banking system, beginning with the Term Auction Facility, or TAF, in December 2007. This was followed by the rescues and an array of lending programs introduced over the course of 2008. At the time of the August 2007 discount rate cut, I questioned the presumption that the markets were suffering from a problem for which increased Fed credit was the solution. An alternative diagnosis of the situation was that the deterioration in housing market conditions was causing a fundamental revaluation of housing-related financial instruments. Because exposures to this revaluation were distributed throughout the financial system, uncertainty about the creditworthiness of counterparties had increased substantially, and this caused investors to demand higher-risk premiums in compensation. For ABCP sponsors, bringing assets back onto their balance sheet was often less costly than paying elevated premiums to investors. This explained the reduced volumes in the ABCP market, but it required raising funds from other sources, such as the interbank market, which in turn contributed to the observed volatility and elevated interest rates on the interbank market. The ABCP market didn’t “seize up,” under this interpretation, it simply moved elsewhere. Another source of additional bank funding in August 2007 was the Federal Home Loan Banks. These institutions are government-sponsored intermediaries that lend to their member banks. Because they are viewed as likely to be rescued by Congress in the event of distress, they generally can borrow from institutional investors at very favorable terms and pass on the funding advantage to their borrowers. Lending by the Home Loan Banks surged by $110 billion during the turmoil in August 2007 because they charged interest rates that were well below those charged by the Fed. Indeed, when the Fed began to auction off credit in the TAF, a large share of the borrowings was taken by foreign banks, which did not have access to Home Loan Bank funding. Evidence from research conducted since 2007 is consistent with the notion that increases in counterparty credit risk drove the financial market turmoil that August. A study by Daniel M. Covitz, Nellie Liang and Gustavo A. Suarez showed that the extent to which counterparties 8 pulled away from issuers of ABCP was directly related to the extent of their holdings of risky housing-related assets.16 And work by John Taylor and John Williams suggests that the evidence on the behavior of interest rate spreads around that time is consistent with counterparty risk.17 While these research results were not available to policymakers in real time, they do support the hypothesis that markets were responding in a plausibly efficient manner to a significant revision in expectations about the underlying economic fundamentals. If that’s true, then central bank lending, by subsidizing borrowers, is likely to have simply undercut the private lending that would have taken place. This increases moral hazard by reducing the perceived cost to financial institutions of getting into funding difficulty in the future. This trade-off between cushioning the blow of financial market disruptions and distorting banks’ incentives is typically thought of as a long-run issue. Because financial crises are relatively infrequent, the incentive distortion will only affect outcomes in the relatively distant future, in this view. This may be why policymakers often seem willing to act so aggressively against current turmoil and often seem confident that sufficient time remains to contain moral hazard effects through tougher regulation. But the crisis we have just been through tells a more complicated story. It wasn’t just some distant future crisis that was affected by the precedents being set; it was the next chapter in the current crisis. Each new move to expand institutions’ reliance on Fed lending also had the effect of increasing expectations of official support in the months ahead. So it seems quite plausible to me that the signal sent by the Fed’s lending actions in August 2007 dampened the willingness of troubled institutions, such as Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, to seek safer solutions to the strains they were facing — whether by raising capital , selling assets or reducing reliance on short-term funding. In March 2008, Bear and many other large investment banks remained dependent on overnight repo markets to fund holdings of some illiquid mortgage-related assets. The perceived likelihood of Fed support in the event that investors pulled away is bound to have influenced the choice to continue that dependence. When Bear lost funding in mid-March, the critical fear was that without government support, investors would pull away from other investment banks as well. Backstop lending was thus necessitated by expectations of backstop lending. The assisted purchase of Bear Stearns seems likely to have influenced in turn the perceptions of government support for other large financial institutions, which seems likely to have affected how such firms were positioned as the events of the fall unfolded. I believe that a more measured response by the Fed in August 2007 could have resulted in significantly less instability in 2008, although I recognize that I say this with the benefit of hindsight. Financial Stability Policy After the Crisis After the crisis, attention has naturally turned to financial reform. Not surprisingly, alternative visions of financial stability yield different prescriptions for the path forward. The main engine of post crisis financial policy is the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, a massive new rule book with enhanced standards for regulation and market practices. Both the inherent fragility view and the induced fragility view find voice in this legislation. 9 Accordingly, the law itself contains some internal contradictions: some good points, some bad points. There’s no doubt that interpretation and implementation of this law, and other policy actions to promote financial stability, will continue to be influenced by the alternative theoretical perspectives I’ve discussed. It would take a separate lecture to do justice to the Dodd-Frank Act. I will just highlight one project that in my view holds out the promise of improving financial stability no matter which view one subscribes to. Title I of Dodd-Frank requires that important financial firms submit credible “living wills” — that is, plans for exactly how they would be wound down in the event of bankruptcy. Credible plans for resolving large failing financial institutions without government support can bolster policymakers’ commitment to refrain from fragility-inducing rescues. And a detailed living will provides a road map for restructuring a firm so that it is not inherently fragile. Many commentators argue that the crisis discredited modern economic science. I disagree. As I have pointed out along the way, several economists warned long ago about the risks associated with maturity transformation and government backstops. For some commentators, the crisis demonstrated that financial arrangements are inherently more fragile than we had thought. But one could just as well argue that the crisis showed how much fragility can be induced by ambiguous rescue policy. There’s no doubt that the crisis will stimulate research for decades to come. Given the magnitude of the interventions we’ve seen, research that improves financial policy could yield enormous social benefits. In this connection I would note that our most recent estimates at the Richmond Fed are that, as of December 31, 2011, 57 percent of financial sector liabilities benefit from perceived government support. This is up from 45 percent over a decade ago and reflects in part an expansion of implied commitments based on new precedents set during this crisis. In my view, this growth in government support for the financial sector is not sustainable. As economic policy challenges go, I would rate this as second only to the looming federal fiscal imbalance. I sincerely hope we can make progress in the years ahead. 1 Graham Allison, “Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis,” 1st edition, New York: Little Brown, 1971. 2 Jeffrey Lacker, “Economics After the Crisis: Reflections on a Return to Madison,” Speech at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wis., October 3, 2011; and “Reflections on Economics, Policy, and the Financial Crisis,” Speech to the Kentucky Economic Association, Frankfort, Ky., September 24, 2010. 3 These transcripts are available online at http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomchistorical2007.htm. 4 I would like to thank John Weinberg, Kartik Athreya, Ned Prescott and Huberto Ennis for assistance in preparing this lecture. 5 Douglas W. Diamond and Philip H. Dybvig, “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy, June 1983, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 401-419. See also the Special Issue on the Diamond-Dybvig Model, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, First Quarter 2010, vol. 96, no. 1. 6 John H. Kareken and Neil Wallace, “Deposit Insurance and Bank Regulation: A Partial-Equilibrium Exposition,” Journal of Business, July 1978, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 413-438. 10 7 Perhaps not coincidentally, the 2007 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences was awarded to Leonid Hurwicz, Eric Maskin and Roger Myerson. See http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economics/laureates/2007/press.html. 8 Robert M. Townsend, “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State Verification,” Journal of Economic Theory, October 1979, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 265-293. 9 Douglas W. Diamond, “Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring,” Review of Economic Studies, July 1984, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 393-414. 10 States had earlier experimented with various deposit insurance programs, with only mixed results. 11 Comptroller of the Currency Todd Conover, testimony to the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions, Supervision, and Insurance, Committee on Banking, Finance, and Urban Affairs, U.S. House of Representatives, 98th Congress, 2nd session, September 18, 1984. 12 Gary H. Stern and Ron J. Feldman, “Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts,” Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2004. 13 John R. Walter and John A. Weinberg, “How Large Is the Federal Financial Safety Net?” Cato Journal, Winter 2002, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 369-393. 14 Daniel M. Covitz, Nellie Liang, and Gustavo A. Suarez, “The Evolution of a Financial Crisis: Panic in the Asset- Backed Commercial Paper Market,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series, no. 2009-36, August 2009. 15 Huberto Ennis and John Weinberg, “Over the Counter Loans, Adverse Selection and Stigma in the Interbank Market,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 10-07R, April 2010. Forthcoming, Review of Economic Dynamics. 16 See Covitz, Daniel M., Nellie Liang, and Gustavo A. Suarez (2009). 17 John B. Taylor and John C. Williams, “A Black Swan in the Money Market,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, January 2009, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 58-83. The authors also discuss other analyses that reach different conclusions from their own.
