Observations on Financial Stability Concerns for Monetary Policymakers By Eric S. Rosengren August 31, 2016 Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Shanghai Advanced Institute of Finance, Beijing, China Speaking at a conference in Beijing, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said it has been appropriate to be patient about normalizing interest rates, given that growth “has continued to underwhelm.” But the Fed’s mandated goals – stable prices and maximum sustainable employment – are likely to be achieved relatively soon, and “keeping interest rates low for a long time is not without risks.” As a result, important questions confront monetary policymakers in the United States, including when and how quickly to continue normalizing interest rates. Central banks must think about attaining their mandates “not only at the current time, but also through time” – weighing the benefits of low interest rates now against the potential costs in the future of possibly spurring instability. Firms and households faced with long periods of low returns may react by “reaching for yield” – buying riskier assets than one would otherwise in order to archive a desired profit or savings goal, Rosengren said. “Should a large negative shock occur, firms and households would be exposed to greater losses through their holdings of riskier assets than they would be if they were not reaching for yield.” He noted that in the United States, a potential side effect of very low interest rates has been rapid price appreciation in the commercial real estate sector. Exploring the potential risks of the increase in commercial real estate prices, Rosengren said that if the U.S. economy were to weaken, and underlying occupancy rates and rents became less favorable, a large decline in commercial real estate collateral values could lead to losses for banks. This scenario, while not his prediction, would have downstream effects on credit availability to firms and households. “In my view, commercial real estate is, by itself, unlikely to trigger financial stability problems. But should prevailing economic conditions change in response to a large negative economic shock, commercial real estate prices could decline relatively quickly, leading to large losses at leveraged firms.” Rosengren said that because commercial real estate debt is widely held by depository institutions, commercial real estate losses could erode banks’ capital ratios and lead to a contraction of credit availability for firms and households – similar to the credit crunch experience in the early 1990s. “The financial stability concerns that could arise from a low interest rate policy continuing for an extended period of time should be considered in conjunction with how best to achieve” the central bank’s full employment and price stability goals, “now and over time,” Rosengren concluded. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)

Exploring the Economy’s Progress and Outlook By Eric S. Rosengren September 9, 2016 Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share South Shore Chamber of Commerce, Quincy, Massachusetts Speaking to a local chamber of commerce, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said that to ensure the U.S. economy remains at the full employment level it is now approaching, gradual tightening of monetary policy is likely to be appropriate. He added that "a failure to continue on the path of gradual removal of accommodation could shorten, rather than lengthen, the duration of this recovery." The U.S. economy has remained "fairly resilient" despite headwinds from abroad, Rosengren said, pointing to the gradual tightening of labor markets and inflation slowly returning to the Fed's 2 percent inflation target. "My personal view, based on data that we have received to date, is that a reasonable case can be made for continuing to pursue a gradual normalization of monetary policy," he said. Rosengren noted that there have been some conflicting signals in the economic data over the summer. Payroll employment has been quite strong, he said, averaging just over 200,000 net new jobs per month over the past year. In contrast, Rosengren called real GDP growth for the first two quarters "disappointing" but observed that at least part of this weakness reflects temporary inventory adjustments that are likely to be reversed. "I expect some continuing drag from foreign activity," Rosengren added. "But underlying domestic strength is likely to be sufficient to engender continued improvement." Looking forward, Rosengren said that most forecasters expect that labor markets will continue to tighten and the unemployment rate will continue to fall. Commenting on risks to the outlook, Rosengren noted the presence of global concerns but said that "market indicators have so far provided little evidence of outsized risks." However, Rosengren cautioned that an overheated economy – one that significantly exceeds sustainable output and employment – would pose risks to maintaining full employment over time. History shows the difficulty of slowing the economy to a sustainable rate without going too far and causing a recession. Rosengren noted that waiting too long to tighten could lead to conditions that require more rapid increases, risking a more pronounced slowing of growth and rise in unemployment. It may also allow some asset markets to "become too ebullient," and he reiterated previous concerns over commercial real estate prices . "The risks to the forecast are becoming increasingly two-sided, in my view," Rosengren explained. "Weakness emanating from abroad poses short-term downside risks to the domestic U.S. economy," yet there are also "longer-term risks from significantly overshooting the U.S. economy's growth." collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)
