Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the National Agricultural Credit Conference, Washington, D.C. Share Good afternoon. It is a great pleasure for me to join the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City in welcoming you to the Federal Reserve Board for the 2019 National Agricultural Credit Conference. For nearly 80 years, these meetings have been at the forefront of important discussions for those with a stake in agricultural lending, with the first National Agricultural Credit meeting held in 1941. At that time and with war looming, there was a clear need to ensure that our nation's farmers had the resources and capability to support the nation in the wake of the great depression, deflation, and the dust bowl. This meeting provided a vital forum for candid conversation, to exchange information, and to forge relationships that would enable lenders to take steps to ensure a sound future for agriculture--a future supported by the efficient and effective provision of credit. In the decades since that first meeting, this conference has seen a number of boom and bust cycles in agriculture, most often the result of volatile swings in commodity prices, land price valuations, and borrowing costs for agricultural business owners. Through all of these challenges, this conference has provided an important opportunity to promote a greater understanding of emerging issues in agricultural finance. Further, the success of these meetings largely depends on the interactions of everyone here today, so I want to thank you for attending and for participating. I am honored to welcome you to the first conference meeting to be held at the Federal Reserve Board. And I'm pleased to support this group's mission to foster discussion on issues pertaining to ag finance, and I look forward to meeting with you and learning from the discussion. Today and tomorrow, we will discuss recent developments in agricultural credit markets. We will also hear from presenters on topics that connect in various ways to the agricultural sector. I am especially pleased to see there is a special focus on rural communities at this year's meeting. As many of you know, this topic holds a special place in my heart. My family has deep roots in rural Kansas and a long history in farming, ranching, and ag banking. I have spent much of my life and career living, working, and raising a family in a rural area. Rural communities are critical for our nation for many reasons including food production and processing, manufacturing, and leading innovation in these industries. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 97 percent of the country's land mass is rural, and about 60 million Americans call a rural community their home. 1 To put that number in perspective, the rural population of the United States is larger than the combined populations of the New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago metro areas. If we were talking about the economies of those great cities, we'd stress their regional differences, the complexities of demographic change, and the distinct challenges each city faces to remain vibrant and innovative. When the focus shifts to the rural economy, however, the discussion tends to be overly broad and simplistic. The diversity and complexity of our vast rural communities too often gets lost--and I think that needs to change. There are challenges in rural communities. We know them all too well. There is a notable gap in access to broadband. As of 2016, 31 percent of Americans in rural areas were not able to access broadband compared to just 2 percent of Americans in urban areas. 2 This can have a significant business impact on ag producers--for example, limiting access to internet-based cattle auctions or inhibiting the ability of dairies to leverage technology to remotely access animal nutritionists to formulate feed to maximize milk production. Many rural schools struggle to attract and keep qualified teachers who can teach STEM and advanced math classes. These subjects are vital to preparing our children for the opportunities and challenges of a more competitive and technological workplace. 3 One in five people in rural areas have a bachelor's degree, compared to one in three in urban areas. 4 This educational disparity helps explain why the employment-to-population and labor force participation rates in rural areas are lower than in many urban areas. 5 Another contributing factor to low rural labor force participation is the opioid crisis, which the entire nation is struggling to overcome. Policymakers need to be aware of and be willing to confront these issues. But let me be clear: I am optimistic about the future of rural America. The narrative of rural decline is too sweeping and brushes aside the diversity of the rural experience. Just as many cities thrive while others struggle, there are deteriorating rural communities and rural communities that are thriving and growing. So let's build on these successes and highlight a few of the positives. Following six years of steady population losses, up through 2016, the rural population appears to have stabilized. And while employment is growing more slowly in rural areas than in urban areas, rural unemployment has recovered and is now 1 percentage point below pre-recession levels. 6 The rate of poverty in rural areas is also falling. From a peak in 2013, the rural poverty rate has fallen 2 percentage points to 16.4 percent in 2017. There are also many creative and innovative rural communities. In manufacturing, innovation rates are similar for urban and rural manufacturers, although the services sector in rural areas lags its urban counterparts. 7 And, I am greatly encouraged to see younger generations choosing to live in and return to their roots in rural communities, just as my family and I chose to do. These younger generations are often seeking a rural lifestyle and a deeper connection to a smaller community‑‑a community where they can have a lasting impact. They are bringing with them the same innovative spirit they bring to so many industries. For example, some of these young entrepreneurs and farmers are capitalizing on the recent trend for broader access to locally produced and sourced food. Which brings us back to our focus today: agriculture is the foundation for many rural economies and it is the central topic for this conference. Current conditions in agriculture appear to be stable, though at a low level of income, following sharp declines for several years from the peak in 2013. The prices of major agricultural commodities have also remained low in early 2019. For example, today, the price of corn is about 40 percent less than it was from 2010 to 2013. As noted in the Federal Reserve's latest Financial Stability Report , farmland values are at exceptionally high levels, though down from their 2016 peak. And price-to-rent ratios are at historic highs. At the same time, equity levels at many farms are higher than in the past. We also see above-trend yields are helping to support many operators, though working capital at many farms has fallen along with incomes. Although the increase in problem loans associated with lower incomes has been modest, the Federal Reserve is monitoring the risk that has emerged in recent years. One risk that we are actively monitoring is the recent and devastating flooding in the Midwest and its effect on both agriculture and rural communities across the region. Our thoughts and prayers are with all those who live in the areas affected by this disaster. I would be especially interested to hear your thoughts on how the flooding may affect agricultural operations and how lenders are currently responding. The topics you are discussing today are integral to my role as governor. On Thursday, I will be visiting with and speaking to farmers and community bankers in Deming, New Mexico. An important part of my job is to hear directly from leaders like you and others across this country to better understand current challenges facing your communities, your companies, and your industry. My goal is to bring back the knowledge I gain from these discussions to inform and improve our work to support both the financial sector engaged in agricultural lending and our mission as the central bank of the United States. I hope that conferences like this will help generate a richer discussion about the challenges and unique advantages in rural America so we can develop more creative, effective and direct policy responses. A deeper debate that, for example, distinguishes between low-density and higher-density rural areas, between rural communities that are relatively isolated and those that are connected and close to thriving cities, will help us develop more durable solutions. Before I close, I want to thank you again, as well as the many people at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and from the Federal Reserve Board who helped organize this year's conference. Thanks to all of you for your work to ensure continued success for American agriculture. 1. U.S. Census Bureau, America Counts: Stories Behind the Numbers , " What Is Rural America? " August 9, 2017. Return to text 2. Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 2018 Broadband Deployment Report (Washington: FCC, February 2, 2018). Return to text 3. Megan Lavalley, Out of the Loop (PDF) (Alexandria, VA: Center for Public Education, January 2018). Return to text 4. U.S. Census Bureau, " New Census Data Show Differences between Urban and Rural Populations ," news release, December 8, 2016. Return to text 5. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Monetary Policy Report (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, February 22, 2019), 10–12. Return to text 6. Board of Governors, Monetary Policy Report , 10–12. Return to text 7. Tim Wojan and Timothy Parker, Innovation in the Rural Nonfarm Economy: Its Effect on Job and Earnings Growth, 2010–14 (PDF) (Washington: USDA, September 2017). Return to text Last Update: March 25, 2019 Back to Top

Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Ag Lenders Conference, sponsored by The Independent Community Bankers Association of New Mexico, Deming, New Mexico Share Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here today to discuss the important role agriculture plays in our economy, a role that is supported by many community banks. I would like to thank the Independent Community Bankers Association and their New Mexico state association for inviting me to participate in the conversation we will have today. In addition to the bankers and state leaders here, agricultural bankers and other leaders in the industry are listening in from around the country, and I look forward to hearing their views in a few moments. During our time together, I would like to offer some observations on the current state of the farm economy. And because I see community bankers as playing a vital role in this sector, I'll explain why I believe the community banking model is well-suited to supporting agricultural businesses. Finally, I will highlight the Federal Reserve's approach to supervising agricultural banks. As many of you know, before joining the Federal Reserve, I worked at a community bank that primarily served ranchers and farmers and the businesses that support them. More recently, as Kansas state bank commissioner, I supervised many banks whose business and customers were closely connected to the land and the people who work it. I now have the honor of being the first governor to fill the role designated for someone with community banking experience on the Federal Reserve Board, a position that was created by statute in 2015. 1 I plan to fulfill this unique responsibility by traveling widely and listening closely to community bankers, consumers, farmers, ranchers, and dairy farmers--all of the stakeholders with an interest in our work. My goal is to bring back the knowledge I gain from discussions and visits like the one we are having today and use it to improve our work. In doing so, I am confident our work will be more effective and efficient. And in the process, I hope to help you better understand the role of the Federal Reserve and what we are trying to accomplish. The Federal Reserve's monetary policy mandate is twofold: to promote maximum employment and stable prices. To do that, we continuously monitor the health of the U.S. economy in general, and because of its sizable share of overall activity, the agricultural sector in particular. U.S. agriculture and its related industries support about 22 million jobs in the United States and produce close to 10 percent of our exports. 2 A healthy farm economy also supports many rural and regional economies. We track commodity prices, ag credit, and exports as factors that influence our outlook on inflation and economic growth. As bank supervisors, we work to ensure safe and sound banking practices. We also monitor trends in asset quality and risk-management practices at agricultural banks as part of our ongoing assessment of the level and direction of risk at these financial institutions and within the agricultural economy. Earlier this week, I had the privilege of welcoming farm sector leaders to the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, where we hosted the 2019 National Agricultural Credit Conference. For nearly 80 years, this conference has brought together leaders in this sector to discuss important issues related to farm credit. Attendees at this year's conference recognized that, while the outlook for the farm economy in 2019 may be similar to a year ago, there are ongoing concerns that increasing stress on producers could lead to repayment difficulties. Farm incomes are expected to remain relatively low this year after declining sharply from the 2013 peak. The price of major agricultural commodities has also remained low in early 2019. For example, today, the price of corn is about 40 percent lower than it was from 2010 to 2013. Dairy producing states like New Mexico are well aware that average milk prices were about 15 percent lower in 2018 than from 2010 to 2013, and well below the highs of 2014. As noted in recent Federal Reserve System Beige Books, higher tariffs on soybeans and other U.S. exports and continued uncertainty over trade policy represent headwinds for American producers. Here in New Mexico, agricultural production rose 5 percent to $3.4 billion in 2017, with strong gains in milk production and livestock. Coming from a ranching family, I'm well aware of the challenges facing livestock producers. New Mexico is also the nation's second largest producer of pecans, producing a record 92 million pounds worth $220 million in 2017. I'm also looking forward to touring a farm later today to learn more about a crop we don't grow a lot of in Kansas--chili peppers. The demand for chili peppers and pecans grown in New Mexico is a good example of the kinds of regional variations we see in agriculture and many other industries. While it is important to understand regional trends, I would like to focus this morning on some overarching themes that have emerged in recent years. Recently, a great deal of attention understandably has been paid to an increase in the number of U.S. farm bankruptcies. While this is, of course, an important indicator to watch, it's equally important to note that the rise over the past few years has been fairly modest. Specifically, Chapter 12 filings increased from 360 in 2014 to about 500 in 2018. The Federal Reserve tracks these developments closely because of their potential implications for both the economy and banking supervision. The challenging outlook has prompted some to wonder if the industry is about to relive the hard times of the 1980s farm crisis. But here, I think, the historical contrast is somewhat reassuring. In the 1970s, farm income in the United States had advanced rapidly as exports surged. The broad increase in farm income led to a significant rise in capital investments in the years that followed. But exports began to soften and fell sharply after the suspension of trade with the then-Soviet Union. Farm incomes dropped, profits declined rapidly, and liquidity in the U.S. farm sector dried up. Other factors turned the sharp downturn into a crisis. High interest rates in the early 1980s, in response to the Great Inflation, contributed to the stress. 3 Despite the reductions in profits and liquidity, capital spending remained elevated in the early 1980s, and was financed with higher levels of debt made possible by rising land values. With debt burdens rising and incomes falling, many farm operations were forced to sell their land, causing the value of farmland to decline rapidly. The result was a sharp increase in farm bankruptcies and a number of bank failures. What about now? There are some similarities. Farm incomes rose rapidly from 2000 before reaching their peak in 2013 at $123 billion. 4 During that time, spurred by rising demand in China and a boom in biofuels, farmers invested heavily in new equipment and technology to meet this rising demand. And, in a troubling echo of the 1980s, farm incomes have now been cut roughly in half. That said, there are some important differences between the 1980s and today. With current inflation low and stable, interest rates are substantially lower than in the 1980s, and overall leverage has been less pronounced. And in contrast to the 1980s, farmland values have declined only modestly in recent years. The combination of relatively low interest rates and modest debt levels has resulted in more-manageable debt service requirements for many agricultural borrowers. 5 Some farm operations have faced significant financial stress, and it is important to recognize that there are still risks. Farmland prices are quite high, and working capital continues to decline. However, returns at banks with a concentration in agriculture have generally remained healthy, as most producers have continued to make loan payments despite weakening revenue streams. Let me shift focus now to the role of banks, particularly community banks, in the U.S. farm economy. Community banks foster strong long-term relationships with farmers, ranchers, and others involved in the local business of agriculture. Often, these relationships are cultivated through community bankers' service on local civic and business organizations or by participation with local farmers and their families in activities to support the local community and economy. Agricultural community banks and agricultural borrowers share a common goal of serving and strengthening their local communities. They are also responsible for providing jobs that maintain the viability of these rural communities. Frequently, community bankers' ties to local agricultural businesses include running family farms, ranches, orchards, and dairies. In other instances, members of the boards of directors that help to oversee community banks are heavily involved in the business of agriculture. These close connections to local agricultural businesses provide community banks with a unique and important perspective in helping to meet local agricultural credit needs. Additionally, community banks can be more agile than their larger competitors, as they employ lenders with a deep understanding of local products and conditions and are able to offer customized funding options in response to changing lending conditions. This agility ultimately allows for better informed lending decisions and provides agricultural borrowers with the means to fund their operations and sustain their communities. As bank supervisors, we pay close attention to the performance of all banks, including agricultural banks. Before we start our conversation today, I would like to discuss how the Federal Reserve approaches bank supervision with a focus on agriculture lending and the challenges our farmers and the community banks that support these operations are facing. Overview of Agricultural Banks There are approximately 1,400 "agricultural banks" in the United States, all of which play a vital role in providing rural producers with access to credit. 6 Agricultural banks hold approximately 50 percent of all agricultural loans outstanding at U.S. commercial banks. As I noted earlier, farm income has declined by approximately 50 percent since 2013, yet agricultural loans have steadily increased. Additionally, agricultural banks have more challenging funding structures given the seasonal funding needs of their agricultural customers and the difficulty of attracting deposits at rural institutions. This combination of a cyclical deposit base, lower inflows of deposits into rural community banks, and growing loan demand from agricultural borrowers has resulted in a greater dependence on borrowed funds to support the recent growth in agricultural lending. Approximately one-third of all agricultural banks are highly concentrated agricultural banks, and the number of these banks has declined slightly over the past several years--from 479 in December 2016 to 449 in September 2018. Although there are some unique risks and challenges for highly concentrated agricultural banks and their supervisors, these banks also generally remain in sound financial condition. And capital levels and liquidity metrics at most ag banks are generally in line with other banks that do not share these concentrations. While concentrated agricultural banks are currently operating with adequate capital ratios, regulators continue to closely monitor capital levels and to encourage prudent capital planning and concentration risk management, given the potential for unforeseen challenges and emerging risks associated with agricultural lending. With respect to liquidity, as previously noted, rapid asset growth can strain a bank's liquidity position if its funding sources turn out to be unstable. As supervisors, we work with bankers to understand their liquidity planning process, their challenges around attracting deposits, and the risks associated with potentially relying too heavily on noncore sources of funding. We have observed the increasing pressure on community banks to compete for deposits; however, we still see many community banks overcoming this challenge and effectively competing for deposits in their communities. Another key component of all community bank examinations is a focus on asset quality. Financial indicators for agriculture banks remain at manageable levels as highlighted by the nonperforming agricultural loans to total loans ratio of 1.36 percent as of September 2018. In addition to the traditional focus on the financial factors related to agricultural lending, the Federal Reserve has provided examiners with helpful insights into the appropriate treatment of agricultural carryover debt. We understand that bankers need to work constructively with borrowers when problems arise. And this is particularly true for highly concentrated agricultural banks, where maintaining enhanced agricultural credit risk-management practices to facilitate prudent underwriting, early detection of problems, and well-thought-out restructuring plans for agricultural borrowers are imperative to limiting losses and maintaining a sound banking institution. In 2011, the Federal Reserve also issued guidance to the industry on key risk factors in agricultural lending and supervisory expectations for a financial institution's risk-management practices. 7 This guidance applies in all economic environments, but it is especially important in periods of economic stress, because it reminds bankers that the identification of a troubled borrower does not prohibit a banker from working with the borrower. Many banks engaged in agricultural lending are located in communities where farming is the primary economic driver, and simply pushing every borrower with challenges out of the bank does not benefit the long-term interests of the bank or the community it serves. The Federal Reserve recognizes the benefits when lenders work prudently with troubled borrowers in a way that serves the long-term interests of all stakeholders. I would like to conclude by recognizing how fortunate we are to have so many highly skilled and experienced farmers and operators, and agricultural lenders who support them. Modern agriculture is a sophisticated and complex business that requires skilled forecasting of supply and demand, rigorous financial and operational management, and sharp technical expertise. Our farmers and operators are pushing forward the frontiers of agriculture. The integration of robotics, data analytics, geolocation, and advanced sensors holds the promise of a new, more efficient and productive era of "precision agriculture." A close working relationship between farmers and agricultural lenders is essential to the economic growth of agricultural borrowers and the continued success of many rural communities. The outlook for U.S. agriculture is challenging, though agricultural banks remain relatively stable. As such, it is important for the Federal Reserve to continue to tailor effective supervision and regulation to ensure the safety and soundness of agricultural banks, while also making sure that undue burden does not constrain the capacity of these institutions to continue supporting the agricultural communities that they serve. 1. Terrorism Risk Insurance Program Reauthorization Act of 2015 (Pub. L. 114-1, 129 Stat. 3). Return to text 2. See U.S Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service at https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-essentials/ag-and-food-sectors-and-the-economy/ . Return to text 3. Jerome H. Powell, " Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy " ( speech at Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24, 2018). Return to text 4. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, " Highlights from the March 2019 Farm Income Forecast ." Return to text 5. Cortney Cowley and Ty Kreitman , " Farmland Values Stable, but Risks to Outlook Remain ," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, February 14, 2019. Return to text 6. Agricultural banks are defined as banks with farm production and farm real estate loans equal to 25 percent or more of total loans. Return to text 7. See Supervision and Regulation SR Letter 11-14, " Supervisory Expectations for Risk Management of Agriculture Credit Risk ." Return to text Last Update: March 28, 2019 Back to Top

Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Washington, D.C. Share Thank you to the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) for this opportunity to share my perspective and some of my goals as a Federal Reserve Board governor on issues of interest to you and many in your states. 1 I emphasize that word "perspective" because the view from Washington can be very different from how things look in your states and communities. No one knows that better than I do, of course, because not so long ago, I was sitting where you are, enjoying the dinner provided by CSBS and hearing the perspective from Washington. I'm still enjoying the dinner tonight, but find I am now, so to speak, also on the menu. And in this position, as part of the Federal Reserve but also still deeply rooted in my experience as a community banker and state regulator, I'll offer my thoughts on forging a closer relationship and strengthening communication between the Board of Governors and state banking commissioners. First, to establish some context, let me say a few words about the Fed's role and perspective on supervising community banks. The lion's share of community banks are those with total assets of $500 million or less, with the Fed defining the sector as those with up to $10 billion in assets. The Federal Reserve directly supervises 731 state-chartered community banks, which is only a small share of the number of state-chartered banks overseen by CSBS members. The fact that this is only a small share of the total might sound to some people like the Federal Reserve has only a small role in community banking. But it's important to remember that the Fed is the primary federal supervisor responsible for all bank and thrift holding companies, a total of 3,912. This includes the vast majority of all community banking organizations. The Fed also influences the supervision of all community and regional banks by developing both safety and soundness and consumer rules to implement laws passed by Congress, applicable to insured depositories and their holding companies. Typically this is done in collaboration with other federal agencies and after seeking the public's input. I mention Congress and these other agencies to emphasize that the Fed shares responsibility for writing and implementing federal regulations for community banks. Now, let me describe my role. In addition to my broader responsibilities in supervision and regulation, I am Chair of the Board's Smaller Regional and Community Banking subcommittee, which oversees our work in this area. I am also the Chair of the Board's committee tasked with oversight of our rulemaking and supervision on consumer issues. I also participate in carrying out the Federal Reserve's other responsibilities, such as conducting monetary policy and overseeing the payment system. But it's fair to say that my background in community banking was an important reason I was chosen and confirmed by Congress as the first person to fulfill a new requirement that at least one governor have primary experience working in or supervising community banks. My background and commitment to community banking is also some important context for what I have to say about the Fed's interests in improving communication with the members of CSBS. I mentioned a moment ago that the perspective in Washington, and from the Board, can be different from the view from your position as banking commissioners, and that is certainly true. But one thing I have learned, since joining the Board in November, is that my fellow governors, along with the staff at the Board, share your view, as I do, about the vital importance of community banking and the essential role community banks play in our financial system. Community banks are frequently the economic engines supporting and driving the economies of many communities, especially in rural areas. In these communities, they are the primary providers of financial services for individuals and small businesses, and a source of financial advice and civic leadership. They play an indispensable role in areas not served by larger institutions and in other communities of all different sizes, from urban to rural, serving a range of customers, including some that are sometimes not as high a priority for larger banks. I think it is important to note, and too often overlooked, that the vast majority of community banks managed their risks well in the years leading up to and during the financial crisis and were not the source of the excessive risk taking that caused the crisis. For this reason among others, the Federal Reserve has been engaged in an active effort to tailor regulations, including those issued in the wake of the financial crisis, to appropriately reflect the potential risk that an institution might pose to financial stability. I am pleased to see some evidence we are making progress. Last year's CSBS survey found that community banks reported a decrease in regulatory costs in 2017. 2 This was the first reduction in burden reported since the survey began in 2014. The decline was attributed to the implementation of changes stemming from the recent review by the banking agencies under the EGRPRA, the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996. There has been progress in tailoring regulations that affect community banks, and I believe more progress lies ahead as we implement the changes that Congress included in S. 2155 and explore additional opportunities to reduce burden while maintaining the resiliency and strength of smaller banks. 3 Before I go further, let me give a brief assessment of how community banks are faring. This might seem like an issue that is primarily of interest to community bankers and regulators, but I don't look at it that way at all. One of my most important responsibilities now is voting on the monetary policy decisions of the Federal Open Market Committee, and that requires me to closely and constantly monitor the health of the U.S. economy. And when community banks are the source for more than half of all lending to small businesses, which together account for two-thirds of private sector job creation, then the health of community banking has a big influence on the health of the U.S. economy. 4 Since the financial crisis, the health of the community-banking sector has improved significantly. Over those years and today, the large majority of community banks have maintained sound levels of capital. Although the number of community banks in the United States continues to fall due to consolidation, overall the sector continues to post strong earnings, which, in turn, contribute to maintaining healthy capital positions. One measure of this strong financial position is that no community banks failed in 2018. The shared responsibility we have as financial supervisors to ensure the ongoing viability of community banks requires cooperation and coordination. We must continue to ensure that the institutions we supervise are proactively managing their risks to remain strong. It's our job to identify emerging risks to community banks and to ensure bankers are identifying and managing their risks appropriately. We want to ensure that loans are underwritten prudently and that bankers are actively managing the concentrations of credit risk in their portfolios. We welcome the strong lending growth that many community banks are experiencing, which is fueling job creation and sustaining our economic expansion, which in July will become the longest in U.S. history. But strong lending growth must be supported by prudent, well-managed funding plans in order to manage the risk that strains on liquidity may arise more quickly than is sometimes anticipated. Now, let me turn back to my main theme today, which is fostering better communication between CSBS and state banking commissioners and the Board of Governors. Improved communication is a top priority for me for several reasons. First, it is very much my approach to government service, and leadership in particular, to do a lot of listening. A wise person once said that the most effective leaders do more listening than talking. When I became Kansas' State Bank Commissioner, I started a twice-yearly series of roundtables with the chief executives of banks across the state. It was an excellent way for me to better understand the issues that were impacting bankers in a way that was less formal than when banks comment on rules and less fraught than the supervisory process. Sure, it took time away from the office, from consultation with the legislature, and the deadlines all of us have faced. In my case, considering the size of Kansas, it was also time away from home and family. However, I don't have to tell those of you who have also found a lot of merit in such tours that it is an enormous advantage to find out what is on the minds of those in the field. The second, very straightforward reason to foster better communication with all of you is that the nature of financial regulation and supervision in the United States argues strongly for better coordination. To a much greater extent than in other nations, in the United States financial oversight is divided between the federal government and subnational authorities--the states. At the federal level, responsibility is further divided between different agencies, such as the Fed, the FDIC, the Office of Comptroller of the Currency, and the National Credit Union Administration. This system evolved over time, and as things stand, there are some advantages to this specialization. But this division of labor may, at times, inhibit information sharing, and as a general principle, better communication can help overcome this challenge. More specifically, better communication and information sharing between state banking commissioners and the Federal Reserve can further improve the early identification and resolution of emerging issues at community banks. Harnessing and sharing these sometimes divergent views can serve to strengthen a financial regulatory system that shares responsibility among many state and federal agencies. Better communication and information sharing will benefit both you and the Federal Reserve, but my motivation is that the Fed has much to gain here. Because states are responsible for chartering and co-supervising the large majority of community banks, they can provide a broader perspective into local community banking issues and trends. Let me pause here for a moment and say that improving communication doesn't necessarily mean that the Federal Reserve and the CSBS members will always agree. We won't, and perhaps we shouldn't. A diversity of views can be a strength. A robust discussion requires a thorough analysis of differing views, which leads to a more informed understanding of issues. This healthy give and take is the fourth reason for better communication: It leads to better outcomes. I will cite one example that I know is on the minds of many of you--the rulemaking process the agencies are currently engaged in on the community bank leverage ratio (CBLR). Here is an excellent example of where it makes good sense to consult closely. I know you have a lot of knowledge and expertise to bring to bear on this issue, which helps explain why Congress has required the agencies to consult with the states. As you know, the Fed and the other agencies are now gathering and evaluating comments on the CBLR and getting feedback on this interagency proposal. So, now is a good time to re-engage. I am committed to re-engaging with you on the interagency proposal and ways we might be able to improve it. I am eager to hear your thoughts. I have one more reason for better communication, but first I will give you an idea of what I have in mind for that consultation. The formal means by which CSBS and others comment on a rulemaking is important, but I think we would also all benefit from more informal, and more frequent contact. If you have an issue, if you have something to say, just pick up the phone. It is also my intention to be on the road a lot, visiting Federal Reserve Districts and talking to bankers, consumers, and community groups. When I come to your state, I hope to see you, and I promise to make time to talk. My final reason for better communication brings me back to a point I made at the outset: the United States needs a strong community-banking sector. We need strong community banks because they help support strong communities. Strong communities are the building blocks of a strong nation. They provide safety, education and economic opportunities, and help define the values we hold dear. Community banks are vital to the success of communities. They help us save and plan for a better future. The credit they extend helps preserve farming as a way of life for American families, and provides the means for small businesses to start and to thrive, which is so important to the health of communities. This is not an abstract notion for me. As a community banker, I have seen how access to credit and support from a financial institution with deep roots in a community can make a direct and immediate difference in people's lives. I continued to feel that way when I did the job you do, as a state banking commissioner, helping ensure that families and communities have access to financial services that are so important to their success. I enjoyed being a community banker, and I hope you know I've enjoyed working closely with all of you as a banking commissioner, and I now look forward to building a stronger partnership between all of you and the Federal Reserve Board. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. I hope to see you soon in your states, and I wish you a productive and enjoyable visit to Washington. 1. My views are my own and do not represent the view of the Board of Governors or its other members. Return to text 2. Federal Reserve System, Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., 2018 Community Banking in the 21st Century (PDF) (Research and Policy Conference, October 3-4, 2018). Return to text 3. Pub. L. No. 115-174, 132 Stat. 1296 (2018) Return to text 4. U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy, Frequently Asked Questions About Small Business (PDF) (August 2018). Return to text Last Update: April 02, 2019 Back to Top

Governor Michelle W. Bowman At the "Fed Family" Luncheon at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California Share Today I would like to share a few observations on innovation as it relates to the business of community banking. In particular, I will focus on opportunities for community banks to innovate through collaboration with fintech firms. I'll also discuss the role our regulatory structure plays in those relationships. 1 Community banks, like just about every other industry, are learning to adapt to a new world of rapid innovation and shifting consumer expectations. Consider the personal loan market. TransUnion estimates that, about a decade ago, fintech lenders generated less than 1 percent of personal loans. 2 Today, fintech firms originate a larger share of personal loans than banks. 3 This is not all bad news for banks, though. And we should not simply assume that gains by fintech lenders are necessarily at the expense of banks. A large share of fintech lending is actually originated by bank partners working with fintech firms. Similarly, the funds that flow between a fintech lender and borrowers almost always travel across the payment services of a bank. So, while the changes in the market pose potential competitive threats to banks, the changes also raise potential new opportunities for banks. This is especially true for community banks, which are frequently the banks working most closely with fintech lenders. Competition or collaboration? Not too long ago commentators were looking at the impact of fintech on community banking as a zero-sum game. In fact, many wondered whether fintech firms would put community banks out of business. 4 Recent surveys show how much the discussion has evolved. Rather than fear fintech, more and more community bankers are trying to determine how to adjust their businesses to make the best use of new technologies. For example, in the 2018 Survey of Community Banks by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), small banks almost universally agreed that fintech firms are not currently their primary competitor. 5 These findings are consistent with data from the 2018 Small Business Lending Survey by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). 6 In contrast, almost half of large banks identified fintech firms as frequent competitors. The FDIC opined that this was likely because large banks, like fintech firms, rely heavily on data and automated technology when making loans. A much lower percentage of small banks--only about 10 percent--saw fintech firms as current competitors. As I'll discuss later, it's likely that the relationship-driven nature of community bank business models helps insulate these banks from fintech competitors. The most interesting possibilities emerged in survey responses about small banks working together with fintech firms as partners. The community bank respondents to the CSBS survey included numerous anecdotes and observations about the important opportunities fintech offered community banks to diversify their products, extend their reach, and offer more efficient services for their customers. 7 Indeed, fintech firms may complement the activities of community banks well. For example, while small businesses may value the relationships that local bankers offer, they don't like the lengthy process of filling out loan applications, waiting for credit decisions, and the time it takes small banks to make funds available. 8 Those are precisely the types of issues that data-driven, smartphone-based fintech firms are good at addressing. 9 At the same time, community banks' particular advantages, mainly their strong relationships with their small business customers, would be difficult for smartphone-based fintech apps to replicate. Let me give you an example: During last year's community bank research conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 10 a community bank based in Santa Barbara described the harrowing months around the end of 2017. As you know all too well, a massive wildfire, followed by a deadly series of mudslides, caused devastating damage and five emergency evacuations of Montecito, California. 11 Within 24 hours of the wildfires and mudslides, the community bank declared an emergency and began executing its disaster response strategy. 12 The bank used a wide range of communication channels, from Facebook to text messaging, to keep in touch with its employees and its customers. It created a disaster assistance package for personal and small business borrowers. The bank offered new lines of credit (including a 24-hour turnaround on small business lines). It made payment deferrals on already-existing loans and provided free safe deposit boxes. The bank even delivered more than 15,000 water bottles and offered more than 1,500 respirators for local residents at its branches. Small businesses value that level of commitment to local customers. And they recognize the benefits of working with local community banks that understand their regions and businesses. The relationship-based nature of community bank lending helps small businesses that often lack the detailed balance sheets or detailed income statements required by larger banks. 13 Even when small businesses do have the right paperwork, large banks are still less likely to engage in lending at small bank levels. That's because the transaction costs for underwriting a $100,000 loan are comparable to a $1 million loan. None of this is lost on small businesses, which, according to the Federal Reserve's Small Business Credit Survey, continue to express greater satisfaction with small banks compared to both big banks and fintech lenders. 14 This is not to say that the community banks' advantages cannot be challenged by technology. Many fintech firms are currently looking to leverage their deep ties with other aspects of small businesses--their payment processing services or accounting software, for instance--to build data-driven lending products that are tied to the day-to-day operations of small businesses. Fintech lenders can provide easy-to-use online applications, rapid loan decisionmaking, and customer service that helps bring low cost, automated decisionmaking to the small loan segment that was previously left to community banks. Partnering with a fintech firm can offer a community bank the best of both worlds. The bank can take advantage of new technology and all the efficiencies that come with it as an extension of the banks' relationship-banking model. In a sense, fintech is just the latest evolution of a long history of community banks leveraging technology to provide financial services. I'm thinking here of technologies, such as ATMs, mobile banking, and remote deposit capture. 15 For their part, community banks offer potential fintech partners a consumer-first approach to business and a number of advantages: deposit insurance and liquidity; a stable customer base; credibility in a local community; and settlement and compliance services. 16 I thought one response to the CSBS survey said it best. The banker wrote, "[T]he future of consumer banking seems to be as a participant in the ecosystem of lifestyle technological solutions rather than as a standalone banking relationship." The problem is, as the banker continued, "[I]t's hard to imagine what exactly that will look like and how it will change the banking business model." 17 What can the Federal Reserve do to foster prudent community bank innovation? I believe that if a bank has not started thinking about how innovation may impact its business, it is very late to the game. This does not mean that every bank has to run out this afternoon and partner with a fintech firm--there may be all kinds of thoughtful reasons not to engage with them. What matters is that banks, particularly community banks, have gone through the process of thinking about the relevant issues. 18 But there are many questions about how community banks are adjusting to the changing environment. For instance, about 40 percent of community banks say that they do not currently offer online loan applications and have no immediate plans to do so. 19 That 40 percent may represent bankers who have not gone through the process of thinking about the way innovation impacts their business. But it could just as easily include bankers who have looked at the issue carefully and concluded that online loan applications do not fit within their business model. Most importantly, though, it may indicate that some community banks may feel that they are simply not able to leverage new technology. Most small banks are dependent on partnerships with third parties to make use of new technologies. 20 I am concerned that some banks are not innovating because they feel they lack the ability to navigate the complex regulatory and compliance issues that may arise. Among other requirements, for instance, before a bank partners with a fintech firm, it first has to consider regulatory and supervisory expectations regarding third-party risk management. Written guidance may allow for risk-based or more tailored approaches, but a number of factors contribute to what the Treasury Department recently described as, "more stringent de facto regulation." In particular, Treasury raised concerns that banks that are worried about criticism from examiners might, "adopt a more uniformly stringent vendor oversight approach rather than trying to convince their examiners to permit a more tailored approach to vendor oversight." 21 And this may ultimately deter banks from trying to explore how they should be adapting their business strategies in light of technological change. Given these concerns, what is the Federal Reserve Board's role, as a bank supervisor, in helping community banks chart their way through changing times? Let me be clear. It is management's job, not an examiner's job, to set the bank's innovation strategy. However, I think supervisors need to recognize and be thoughtful about how we might affect the way banks consider innovation. In particular, I think it's important that we fulfill our responsibilities to ensure safety and soundness of banks and consumer protection, while also creating a regulatory environment that does not hinder the integration of responsible innovation into the strategic direction that a bank opts to pursue. Here at the Federal Reserve, I think it's vital that we look closely at our work to make sure we are not hindering prudent innovation between community banks and fintech firms. We need to think about how our guidance sets expectations for the way banks should engage third parties. We should explore more effective ways to interact with banks, including through new types of outreach and education. To begin with, I recognize the need to ensure that our outsourcing risk management guidance appropriately reflects the present-day business realities of the banks that we supervise. For instance, regulators' third-party risk management frameworks discuss particular types of contractual terms and, where appropriate, audit rights by a bank over its service providers. However, when a community bank is in negotiations with large vendors, such as cloud service companies and core service providers, they may not be in a position to make demands. As the largest vendors grow even larger, this will get even harder for small banks. 22 Concerns about compliance can also make it difficult for a community bank to work with small partners. A small fintech firm may lack a traditional financial history, raising questions about how a bank can evaluate the fintech firm's status in the industry, corporate history, or financial condition. It certainly can be difficult for a small bank's staff to evaluate a wide range of potential technology vendors. I am heartened to hear that small banks are increasingly collaborating to vet third-parties. Services are also emerging to help deliver due diligence information to banks and monitor their third-party relationships. Of course, the ultimate responsibility should always lie with bank management, as each relationship involves particular services, for particular needs, for a particular risk profile. However, it seems sensible that a large amount of the vetting, contracting, and onboarding process could be streamlined for banks by collaboration or specialized third-party services. We are also looking to engage industry more frequently and openly so that we understand how they are weighing questions relating to innovation and how bank regulators may or may not impact those considerations. Along those lines, we continue to look for new ways for regulated institutions to interact with the Federal Reserve System outside of the examination process. In particular, supervised institutions, vendors, or consumer advocates are encouraged to contact their local Reserve Bank; talk with us about the issues they face; and, in some cases, ask clarifying questions about relevant legal frameworks and supervisory expectations. Conclusion As regulators and banks adjust to this post-crisis age of innovation, it is important for us to understand the pain points for community banks. As a regulator, my priority will always be facilitating a banking system that is safe and sound and in which consumers are treated fairly. But regulators also have to ask: How can our approach to supervision be modernized so that it supports responsible innovation by our supervised institutions? The efforts I described today are hopefully just a start. I am looking forward to personally engaging with community bankers, vendors, and consumer advocates to hear their perspectives on the most productive ways for the Federal Reserve Board to help community banks thrive in this age of innovation. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. TransUnion, " FinTechs Taking Larger Share of Personal Loan Market While Increasing Portfolio Risk-Return Performance ," press release, November 2, 2017. Return to text 3. TransUnion, " Fact versus Fiction: Fintech Lenders ," (2017) (finding that fintech firms and banks originate 38 percent and 28 percent of personal loans, respectively). See also Kate Rooney, "Fintechs help boost US personal loan surge to a record $138 billion," CNBC , February 24, 2019. Return to text 4. See, for example, Kate Rooney, " Small banks you've never heard of are quietly enabling the tech takeover of the financial industry ," CNBC , February 15, 2019. Return to text 5. The primary exception was survey responses regarding mortgage lending, where just under 5 percent of respondents identified fintech firms as a primary source of competition. See CSBS Community Bank Survey, " Community Banking in the 21 st Century (PDF) " (paper presented at the Sixth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, St. Louis, MO, October 3-4, 2018). See also Allen N. Berger, William Goulding, Tara Rice, "Do small businesses still prefer community banks?," Journal of Banking & Finance 44 (July 2014): 264-278 (finding that small banks may have less strong relationships with small businesses, potentially due to changes in lending technologies and deregulation of the banking industry). Return to text 6. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FDIC Small Business Lending Survey (PDF) (Washington: FDIC, 2018). Return to text 7. One Missouri bank described how it uses new technologies (and partnerships) to be one of the first banks in its market to offer video banking services. See also CSBS Community Bank Survey in note 5. Return to text 8. See, for example, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, Kansas City, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, St. Louis, San Francisco, Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms (PDF) (Federal Reserve System, 2017). Return to text 9. For example, focus group participants were limited to small businesses with 1 to 20 employees, excluding owners, and at least $200,000 but less than $2 million in revenue. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Browsing to Borrow: "Mom & Pop" Small Business Perspectives on Online Lenders (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, June 2018). Return to text 10. The annual conference is jointly-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Return to text 11. See Lou Whiteman, " How the 'Best Banks' handle the wrath of Mother Nature ," American Banker , September 4, 2018). See also Brooke Holland, " In Case of Emergency, Planning Pays Off for Montecito Bank & Trust After Fire and Debris Flows ," Noozhawk , July 29, 2018. Return to text 12. The bank had finalized its disaster relief strategy in 2016, anticipating potential roadway closures and shutdowns from the predicted El Niño season. Return to text 13. See, for example, Karen Gordon Mills and Brayden McCarthy, " The State of Small Business Lending: Credit Access during the Recovery and How Technology May Change the Game (PDF) ," Harvard Business School Working Paper 15-004 (Cambridge: Harvard Business School, July 2014). Return to text 14. Results show net satisfaction scores for small banks as 73 percent, large banks as 49 percent, and online lenders as 35 percent. See Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms in note 8. Return to text 15. See, for example, The Independent Community Bankers of America, Fintech Strategy Roadmap for Community Banks (PDF) (Washington: The Independent Community Bankers of America, March 2018). Return to text 16. Fintech Strategy Roadmap . Return to text 17. See CSBS Community Bank Survey in note 5. Return to text 18. The National Risk Committee at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) warns that, "[f]ailure to appropriately consider innovation and the responsible adoption of technology could pose strategic risk to some banks." See also Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Semiannual Risk Perspective (PDF) (Washington: OCC, Fall 2018). The OCC has long raised concerns that the strategic risks are particularly acute for community banks as compared to large banks that have the resources to fund innovation labs or even purchase mature fintech firms. See, for example, Lalita Clozel, " OCC's Curry: Fintech a 'Strategic Risk' for Small Banks ," American Banker , November 18, 2016. Return to text 19. See CSBS Community Bank Survey in note 5. Return to text 20. More than two-thirds of respondents to the Conference of State Bank Supervisor's annual survey of community banks reported that they rarely or never rely on in-house technology for online loan applications and other digital products. See also CSBS Community Bank Survey in note 5. Return to text 21. U.S. Department of Treasury, A Financial System that Creates Economic Opportunities: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF) (Washington: Department of Treasury, July 2018). "Smaller, nonbank fintech firms and banks have raised concerns that the overall burden of the third-party supervisory regime stifles the ability of new firms to partner with banks. . . . [C]ommunity banks have expressed concern about their capacity to undertake the requisite due diligence and ongoing vendor management (especially with larger vendors)." Return to text 22. See, for example, Penny Crosman, " Fiserv-First Data: Why small banks fear big fintech ," American Banker , January 16, 2019. Return to text Last Update: April 11, 2019 Back to Top
