Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Community Banking in the 21st Century" Sixth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri Share Watch Live Good morning. I want to thank the conference organizers for inviting me to speak to you today. 1 It is an honor and a pleasure to be part of this unique annual event that brings together bankers, bank supervisors, and researchers to discuss the latest community banking research, recent trends in community banking practices, and policy issues that are on the minds of conference attendees. I want to start, first, by conveying my own perspective on the importance of community banks. Community banks have a long history of providing essential financial services to households, small businesses, and small farms in communities across the United States. Their ability to effectively provide these services speaks to the strength of the community banking business model--that is, establishing and maintaining local relationships, and offering customers a face-to-face interaction with a local banker. And it is something I have observed firsthand, especially for community banks in rural communities. Growing up in rural Colorado and Utah, I saw the importance of community bankers having local knowledge and being personally invested in the same communities that they serve. That local knowledge, and the relationship-based lending that is the hallmark of community banking, can stem losses during downturns, as community banks may be able to work with borrowers to avoid losses. Indeed, research has shown that small business lending at small banks declined less severely than at large banks during the last recession. 2 At the same time, I have seen the challenges that many community banks face. I want to be careful not to overstate those challenges--to paraphrase Mark Twain, the reports of your demise are greatly exaggerated--and I believe that the community bank model has many advantages and will continue to play an integral role in our financial system. These sorts of dynamics are one reason that community banks are an important topic for research. As you probably know, this is the sixth annual community banking conference cosponsored by the Federal Reserve and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), and it is the first conference for which the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is joining as a cosponsor. The organizers of the inaugural conference decided that, rather than holding a traditional academic-style conference, they would invite bankers and bank supervisors to hear what the researchers had to say and to share their real-world experience with the researchers. The hope was that these interactions would prove beneficial to all three groups. The positive feedback that we have received from conference attendees over the past five years strongly supports the wisdom of the organizers' decision. Over time, the conference has evolved, with some new features introduced each year. The Case Study Competition, which is sponsored by the CSBS, introduces undergraduates to community banking and some of the challenges that community bankers face. The Emerging Scholars Program was also added to the conference a few years ago. This program is intended to support Ph.D. students who are considering or working on a dissertation on a banking-related topic and encourage them to develop a research agenda that focuses on community banking issues. I would like to congratulate this year's winning case study team, Eastern Kentucky University, and emerging scholars, Jiayi Xu, Cao Fang, and Flora Ma. Not All Community Banks Are the Same Turning to the topic of today's speech, it occurs to me that we often speak of community banks as though they are all pretty much the same. But, in reality, there is considerable heterogeneity within the group of firms that are commonly considered to be community banks. 3 One important dimension of diversity is size, which can range anywhere from less than $100 million in assets to around $10 billion in assets. As noted by Chairman Powell when he spoke at this conference two years ago, looking at community banks as a monolithic group masks some important differences between the smallest and largest community banking organizations. 4 For example, essentially all of the decline in the number of community banking organizations over the past two decades has taken place among those with assets less than $100 million. And these smallest banking organizations have consistently had a lower average rate of return on assets than their larger peers. Another significant aspect of diversity among community banks is the type of market served--urban versus rural. These two types of areas differ in many respects, including the age distribution of the population, the share of the population with a college degree, homeownership rates, poverty rates, and the share of the population with internet access. 5 And while the national population has been growing over the past 20 to 30 years, many rural areas have experienced population declines, and the share of the population living in rural areas has been falling. 6 Furthermore, since 2008, most job growth in the United States has occurred in urban areas. 7 Given these differing circumstances, it is not surprising that community banks operating in rural and urban areas tend to face different challenges. For example, the number of competitors faced by a banking organization tends to be larger in urban banking markets than in rural markets, while hiring and retaining high-quality employees can be more difficult in rural areas. And some observers have expressed concern about the implications of bank consolidation over the past two or three decades for access to banking services in rural areas while also wondering about the future viability of rural community banks. The number of community banks has been declining over the last 20 years, but community banks still account for more than 95 percent of banks operating in the United States. The decline has been roughly similar for urban and rural community banks, leaving the share of community banks that operate primarily in rural markets quite stable at just over 50 percent. While urban community banks are quite a bit larger than rural community banks on average, over the last 20 years, rural community banks have consistently earned higher rates of return on assets and rates of return on equity than their urban peers despite a more challenging economic environment. While the data present a compelling high-level picture, they do not tell the whole story. For example, averages across a large number of markets do not tell us what is going on in any individual market. In addition, much of the data that I am presenting today is aggregated to the county level, which obscures community-level dynamics: Some communities within a county may have lost banks or bank branches, while others may have gained. In the rural Mountain West, where I grew up, a single county can be physically larger than some Eastern states. And the demographics of the communities--for example, high- or low-income--that have lost or gained are also not visible, but important. Federal Reserve staff are engaged in efforts to further our understanding of the effects of losses of banks or bank branches on the people who live and work in the affected communities. National Trends in Urban versus Rural Community Banks over the Past 20 Years The number of banks in the United States fell by almost half over the past 20 years--from about 10,700 in 1997 to about 5,600 in 2017. About 97 percent of the decrease was accounted for by community banks. Looking at the trend in the number of urban and rural community banks ( figure 1 ), we see that the number of banks in both of these categories has been falling over time. The rate of decline was steeper for rural banks than for urban banks before the financial crisis but has reversed in the post-crisis period. This reversal may be due to the fact that, as we will see momentarily, urban community banks suffered more severe losses in the immediate post-crisis period than did rural community banks. And the share of community banks that operate primarily in rural markets has increased slightly, from 53 percent to 54 percent. While there are more rural community banks than urban community banks, the latter consistently account for a larger volume of deposits, loans, and offices than the former. This difference is due, in part, to the average size of an urban community bank, in terms of total assets, being about two and a half to three and a half times that of the average rural community bank ( figure 2 ). As community banks have increased in asset size, they have also grown their branch networks. The average number of branches for an urban bank is about 1.7 to 2 times that of a rural bank ( figure 3 ). Looking next at the total amount of deposits held by all urban community banks and all rural community banks, we can see that both have been trending upward over time ( figure 4 ). Growth in total loans outstanding was strong for both urban and rural community banks between 1997 and 2008 ( figure 5 ). Declines in lending between 2008 and 2011 were more severe for urban community banks than rural ones. Coming out of the recent recessions, rural community banks have seen quite modest loan growth since 2011, while the pace of growth in urban community bank lending has been strong since 2013. This divergence in recent growth rates may be due to the fact that the recovery from the recent recession has been much more robust in urban areas than in rural areas of the country. When it comes to performance measures, rural community banks consistently outperform urban community banks with regard to return on assets ( figure 6 ) and return on equity ( figure 7 ). This difference was particularly pronounced during the financial crisis, when profitability fell much more sharply at urban community banks than at rural community banks. Looking at charge‑off rates ( figure 8 ), we see that they have been quite similar for the two types of community banks over most of the past 20 years, except for the period from 2008 to 2013, when rural community banks had lower charge-off rates than urban community banks. This data suggest that, despite facing a more challenging economic environment, rural community banks appear to be holding their own relative to urban community banks. Market-Level Trends for All Banks and Community Banks Now I would like to shift my focus from the banks themselves to the communities they serve by exploring whether access to banking services--provided by community or larger banks--has been declining in urban or rural areas of the country. As of 2017, the average urban market was home to 18 community banks and just over 8 large banks, which represents a change from 21 community banks and 6 large banks in 1997 ( figure 9 ). The average number of community banks per rural market has been remarkably stable over the past 20 years at right around 4, while the average number of large banks per rural market has increased from just under 1 to 1.4 ( figure 10 ). These statistics indicate that, perhaps surprisingly, the average number of banks in rural markets has actually increased in the past 20 years. If we look at the number of bank branches rather than the number of competitors, we see a significant increase in the number of branches in the average urban market, with the entire increase coming from branches of large banks ( figure 11 ). Over the same period, there was essentially no change in the number of branches in rural markets, with a slight shift upward in the share of branches accounted for by large banks ( figure 12 ). Of course, there is substantial variation in the experiences of individual markets, as some local rural and urban markets gained and others lost bank branches. As the share of branches in the average banking market operated by community banks has declined, so, too, has the share of deposits held at community banks. This shift in deposit shares away from community banks, similar to the shift in branch shares, has been substantial in urban markets but only marginal in rural markets ( figure 13 ). Community banks held almost half of all deposits at urban bank branches in 1997, but just over one-third in 2017. In rural markets, community banks collectively had a deposit market share of 80 percent in 1997, declining moderately to 77 percent in 2017. Despite the decline in the overall share of deposits held by community banks in urban and rural markets over the past 20 years, the average individual community bank operating in each type of market has seen almost no change in its deposit market share ( figure 14 ). In other words, the decline in the share of market deposits held in aggregate by community banks is due to fewer community banks. The fact that the average individual community bank has maintained or increased its deposit market share since 2008 suggests that community banks have been able to compete quite successfully with larger banks in both urban and rural markets during and since the recent recession. Head Offices As I have mentioned, the average numbers of banks and bank branches have increased or remained constant in rural markets in recent years despite a wave of mergers that has greatly reduced the number of U.S. banking organizations. Industry consolidation has led to fewer banks but maintained most of the branches of the acquired banks. In addition, most mergers and acquisitions have involved expansion into new markets by the acquiring bank rather than acquisitions of local competitors, which has allowed local communities to continue to enjoy a variety of potential providers of banking services despite the industry consolidation. 8 One unavoidable aspect of consolidation is a loss in the number of bank headquarters offices. The number of bank headquarters located in urban markets has fallen by half over the past 20 years, while the number in rural markets has fallen by 45 percent. 9 Consolidation has led to a doubling in the number of banking markets--almost all of which are rural--in which no banks are headquartered ( figure 16 ). We hear anecdotally that banks are more attuned to the needs of the communities in which they are headquartered, so the significance of this loss could have an effect on the local markets. Qualitative Evidence at a More Micro Level As I previewed at the beginning of my remarks, data and averages often do not tell the whole story. At the end of the day, we care about bank branch locations because we care about the people and communities that they are serving or, in some cases, not serving adequately. So even if the data tell us that most rural markets are well served, we need to focus our attention on those markets that may not be as well served and how that is affecting the people who bank, or cannot bank, there. That is why the Federal Reserve System's Community Development function has undertaken a national series of listening sessions to assess the real effects of bank closures on rural communities. Reserve Bank staff members are conducting the sessions around the country to gather information from consumers and small business owners in rural communities that have been directly affected by bank closures. To identify where to conduct these sessions, we used data to identify rural towns that have experienced bank branch closures; in some cases, these towns lost the only bank in town and now have no remaining banks. Then we convened local residents and small business owners to ask them about what the loss of a bank meant to them and their community. For some residents, the closure has not been much of a problem. Most, if not all, of the listening session participants in Clark, South Dakota, noted that they do most of their routine banking online. Some in Clark even noted that they did not think ATMs (automated teller machines) were necessary, as most of the retail businesses in town offer cash back with debit card purchases. Nonetheless, residents of Clark spoke positively about the importance of the personal touch a local bank can provide. Residents liked familiar faces at the teller window and loan officers who understand the local economy when making small business loan decisions. However, online banking is not necessarily an opportunity for everyone. Indeed, even for community banks themselves, technology may be perceived as a threat or an opportunity, depending for example on whether the necessary infrastructure is available. In Nicholas County, Kentucky, which is located in Appalachia, many residents do not have access to high-speed internet; this lack of access has led most residents to travel outside of the county to conduct their banking needs. This situation is certainly not optimal for anyone, but it presents a particular challenge to the elderly, those without a car, and busy small business owners who do not have time to travel 25 miles each way to make change and deposit checks. In Centre County, Pennsylvania, we heard that the transportation challenge is particularly acute for the Amish--10 miles is a long way to travel by horse and buggy. The loss of a bank branch also has a ripple effect on a community as a whole. In the village of Brushton, New York, which lost its only bank branch in 2014, small business owners commented that when residents must leave the village to access banking services, they are more likely to shop, eat, and pay for services in other towns, which creates additional hardship for the small businesses of Brushton. Additionally, as the ability of community members to access cash has decreased, credit card use has increased. Small business owners in Brushton say that this growth in credit card usage has significantly increased the cost of doing business. Lastly, one theme that we heard loud and clear across the country was that the loss of a local bank meant the loss of an important civic institution. Banks do not just cash checks and make loans--they also place ads in small town newspapers, donate to local nonprofits, and sponsor local Little League teams. As towns lose banks and bankers, they also lose important local leaders. We will continue to conduct these listening sessions across the country throughout the fall. In fact, one of these listening sessions will take place next week just two hours down the road in Reynolds County, Missouri. We look forward to sharing the collective results of our efforts in a report that should be published in early 2019. Conclusion To sum up, the numbers of urban and rural community banks have been declining over the past 20 years, but community banks continue to play an important role in both types of markets. Urban and rural community banks face different challenges, but, on average, both seem to be faring well in the post-crisis period. And the average rural banking market has not seen any decline in the number of banks or bank branches over recent years. For the local areas where the availability of banking services has declined, we are in the process of assessing the effects of this decline on the people who live and work in those communities. I look forward to continuing to engage in this area and monitor the developments in this most vital part of the banking ecosystem. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. While small banks reduced small business lending by roughly 13 percent between 2009 and 2011, large banks reduced lending by nearly 30 percent. See Rebel A. Cole (2012), How Did the Financial Crisis Affect Small Business Lending in the United States? report developed under contract with the U.S. Small Business Administration, Office of Advocacy (Washington: SBA, November). Return to text 3. For the purpose of my remarks today, "community bank" means a bank or thrift with less than $10 billion in assets (in constant 2005 dollars). I exclude from this definition any bank or thrift that has less than $10 billion in assets but is part of a larger organization with more than $10 billion in total banking assets. "Urban community bank" is one that derives more than half of its deposits from offices located in one or more metropolitan statistical areas, and "rural community bank" derives at least half of its deposits from nonmetro areas. Using the more nuanced Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) definition of a community bank, which takes into account both size and activities, would have very little effect on the trends that I will be discussing. The FDIC definition can be found in Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012), " Defining the Community Bank (PDF) ," in FDIC Community Banking Study (Washington: FDIC, December). Return to text 4. See Jerome H. Powell (2016), " Trends in Community Bank Performance over the Past 20 Years ," speech delivered at "Community Banking in the 21st Century," Fourth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, St. Louis, Mo., September 29. Return to text 5. See U.S. Census Bureau (2016), " New Census Data Show Differences between Urban and Rural Populations ," press release, December 8. Return to text 6. See Kim Parker, Juliana Menasce Horowitz, Anna Brown, Richard Fry, D'Vera Cohn, and Ruth Igielnik (2018), " Demographic and Economic Trends in Urban, Suburban and Rural Communities ," in What Unites and Divides Urban, Suburban and Rural Communities (Washington: Pew Research Center, May); or John M. Anderlik and Richard D. Cofer, Jr. (2014), " Long-Term Trends in Rural Depopulation and Their Implications for Community Banks (PDF) ," FDIC Quarterly , vol. 8 (2), pp. 44-59. Return to text 7. See Mark Muro and Jacob Whiton (2018), " Geographic Gaps Are Widening While U.S. Economic Growth Increases ," Brookings Institution, The Avenue (blog), January 23; and Brian Thiede, Lillie Greiman, Stephan Weiler, Steven C. Beda, and Tessa Conroy (2017), " The Divide between Rural and Urban America, in 6 Charts ," U.S. News & World Report, March 20. Return to text 8. One way that economists measure the structure of a market is by measures of market concentration. Not surprisingly, rural markets are, on average, much more concentrated than urban markets. However, average concentration levels have been declining in rural markets while increasing slightly in urban markets over the past two decades. Return to text 9. The average urban market has more headquarters offices than the average rural market ( figure 15 ). There are just over 8 banks headquartered in the average urban market (down from just over 14 in 1997), compared with an average of 1.3 banks headquartered in the average rural market (down from 2.4 in 1997). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: October 04, 2018 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Economic Club of New York Luncheon, New York, New York Share Watch Live Thank you for having me. 1 I very much appreciate the opportunity to speak to this distinguished group and look forward to my discussion with Greg Ip. Now almost exactly a year into my appointment as Vice Chairman for Supervision, I have, as might be expected, spoken publicly most often about banking and the financial system more generally. However, supervision and regulation are not all that I do at the Federal Reserve, and I welcome this opportunity to speak to another part of my day job, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Today I would like to offer my take on the economic outlook, which is optimistic, and explain how I view my optimism as consistent with the continued gradual pace of policy tightening that many Committee participants have projected. In particular, I will explain how my views on potential growth help shape my outlook, both for the economy and for the appropriate path of monetary policy. Relatedly, I will discuss the uncertainties that arise when a central element of the outlook--in this case, the potential capacity of the economy--is unknown and largely unobservable. Such uncertainty can complicate policymaking in even what appears to be a very healthy economy, providing a further argument for gradualism. Where We Are Now In previous remarks on the economic outlook, delivered at a National Association for Business Economics conference in February, I characterized the U.S. economy as being in a "good spot" and asked if the economy had reached a positive turning point following an extended period of post-crisis slow growth. I argued that while it might be too soon to call a turning point, there was a definite possibility of an upside surprise. 2 So now that we are fairly deep into 2018, where do we stand overall? My view has not changed all that much from February. While many other forecasters had to revise up their forecasts over the course of the year, my own outlook is basically unchanged, because the economy is evolving essentially as I expected at the outset of the year. The economy remains in a good spot. Gross domestic product increased a robust 3‑1/4 percent in the first half of the year, and indicators suggest continued strong growth through the summer. Economic conditions are as close to meeting the Federal Reserve's dual mandate for monetary policy--maximum sustainable employment and price stability‑‑as they have been in a long time. Inflation is in line with the Committee's 2 percent objective, and the unemployment rate is at nearly a 50-year low. How long can this strong growth be sustained? The answer depends largely on what form growth takes. Growth that is supported by increases in the productive capacity of the economy should be durable. However, if growth primarily reflects strong demand that stretches production beyond its sustainable capacity, the economy will run into constraints that will result in slower growth, higher prices, or a potentially destabilizing buildup of financial imbalances. So, which is it? Unfortunately, it is very difficult to tell. I will return to that question shortly. That said, I see many reasons to be optimistic about the growth of the potential capacity of the economy over the next few years. In part, my optimism is rooted in the view that many of the factors that have been weighing on potential growth since the financial crisis could be lifting. So, have we reached the turning point? While I believe the issue remains unresolved, the recent evidence is encouraging. Have We Reached a Turning Point? Why am I optimistic about the economy's supply potential? The growth of potential can, at the most basic level, be broken down into two factors: the supply of labor and the productivity of that labor. Productivity, in turn, is importantly affected by changes in the stock of capital--that is, machines and factories--as well as technological advances and improved production methods. I see reasons to be hopeful about both factors. Let us start with labor. For some time, the contribution of the labor force to potential growth has been held down by the predictable drag of baby boomers moving into retirement. However, the decline in labor force participation following the financial crisis exceeded even what might be expected given this long-standing downward trend-- in particular, as the participation of prime-age workers (those between the ages of 25 and 54) fell and teenagers exited the workforce in droves. The reasons behind the fall in participation among non-retirement-age workers have been the subject of much debate. However, I see little reason to assume that it will be permanent, and we have already seen some signs of a turnaround. Thus, I think there is some potential for labor force participation to move up, perhaps as workers respond to the incentives of plentiful job opportunities and higher wages, thereby adding to the productive capacity of the economy and pushing back the constraints on growth. Some recent labor force trends have been promising. For example, the two-decade-long trend increase in the population not in the labor force on account of disability peaked in 2014 and has started to move down quite rapidly--again, for reasons that defy easy explanation but may reflect the general improvement in labor market opportunities. 3 I will now turn to productivity. Labor productivity has averaged an annual growth rate of only 3/4 percent since 2011, far below the 2-1/4 percent pace that prevailed in the two decades before the financial crisis. Although there are competing theories, the productivity decline is not well understood, and a consensus explanation has yet to emerge. As such, the slowdown could reverse unpredictably as well. The most recent data have been moving in the right direction, but only haltingly, with labor productivity increasing about 1-1/4 percent over the past year. There are reasons that productivity growth could shake off some of its recent torpidity. I would like to start with the capital stock. After a few years of abysmal business-sector investment spending, it appears as though the drought has broken. After picking up in 2017, business fixed investment climbed a robust 10 percent at an annual rate in the first half of this year, likely supported by lower corporate tax rates and other incentives in last year's tax bill. Also, indicators for investment, including orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods, point toward continued strength, and survey evidence points to high business optimism and solid capital expenditure plans. More capital should allow labor to be more productive. I am also a bit of a techno-enthusiast. We are in the early stages of a more widespread application of a wave of new technologies, such as 5G communications, AI (artificial intelligence) and machine learning, and 3-D printing. It might be that the productivity gains associated with these and other new technologies are embodied in new capital equipment and will only now start to become apparent as the investment drought of recent years comes to an end. A tighter economy could also create incentives for firms to revamp their production methods to save on scarce labor resources. To summarize, the economy has been doing very well. Whether this performance is sustained will be importantly determined by whether growth is supported by increases in the economy's potential. I am hopeful that potential growth, and particularly productivity, could accelerate from its relatively anemic pace of late, sustaining growth without overheating the economy. The more the economy's potential growth increases, the more gradual we can be in our removal of monetary policy accommodation. Thus, an assessment of the pace of potential growth will be an important input into what I view as the appropriate path of policy to achieve our objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. The Difficulty in Identifying Potential The tricky thing, as I pointed out earlier, is that potential output is unobserved and can only be inferred from the behavior of other measured economic indicators. Traditionally, as taught in Econ 101, inflation provides a signal on whether the economy is operating above or below its potential level. If inflation moves up in a sustained manner, not just because of temporary shocks, then the economy is likely operating above its productive capacity, as firms have the leeway to raise prices given the strength of demand. Likewise, if inflation moves down persistently, then the economy is likely operating with some slack, as firms restrain prices to sell their products in the face of weak demand. If inflation is the primary indicator of the economy's position relative to potential, how confident can we be in the quality of the signal? It has been noted--quite frequently, I might add--that the relationship between inflation and the tightness of the economy has gotten weaker, which is to say that inflation appears to be less affected by movements in economic slack or tightness, traditionally measured by the unemployment rate, than in the past. As the role of slack in explaining inflation has diminished, inflation expectations have assumed greater importance. However, it is reasonable to ask, if inflation is, in fact, now largely a reflection of inflation expectations, is inflation still a good indicator of the cyclical state of the economy? Or, more directly, can we count on inflation to warn us in time if the economy is overheating? To be a little controversial, perhaps what we are witnessing with inflation is an application of what has been called Goodhart's law, named after Charles Goodhart, the distinguished scholar of central banking at the London School of Economics. 4 The law can be summarized as the idea that if an indicator becomes a target of policy, that indicator loses its value as a gauge of the state of the economy. Rather, the indicator becomes a signal of the public's belief in the competence and commitment of the government agency that is targeting the indicator. Something along these lines could be happening to inflation, especially given the important role of expected inflation in the behavior of actual inflation. Perhaps inflation is just sending a signal of people's trust in the Fed's ability to meet its inflation objective. If so, no complaints here. That is a good thing. However, a problem does arise if the Fed remains reliant on inflation as our only gauge of the economy's position relative to its potential. There are risks in pushing the economy into a place it does not want to go if we limit ourselves to navigating by what might be a faulty indicator. Anchored inflation expectations might mask the inflation signal coming from an overheated economy for a period, but I have no doubt that prices would eventually move up in response to resource constraints. The ultimate price, from the perspective of the dual mandate, would be an unanchoring of inflation expectations. Of course, I view this more as a risk than my baseline expectation. As I have said, I am optimistic about potential growth, and I expect that even relatively strong growth can be met without running into economic constraints. However, I also think that we should pay attention to other indicators of tightness and overheating in addition to inflation. There are other signs of potential besides inflation, including, but not limited to, direct measures of labor utilization or indications of shortages and bottlenecks in production. Policy Considerations How should these thoughts affect monetary policy? I began my remarks by noting that there may be reason to think that the productive capacity of our economy could be accelerating, which would allow a more gradual withdrawal of accommodation without overheating. But I have noted as well that there may be reason to think that resource constraints could be more binding than current inflation measures would traditionally indicate, which would call for a more athletic response. Moreover, there is today a higher degree of uncertainty about many of these factors--measures of labor slack, the relation between labor slack and inflation, the sensitivity of current inflation measures to actual resource constraints, and the future growth of productivity, to name a few--than there has been for many years. In such an environment, some have argued that this greater uncertainty leaves policymakers without a clear guide and market participants without a firm anchor, meaning policy itself could drift--perhaps dangerously. I do not think that is the case at all. Instead, I think this situation reinforces and supports the importance of a clear, steady strategy and a gradual, predictable approach to the removal of accommodation as we continue to monitor the data. The analogy I frequently use is the old pilot's adage of "Don't chase the needles." The control panel of any airplane has an instrument to guide your course: a circular gauge with a vertical bar, or "needle," running through the center of it. If the bar moves sideways to the left, you are drifting off course and should change course to the left until the bar comes back into the center of the circle; if it moves to the right, you change course to the right. Today these instruments get their inputs from the plane's GPS (Global Positioning System) and are fairly sensitive and accurate, but decades ago, when I was a young man first learning to fly in the clouds, they got their information from radio beacons stationed on the ground and were quite squirrelly. The bar could wander from side to side for a while for any of a number of reasons--distance from the beacon, the angle you were approaching it from, interference from other instruments on the panel, sunspots, or rain--and because of this uncertainty, the first rule taught to us as young pilots was, "Don't chase the needles." Precisely because of the uncertainty around the course inputs, the right strategy was to set a course based on your knowledge of the destination, winds, and performance of your plane; communicate that course clearly to air traffic control so everyone knew what you were doing; and then stick to that course steadily even as the course needle might waver from side to side across your instrument. If the needle moved to one side substantially and stayed there pretty consistently, then you would make a small, firm correction--but even then, only gradually and with clear communication about what you were doing. In a world where you had great confidence in the sensitivity of your instrument, such as in today's GPS-based avionics, you could respond immediately to moment-to-moment changes in your course readings, but in the world of radio beacons and sunspots, "chasing the needles" would at best lead to inefficient fishtailing across the sky, and at worst to a substantial deviation from your destination. Today uncertainty around many of the macroeconomic inputs to monetary policy decisions argues for just the same approach to navigation. Rather than meaning that policy will drift because of this uncertainty, it means that policymakers should chart a course that is stable, gradual, and predictable; communicate it clearly; and then follow that course through the temporarily shifting and sometimes conflicting signs from the economy unless some strong and steady signal requires a firm but moderate correction. Given that the economy has performed fundamentally as I expected at the outset of this year, the right strategy is to maintain the gradual course that I have thought appropriate for some time now. Put another way, while I think that there is enough reason to think that the productive capacity of our economy might be increasing so that we should not feel compelled to accelerate our pace, I also think there is enough doubt about current inflation as an infallibly reliable measure of current resource constraints that the continued gradual removal of accommodation is appropriate. Like pilots back in the days of radio beacons, don't chase the needles. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. See Randal K. Quarles (2018), " An Assessment of the U.S. Economy ," speech delivered at "Promoting Sustained Growth: Policy Tensions and Risks," 34th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, February 26. Return to text 3. See Ernie Tedeschi (2018), "Will Employment Keep Growing? Disabled Workers Offer a Clue," New York Times, March 15. Return to text 4. For the original formulation of the law, see C.A.E. Goodhart (1975), "Problems of Monetary Management: The U.K. Experience," in Papers in Monetary Economics , vol. I (Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia). Return to text Last Update: October 18, 2018 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Share Watch Live Thank you to Brookings for inviting me to speak today. It is an honor and pleasure to talk to you about the next chapter in stress testing, particularly before this extremely distinguished audience of Brookings scholars that includes former Chairs, Vice Chairs, and senior leaders of the Federal Reserve who did the hard foundational work of developing and implementing this new approach to the assessment of bank resiliency. In these circumstances, my discussing changes to our stress testing regime could sound uncomfortably close to the serene arrogance of Alfonso X of Castile, who famously said that "Had I been present at the creation, I would have given some useful hints for the better ordering of the universe." My thoughts today, however, are not a call to rewrite Genesis, but rather a recognition that our stress testing regime--like the banking and financial system that it evaluates--will and should evolve as we continue to learn from experience in the management of this tool. In the best traditions of the Federal Reserve, this evolution should be grounded in rigorous analysis of the facts and a commitment to continual improvement of our methods. In my remarks today, I will begin with what has been successful about the stress tests and why those elements should remain. I will then spend some time discussing some of the changes we have proposed to our stress testing program, and how we are now thinking about moving forward with those changes. After that, I will discuss the tension between, on the one hand, providing additional information to the firms, while, on the other hand, ensuring that the tests remain effective. And last, I will close with some thoughts on the "qualitative" element of our stress testing program. The adjustments I will discuss are intended to increase both the transparency and the efficiency of the stress testing regime. Enhanced transparency goes to the very core of democratic accountability and the rights of all U.S. citizens--including the management and shareholders of the institutions that are subject to the stress tests--to understand the requirements to which they are subject. It also helps ensure the continued credibility of our regime. Background Let me begin with a short discussion of the core elements of our stress testing program. As you know, one of the most visible aspects of our stress testing program is that the firms and the public receive an independent view of the capital adequacy of the largest banks. The results are based on our own models and provide a consistent yardstick to measure resiliency across the banking system. But the stress test conducted by the Federal Reserve is only one part of our stress testing regime. Just as important, we require each firm to run its own stress test, using its own models and a stressful scenario that reflects the firm's assessment of its idiosyncratic risks and key vulnerabilities. Underpinning a firm's stress test is the firm's ability to identify and measure risks under normal and stressful conditions and the strength of the firm's internal processes, and we use the supervisory process to ensure that the firms' stress testing practices employ sound methodologies. The combination of the Federal Reserve's common yardstick, the firm's own stress tests, and supervisory oversight over the firms' practices has resulted in a meaningful increase in the post-stress resiliency of large financial institutions. All of these core components will remain in place. Further, the changes I'll speak about today are not intended to alter materially the overall level of capital in the system or the stringency of the regime. A healthy U.S. economy relies on a strong, well-capitalized banking system that can weather stressful events and continue lending to households and businesses. The U.S. banking organizations subject to the 2018 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)--the Fed's evaluation of capital adequacy for large holding companies--have increased the dollar amount of their common equity tier 1 (CET1) capital from around $500 billion in 2009 to more than $1.2 trillion as of the second quarter of this year, and have more than doubled CET1 risk-based capital ratios from approximately 5 percent to over 12 percent over the same period. While the regime has been successful overall, I believe it is prudent to review all our practices to ensure that they are as efficient and transparent as possible and that they remain appropriate in light of changes in the industry that have been achieved. For instance, as firms become more resilient, they may no longer need to build capital to support their current level of risk taking, but rather move into the mode of retaining the capital they have already built. Firms have also significantly improved their risk management, providing room to adjust our approach to assessing capital planning practices. Finally, as we make changes to our regime, the issue of volatility in the stress test results becomes more pronounced. As I'll discuss, we are considering how to balance the need to preserve the dynamism in stress testing with the need to ensure that firms have sufficient notice regarding the capital requirements to which they are held. Stress Capital Buffer Many of you are familiar with the Federal Reserve's proposal to integrate the stress test with the regulatory capital rule--known as the stress capital buffer (SCB). 1 I believe the SCB proposal represents an important milestone as we enter the next chapter of our stress testing regime. For those who are not familiar with the SCB, let me provide a little background about how our capital rule currently works, and how it would be modified by the SCB. As devoted readers of our capital rules may know, our regulatory capital rule includes both minimum capital requirements and a buffer that sits on top of those minimum requirements. The buffer serves as an early warning to a firm and to supervisors, and it requires the firm to reduce its capital distributions as the firm approaches the minimum requirements. Under the current capital rule, all firms are subject to a fixed buffer requirement of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets--the largest firms are also subject to a global systemically important bank surcharge and potential countercyclical capital buffer. For large firms, the SCB would replace the fixed 2.5 percent risk-based buffer with a firm-specific buffer the size of which would be based on the firm's stress test results. In this way, we are integrating the automatic restrictions on capital distributions in the current capital rule with the output of the most dynamic tool we have for assessing risk--the stress test--to create a more robust and dynamic regulatory capital regime. The SCB would also result in a more transparent and simplified system of regulatory capital requirements, because a firm will be held to a single, integrated capital regime. When we made our SCB proposal last April, we had aimed to make the SCB final for the 2019 stress test cycle. However, the comments we received have been extensive and thoughtful, and have raised issues that require a carefully considered response. While I don't believe these issues will prevent us from ultimately implementing the SCB, they have flagged certain elements of the regime that could benefit from further refinement. Accordingly, I expect we will adopt a final rule in the near future that will settle the basic framework of the SCB, but re-propose certain elements. To enable this process to run its course, I expect that the first SCB would not go into effect before 2020. For 2019, I expect CCAR will remain in place for firms with over $250 billion in assets or that are otherwise complex; however, we will consider whether we can move forward with any aspects of the SCB proposal for CCAR 2019, such as assumptions related to balance sheet growth. I will also ask the Board to exempt firms with less than $250 billion in assets from the CCAR quantitative assessment and supervisory stress testing in 2019 in light of the every-other-year cycle contemplated in the tailoring proposal that the Board approved two weeks ago. 2 Returning to the SCB proposal, I would like to give you a sense of the comments we received and our approach to addressing those concerns. The issue foremost on my mind is the volatility of the stress test results. One concern frequently expressed is that the results of the supervisory stress test can lead to capital requirements that change significantly from year to year, which limits a firm's ability to manage its capital effectively. Some amount of volatility is necessary to preserve the dynamism of the stress test--by nature, the stress test will differ year-over-year based on macroeconomic conditions and contemporary understanding of salient risks in the economy. In addition, the stress test results are sensitive to changes in a firm's balance sheet, which means that a firm's capital requirements will evolve as the firm's activities and exposure evolve. However, I do think there is an important balance to be struck between preserving this dynamism and ensuring that firms have sufficient notice regarding the capital requirements to which they are held. In the first years after the financial crisis, as the banking system was dramatically ramping up the total amount of capital in the system, this volatility was less of a management problem: until we reached reasonably full capitalization, each year every bank needed to increase its capital. If one year that increment was a little higher or a little lower than the previous year, that was simply a modest difference of velocity, not direction. At the current juncture, however, both our system as a whole and each of the largest banks in that system are fully meeting their capital requirements. In these circumstances, having a highly variable capital requirement presents a significant management challenge. We are considering ways of preserving the dynamism of stress testing while reducing its volatility, and plan to seek comment on a proposal in this area in the not-too-distant future. In addition, we are also exploring ways of improving our approach to measuring risks in the trading book. Firms' trading books are dynamic and complex, as firms hold both long and short positions. Many have noted that a single market shock does not adequately capture risks in firms' trading book, and we agree with those comments. We are exploring ways to incorporate multiple market shocks in our stress test without adding volatility to the results and without increasing the compliance burden. We are also considering adjusting another element of the SCB proposal in order to provide more notice to firms. Currently, and under the SCB proposal, a firm must decide whether to increase or decrease its planned dividends and share repurchases for the upcoming year without knowledge of a key constraint: the results of the stress test. In other words, we require a firm to give us a formal plan for dividends and stock repurchases without knowing what its effective capital requirement is. If it guesses wrong, it could be publicly shamed for failing the stress test (if its dividends are too high relative to capital), or penalized in the markets for inadequate distribution of income (if its dividends are too low relative to capital). Now, while this might at first blush appear to be pointless and obdurate cruelty, the reasoning behind the practice was initially perfectly sensible: it reflected the view that firms should think rigorously about their capital uses and needs in developing their capital distribution plans, rather than rely primarily on the results of the supervisory stress test to guide those plans. Now that we all have several years' experience with this system, however, firms have told us that they would be able to engage in more thoughtful capital planning if they had knowledge of that year's stress test results before finalizing their distribution plans for the upcoming year. I am sympathetic to their concerns, and will ask the Board to adjust the operation of the rule so that firms know their SCB before they decide on their planned distributions for the coming year. This adjustment in sequence will also help firms manage volatility in the SCB. We expect firms to continue to maintain robust stress testing practices and use those results to inform their capital distribution plans, and we will continue to use the supervisory process to reinforce this expectation. The comments also highlighted an issue with how the capital buffers operate today, which is amplified by the inherent volatility of the SCB. As I noted earlier, a firm operating in its capital buffer is required to reduce its capital distributions so that it can build capital over time. By design, the buffer was intended to apply increasingly stringent limitations as the firm's capital ratios decline. But, in our current world in which a healthy and profitable banking system is seeking to maintain its capital levels rather than continue to increase them, a bank will appropriately and safely tend to distribute much or all of its income in any given year. In that case, the operation of the buffer would not result in a proportional restriction of income as the firm's capital eases, but could be a sudden cessation of all dividends if the firm dips into the buffer by even a small amount, even if the changes in its capital levels are quite minor. We are considering adjustments that would make the rules more consistent with the graduated intent. We plan to work with the other banking agencies to consider how best to effect this change. There are two additional elements of the SCB proposal that I believe would benefit from modification. First, the SCB proposal would have included four quarters of dividends in a firm's SCB, in recognition of the fact that firms experience market pressure to hold dividends constant, even under stress. In my view, there may be ways of encouraging greater reliance on less sticky repurchases while providing more flexibility in the regime, and we are exploring alternatives. Last, the SCB proposal would have included a post-stress leverage requirement. As the Federal Reserve has long maintained, leverage requirements are intended to serve as a backstop to the risk-based capital requirements. By definition, they are not intended to be risk-sensitive. Thus, I am concerned that explicitly assigning a leverage buffer requirement to a firm on the basis of risk-sensitive post-stress estimates runs afoul of the intellectual underpinnings of the leverage ratio, and I would advocate removing this element of the stress capital buffer regime. Of course, leverage ratios, including the enhanced supplementary leverage requirements, would remain a critical part of our regulatory capital regime, and we will maintain the supervisory expectation that firms have sufficient capital to meet all minimum regulatory requirements. Together, the adjustments we are contemplating to the SCB offer promise in improving the efficiency, coherence, and transparency of the regulatory capital regime while maintaining the overall level of capital in the system and the core principles of the regime that have proven successful. That being said, we welcome a continued dialogue with the public as we implement these changes, and through that implementation, we will ensure that we maintain the incentives for effective stress testing practices that exist today. Transparency Transparency of the stress test and its inputs and outputs is key to the credibility of the stress test, and there are several initiatives underway to provide additional transparency regarding the supervisory stress test models and scenario design process. We believe that the adjustments under development strike the right balance of advancing transparency, while maintaining incentives for firms to think critically about their own risks. I expect that soon you will see the Federal Reserve issue a policy statement describing governing principles around the supervisory stress testing process. As a part of that statement, I would expect a commitment to disclose additional detail about supervisory stress test models and results and to publish portfolios of hypothetical loans and associated loss rates. I expect that we will begin providing some of this additional detail starting in early 2019, and that these changes will allow firms to benchmark the results of their own models against those of the supervisory models. However, our commitment to transparency does not end there. We are currently considering options to provide additional transparency regarding scenarios and scenario design and I expect that the Board will seek comment on the advisability of, and possible approaches to, gathering the public's input on scenarios and salient risks facing the banking system each year. Such a proposal may also provide additional details about the scenario design features that underpins each year's scenarios, and a range of other enhancements. Additional transparency regarding the stress test scenarios serves multiple purposes: it both provides additional due process to affected participants, and provides additional sources of insight--including from academics and thought leaders like many of you in this room--that could be used to inform a given year's scenario. Increased transparency could also enable us to be more nimble in our scenario design to the extent we uncover through external input new salient risks that we have not previously considered. As we develop proposals, a key consideration is to ensure that we maintain incentives for firms to conduct their own stress tests rigorously and thoughtfully. Firms have indicated that additional disclosure about models would not affect their own stress tests. We expect them to make good on that representation, as the Federal Reserve's stress test is not, and cannot be, a full picture of a firm's resiliency in light of its idiosyncratic risks. For example, there is some risk that firms will use knowledge from additional transparency about the stress test to engage in transactions that are solely designed to reduce losses in the test, but that do not truly reduce risk in their portfolios. As supervisors, however, this is something that we can guard against through the regular examination process. We will closely monitor changes in firms' portfolios and take appropriate actions to ensure firms are holding sufficient capital, and have sufficient controls and governance, in light of the risk characteristics of their activities. Qualitative Objection Before I close, I would like to say a few words about the role of the qualitative objection in our new chapter of stress testing. As originally conceived, CCAR had both a quantitative component--based on the supervisory stress test--and a qualitative component--based on the Federal Reserve's assessment of a firm's stress testing practices. In 2017, the Federal Reserve eliminated the qualitative objection as part of CCAR for large and noncomplex firms, in part because of improvements in risk management at these firms. 3 By incorporating supervisory stress testing into the regulatory capital regime and introducing an automatic penalty if a firm falls below its SCB-derived capital requirement, the SCB proposal will eliminate the quantitative objection from CCAR. The natural next question is: has the CCAR qualitative objection for the largest firms also run its course? In my view, the time has come to normalize the CCAR qualitative assessment by removing the public objection tool, and continuing to evaluate firms' stress testing practices through normal supervision. In such an environment, firms would remain subject to the same supervisory expectations, and examiners would continue to conduct rigorous horizontal and firm-specific assessments of a firm's capital positions and capital planning, tailored to the risk profile of the firm. While much of the examination work would center on a firm's capital plan submissions, examination work would continue on a year-round basis, taking into account the firm's management of other financial risks. The evaluation of the firm's capital position and capital planning would culminate in a rating of the firm's capital position and planning. Firms with deficient practices would receive supervisory findings through the examination process, and would be at risk of a ratings downgrade or enforcement action if those deficiencies were sufficiently material. Conclusion As we begin the next chapter in stress testing, my objective is to ensure the continued credibility of the program by increasing its transparency, simplicity, and stability while maintaining the strength of the supervisory and internal stress testing elements that are central to the program today. These adjustments will be coupled with our continued commitment to strong supervision and our expectation that financial institutions ensure they are managing their risks and holding sufficient capital to continue operations through times of stress. 1. Amendments to the Regulatory Capital, Capital Plan, and Stress Test Rules (PDF) , 83 Fed. Reg. 18,160 (April 25, 2018). Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles ," news release, October 31, 2018. Return to text 3. The capital planning evaluation remains as part of the normal supervisory process for these firms. Return to text Last Update: November 09, 2018 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "An International Perspective on the Future of Bank Stress Testing" Symposium sponsored by Harvard Law School Program on International Financial Systems, Cambridge, Massachusetts Share Professor Scott, and our hosts from Harvard and the Program on International Financial Systems, thank you for the chance to participate in today's meeting. Looking around the room, I see a mix of past and current colleagues, from academics, to supervisors and central bankers, to researchers and practitioners in industry. All of you have seen, felt, and lived different aspects of the transition to the post-crisis regulatory framework, and I am grateful to hear your perspectives on such a critical aspect of it. In the depths of the financial crisis, the first regulatory stress tests were designed under intense scrutiny with high-stakes consequences. Their contribution--an independent public view of the capital adequacy of the largest firms--helped reinforce the banking system at a critical juncture. Since then, stress testing has meaningfully increased the post-stress resiliency of large financial institutions, and become a critical tool in keeping the system strong. Those accomplishments are real, and we should aim to do more than simply preserve them. Now is a prudent time to consolidate the gains we have made, and to promote the efficiency and transparency of our processes. Today, I will review some of our efforts along those lines, focusing on proposed changes to our stress-testing program. These changes, which I described in more detail in remarks last week, are intended to improve the program, maintaining its dynamism and flexibility while providing adequate notice to regulated firms, without altering materially the stringency of the tests or the overall level of capital in the system. 1 I share these views with a deep appreciation of the decades of international experience represented in this room. The crisis came with a reminder that the financial system is global, that risks in one country can quickly spread to another, and that in keeping the system and the economy safe, we have no choice but to work together. I look forward to hearing your thoughts on the changes I outline, and on how to improve our stress testing processes in the years ahead. Stress Capital Buffer Many of you are familiar with the Federal Reserve's proposed stress capital buffer (SCB), which would replace the current fixed buffer requirement of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets with one based on each firm's stress test results. 2 I believe the proposal represents an important milestone in crafting an integrated capital regime, and in keeping with its importance, we have received extensive and thoughtful public comments, identifying elements of it that could benefit from further refinement. I described several of these elements last week, including my views on some areas which I believe we should revisit: improving measurement of risks in the trading book; encouraging less sticky forms of capital distribution without requiring dividend pre-funding; and reevaluating the interaction of the capital buffer with capital distributions. Today, I want to highlight three elements in particular. Foremost among these is the volatility of stress test results. Some volatility in annual results is necessary to preserve the dynamism of the stress test, and to reflect changes in macroeconomic conditions, salient economic risks, and the composition of firm balance sheets. However, when the largest banks in the system are fully meeting their capital requirements, a highly variable capital requirement from year to year can present a significant management challenge. I believe there is an important balance to strike in this area, which will let us preserve dynamism while reducing volatility, and we plan to seek comment on a relevant proposal in the not-too-distant future. The second is the sequencing of stress test results with capital plan submissions. Currently, and under the SCB proposal, a firm must decide whether to increase or decrease its planned dividends and share repurchases for the upcoming year without knowledge of a key constraint: the results of the stress test. Initially, this phasing reflected the view that firms should think rigorously about their capital uses and needs, rather than relying primarily on the results of the supervisory stress test to guide those plans. However, now that we all have several years' experience with this system, firms have told us that they would be able to engage in more thoughtful capital planning if they had knowledge of that year's stress test results before finalizing their distribution plans for the upcoming year. I am sympathetic to their concerns, and will ask the Board to adjust the operation of the rule, so that firms know their SCB before they decide on their planned distributions for the coming year. Of course, we expect firms to continue to maintain robust stress testing practices and use those results to inform their capital distribution plans, and we will continue to use the supervisory process to reinforce this expectation. The third is the post-stress leverage requirement. As the Federal Reserve has long maintained, leverage requirements are intended to serve as a backstop to the risk-based capital requirements. By definition, they are not intended to be risk-sensitive. Thus, I am concerned that explicitly assigning a leverage buffer requirement to a firm on the basis of risk-sensitive post-stress estimates runs afoul of the intellectual underpinnings of the leverage ratio, and I would advocate removing this element of the stress capital buffer regime. Of course, leverage ratios, including the enhanced supplementary leverage requirements, would remain a critical part of our regulatory capital regime, and we will maintain the supervisory expectation that firms have sufficient capital to meet all minimum regulatory requirements. To give these issues the careful consideration they deserve, I expect we will adopt a final rule in the near future, settling the basic SCB framework while re-proposing certain elements. I expect that the first SCB would not go into effect before 2020, and that CCAR will remain in place in 2019 for firms with over $250 billion in assets or that are otherwise complex. However, we will consider whether we can move forward with any aspects of the SCB proposal for CCAR 2019, such as assumptions related to balance sheet growth, and I will ask the Board to exempt firms with less than $250 billion in assets from the CCAR quantitative assessment and supervisory stress testing in 2019. Transparency In the meantime, several initiatives are also underway to provide additional transparency into stress testing. I expect you will soon see the Federal Reserve issue a policy statement describing governing principles around the supervisory stress testing process--and with it, a commitment to disclosing additional detail about supervisory stress test models and results, along with portfolios of hypothetical loans and associated loss rates. I expect we will begin providing some of this additional detail starting in early 2019. I also expect the Board will seek comment on the advisability of, and possible approaches to, gathering public input on scenarios and salient risks facing the banking system each year. Transparency matters not only because it provides additional due process to affected participants; it also creates an opportunity for broader, more insightful comments from the public. As a result, it can allow us to be more nimble and better informed in our scenario design. However, we want to maintain incentives for firms to conduct their own stress tests rigorously and thoughtfully, and avoid the risk that firms will use this new information to engage in transactions that are solely designed to reduce losses in the test without reducing actual risk. Firms have indicated that additional disclosure about models would not affect their own stress tests. We expect them to make good on that representation, as the Federal Reserve's stress test is not, and cannot be, a full picture of a firm's resiliency in light of its idiosyncratic risks. We are confident that we can address these concerns through the regular examination process, by closely monitoring changes in firms' portfolios and ensuring sufficient capital, controls, and governance in light of the risk characteristics of their activities. Qualitative Objection I also want to reiterate a point regarding the role of the qualitative objection. The Federal Reserve eliminated this element of CCAR for large and noncomplex firms in 2017, in part because of improvements in risk management at those firms. 3 In my view, the time has come to normalize the CCAR qualitative assessment by removing the public objection tool, and continuing to evaluate firms' stress testing practices through normal supervision. While supervisory assessments would continue to center on a firm's capital plan submissions, examination work would continue on a year-round basis, taking into account the firm's management of other financial risks, and culminating in a rating of the firm's capital position and planning. Firms with deficient practices would receive supervisory findings through the examination process, and would be at risk of a ratings downgrade or enforcement action if those deficiencies were sufficiently material. Conclusion These changes are aimed at preserving the foundation laid over nearly a decade of stress testing experience, including by many of the people in this room. Our goal is to bolster the program's credibility by increasing its transparency, simplicity, and stability, while maintaining the strength of the supervisory and internal stress testing elements that are central to the program today. These adjustments will be coupled with our continued commitment to strong supervision, and our expectation that financial institutions manage their risks and hold sufficient capital to continue operations through times of stress. I look forward to hearing your insights into these changes, and I thank you for your time. 1. See Randal K. Quarles (2018), " A New Chapter in Stress Testing ," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, November 9. Return to text 2. Amendments to the Regulatory Capital, Capital Plan, and Stress Test Rules (PDF) , 83 Fed. Reg. 18,160 (April 25, 2018). Return to text 3. The capital planning evaluation remains as part of the normal supervisory process for these firms. Return to text Last Update: November 16, 2018 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California Share It's a pleasure to be here at Stanford, an honor to be invited to speak by SIEPR and the Bill Lane Center--two institutions for which I have long had fondness and respect--and a great luxury to have the chance to talk for an hour with a group of people who share my love for a part of the world we call the West. Most of my day job enmeshes me, of necessity, in either broad systemic questions of global financial stability or the impossibly arcane minutiae of our convoluted and labyrinthine financial regulatory system. Both of those are perfectly worthy occupations but inescapably require a relentlessly global outlook. Yet my first intellectual passion as a very young man was for the history and life of a specific part of the world--the Western United States, as place and idea. Your own presence here in the audience suggests that many of you have been moved at some point in your life, as I have been, by the words of Wallace Stegner: If there is such a thing as being conditioned by climate and geography, and I think there is, it is the West that has conditioned me. It has the forms and lights and colors that I respond to in nature and in art. If there is a western speech, I speak it; if there is a western character or personality, I am some variant of it; if there is a western culture in the small-c, anthropological sense, I have not escaped it. 1 So, that is why I say it is a pleasure and an honor but most especially a luxury for me to speak to an audience that shares my concern for and love of the West on the topic of how the preoccupations of my day job--banking and finance--affect this particular part of the world. We all know that throughout the history of the West, banking and finance have played an important role as vital infrastructure for the economy. That remains true today, although it is often overlooked in the traditional litany of issues critical to the West. A strong banking industry is necessary for households and businesses to engage in the spending, saving, and investment that constitute economic activity, and one of the purposes of financial regulation is to ensure that banks continue to be able to serve this purpose. So it is my plan today to talk about the economy of the West and link the recent and future performance of the western economy to the central and supportive role banks play as vital infrastructure in their communities. Defining the West Let's start by defining our terms. What do we mean by the West? Before this audience, I approach this question with respect and a little caution, because I know that in a broad sense, it is what the Center for the American West has been addressing since its founding. That aside, it makes sense to use a definition, as the center often does, that includes parts of states in the middle of the country whose economies, heavily dependent on natural resources, ranching, and farming, more closely resemble Montana and New Mexico than they do states on the Eastern seaboard. Nevertheless, for the purposes of these remarks, I am going to use a less expansive definition comprising the 13 westernmost states. I do so partly because this is a common definition of the West, and because it is the one used by the U.S. Census Bureau in dividing the country into four regions and this has helped me gather data for this speech more readily. ( Figure 1 ) The first thing to mention that distinguishes the West from the rest of the country is apparent on this map--land area. The West is large and would appear even larger of course, if it weren't necessary to shrink the vastness of Alaska to fit on one page. Even using my more modest definition, the West still represents half of the land area of the United States. This is important in this context because of one theme I will be exploring today, which is the economy of the rural West and the banking services available there. As this map should make plain, when we talk about rural America, to a significant extent we are talking about the rural West. Another way to put it is that while the West is half of the United States geographically, it is only a quarter of its population. 2 Eight of the 13 states in our definition of the West are among the dozen in the nation with the lowest population density. 3 Even after subtracting the large share of unpopulated government-owned land in the West, the overwhelming majority of the West is rural. Yet it is also true that, as most of you know, the West is the most urban region of the country. Five of the 15 largest metro areas in the United States are located in the West, and 90 percent of the entire region's population lives in cities, compared to 81 percent of the country as a whole. 4 , 5 Nevada and Utah are among the least densely populated states, but 90 percent or more of their residents live in cities. Like the rest of the country, the West is urbanizing. I will return to the differences between urban and rural areas, but first, let's look at the economy of the West. The Economy of the West: From Boom to Boom The West accounts for 25 percent of U.S. gross domestic product, almost exactly the share of the U.S. population in the West. This isn't entirely a coincidence, because population relates to labor supply, which is one determinant of economic output. I mention this because it is also true that the change in population over time has a bearing on the economic health of communities and regions, and is part of the story for economic growth in the western United States. In recent years, that story has been a very positive one. The U.S. economy is strong, and the western economy is especially strong. While we don't have state or regional numbers for this year, from 2015 through 2017, GDP, after adjusting for inflation, grew two to nearly three times as fast in the West as in the rest of the United States. Since the Great Recession ended in 2010, real GDP has grown twice as fast in the West as in the Northeast, about 50 percent faster than in the Midwest, and a third faster than in the South. 6 But there is another distinction to the western economy, one that many in this audience know well, that brings these high-flying results down to earth. While the good times are typically very good in the West, the bad times are usually pretty bad, and that was certainly true during the Great Recession. From 2008 through 2010, the western economy contracted four times as much as the average for all of the United States. The same is true for per capita personal income, which contracted more sharply in the West than elsewhere, as job losses in the western region during the recession were worse than elsewhere. Taking a longer perspective, however, even with the booms and the busts that have characterized the West for upwards of 200 years, the West is still the fastest growing region of the United States. Since 2000, real GDP has grown twice as fast in the West as in the Northeast and Midwest, and about 30 percent faster than in the South. Since 1988, the numbers are roughly the same. Per capita personal income grew faster in the West during good years, outweighing the sharper losses during the recession and since 2000 has grown about 20 percent faster in the West than in the rest of the country. This picture of the West leading the nation in economic growth is also reflected in population, a key factor in that growth. From 2010 to 2017, the population of the West increased 7.4 percent, compared to 5.3 percent for the nation. 7 One might guess that this strong growth is primarily in cities, and in fact reflects the drain of population from smaller towns that is reported to be happening all over the United States. But in fact, population gains in the West are quite well balanced between cities and towns, and smaller towns are doing better in the West than elsewhere in holding and even increasing their populations. In the cities of the West, those communities of 50,000 or more, the population grew 7.8 percent from 2010 to 2017, eclipsed by the 10 percent growth in southern cities but well above the 2 percent to 3 percent increase in the cities of the Northeast and Midwest. 8 At the same time, the West led the other regions of the United States in growth for towns and cities from 10,000 to 50,000 in size, and likewise for towns between 5,000 and 10,000. Now let's look at small towns, those with 5,000 or fewer residents. It is this cohort of towns and their people that to my mind is really the essence of rural America. There is a widespread impression that small towns all over America are shrinking and that population is shifting to larger towns and cities, and that is the story we can see in much of the regional data. From 2010 to 2017, the average small town shrank by 2 percent in the Northeast, by 1.4 percent in the Midwest, and only grew 1.3 percent in the South, while larger towns and cities grew substantially faster there and elsewhere. What about the West, where urbanization is happening more quickly than anywhere else? In fact, the average western small town grew 7.8 percent in those seven years, which is roughly the same healthy pace of growth registered in western towns and cities from the smallest to the largest. With a nod to Mark Twain, the message here is that reports of the death of small towns, at least in the West, have been greatly exaggerated. I don't mean to minimize the challenges small towns face, because they are considerable, or suggest that western small towns are immune to them, because they certainly are not. But the more positive message I come away with here is that a rising tide of prosperity in the West seems to be lifting communities large and small, and that the many instances of small towns in decline that we all hear about are counterbalanced by other small towns growing healthily. Another lesson is that population growth and the attendant economic growth in the West is not zero sum, and that small towns can still grow healthily while the metropolises of the West continue to attract people, partly from outside the region. I will return to the issue of how the economies of the urban and rural West differ, but the backdrop is that population data are promising for both. Banking in the West Now that I have outlined how the economy of the West relates to that of the rest of the United States, let me do the same for banking in the West. There is a lot to this topic, but my focus is banking as it is experienced at the retail level by households and small- and medium-sized businesses. Again, I use the Census Bureau's list of 13 states to define the West, and for a simpler comparison, and in honor of Frank Church, I will refer to the other 37 states as "eastern" even though they cover several regions. Some of you are old enough to remember Frank Church, the U.S. Senator from Idaho--a Stanford grad and hero of mine when I was a teenager. When he ran for president in 1976 and had some success in the primaries, he was challenged by the press that said his victories were limited to the West, and he replied "What do you mean I can't win an eastern state? I won Nebraska!" One dimension to how households and most businesses experience banking is the number of banks competing for their services, and one difference between the West and the East is that the West has fewer banks, even if we count them on a per capita basis. 9 In addition, banks in the West tend to be larger. One reason for the disparity in the average number and size of banks is that historically, a larger share of western states allowed statewide branching or had relatively limited branching restrictions, leading to the development of fewer and larger banks. 10 In metropolitan areas of the West, the average number of banks was 23 in 2017, compared to 27 in eastern metro areas. In rural counties of the West, customers had access to an average of 4.6 banks in 2017, compared to 5.4 banks in the East. In both urban and rural areas, in both the East and the West, the average number of banks increased in the years leading up to the financial crisis but has been declining since then. While there is certainly more to say about banking services in cities, I want to focus on rural areas for the moment. Over the last 20 years, rural westerners have consistently had access to something like 20 percent fewer banks than rural easterners, which amounts to about one less bank per rural county. That may not sound like much, but that one less bank, on average, can make a big difference to the households and small businesses inhabiting those rural counties. In any community, access to credit is essential for economic growth. In any community, but especially in rural communities, small businesses are key drivers of growth. Small businesses heavily rely on banks for funding, and community banks, those with less than $10 billion in assets, account for a disproportionate share of bank lending to small businesses. But across the country, the number of community banks has fallen by half over the past 20 years, mostly due to consolidation. This fall has been slightly larger in the West than the East, but the reason I highlight this trend is that I believe it has significant consequences for rural communities in the West. The reason returns me to that map I showed earlier. The West is vast, and many rural communities in the West must deal with the challenges of isolation from larger towns and cities that few communities in the East face. Rural westerners have access to far fewer banks overall than rural easterners, but that understates the disparity when some western counties are the size of Maryland or Massachusetts and many are more than a hundred miles across, so that access to a limited number of banks can be difficult or out of reach. To provide some perspective on this challenge, let me share what westerners in one small town have to say about their access to banking services. This account is culled from a series of public meetings that the Federal Reserve is convening in communities all around the country, in support of our responsibilities overseeing community banks and promoting community development. Not quite a month ago, we held one such session in my home state of Utah, in the town of Green River, population 940, located on the eastern side of the state. It is just off an isolated stretch of interstate, and its economy depends on those passersby and tourism related to outdoor recreation. In 2014, Green River lost its only bank, and around that time, banks closed in several nearby communities. As a result, most residents of Green River who need banking services must drive the 52 miles to Moab, Utah. This loss has had a profound effect on households and businesses, essentially turning back the clock in Green River by decades, as far as its access to the banking system. Business owners say their work days have been curtailed by the need to drive two or three times a week to Moab to obtain change and make deposits. Businesses have become banks for many residents, agreeing to cash their checks. Because of this new service to residents, and the long distance to a real bank, retail businesses say they are carrying much larger amounts of cash, which has heightened security concerns and prompted some merchants to invest in new safes. Security is also a concern for residents who no longer have access to safety deposit boxes for valuables and important papers. Faster and more efficient electronic payments hold some promise to bridge these gaps, eventually, and the Federal Reserve is working hard on this and making significant progress. But one thing that technology cannot do is replace the knowledge and perspective of a local banker who is part of the community. Relationship-based lending that is the hallmark of community banking can stem losses during downturns, since community banks may be able to work with borrowers to avoid losses. Research has shown that small business lending at smaller banks declined less severely than at large banks during the last recession. Community banks face considerable competition. One of the reasons that community banks continue to succeed in many places is their understanding of their customers' needs and opportunities to invest in families and businesses. The loss of this relationship, for a community, means that needs will go unmet, and opportunities will be lost. In some communities, of course, this may be unavoidable, if a town has lost a major employer and has no new industry or plan to replace the jobs lost. But let me remind you of the very encouraging data I cited on the growth of small towns in the West. Overall, rural communities are growing at a healthy pace, and growing communities need banks. It is my hope that the opportunity for the future that this population growth suggests will support the local banks that communities need to thrive. A significant part of the Federal Reserve's recent regulatory focus has been aimed at streamlining regulations and reducing the regulatory burden on smaller and regional banks. The Fed, along with the other banking agencies, recently proposed a community bank leverage ratio that is designed to simplify significantly the standards banks must abide by for holding capital. 11 As a result, qualifying community banks will only need to calculate and meet a single measure of capital adequacy, rather than multiple measures. We have also proposed a reduction in the burden of reporting requirements for community banks, and expect soon to propose an exemption for community banks to the Volcker rule. 12 For a subset of the smallest banks--those with less than $5 billion in total assets--we have also lengthened the amount of time between supervisory examinations and expanded eligibility of small bank holding companies that qualify for an exemption to the Federal Reserve's capital rules, a policy that was designed to promote local ownership of small banks and to help maintain banks in rural areas. 13 Most recently, the Federal Reserve spearheaded a proposal to tailor regulation that applies to firms that are larger than community banks, but the potential failure of which generally does not pose risks to the financial system. 14 These are firms with between $100 billion and $250 billion in total assets. Those changes are designed to reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens on specific institutions without any loss of resiliency for the financial system. By these steps, I believe the Federal Reserve is helping community banks remain competitive and play the central role they have long played as vital infrastructure for rural communities. The future of community banks in these communities is one reason that I'm optimistic about the economic prospects of small towns in the West, which continue to grow even as the region and the nation overall becomes more urban. That's a good thing, because small towns, and especially their values, have long helped define the West, and I hope will continue to do so. 1. Wallace Stegner, "The American West as Living Space," University of Michigan Press, 1988. Return to text 2. Source: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations were done using data from the following website: " List of states and territories of the United States by population ," Wikipedia, last modified November 18, 2018. Return to text 3. Source: " List of states and territories of the United States by population density ," Wikipedia, last modified October 12, 2018. Return to text 4. Source: " List of metropolitan statistical areas ," Wikipedia, last modified November 29, 2018. Return to text 5. Source: " Urbanization in the United States ," Wikipedia, last modified November 10, 2018. Return to text 6. Statistics presented in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are derived from the following website: " Comparative Economic Indicators: Year vs. Year Analysis of Growth and Change ," Regional Economic Analysis Project. Return to text 7. Source: https://www.census.gov/popclock/data_tables.php?component=growth . Return to text 8. Statistics presented in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are derived from the following website: " The West and South Lead the Way ," United States Census Bureau, last modified October 1, 2018. Return to text 9. The source for statistics presented in this paragraph and the next three paragraphs is Federal Reserve Board staff calculations using bank Reports of Condition and Income filed with the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Thrift Financial Reports filed with the Office of Thrift Supervision, and Summary of Deposits filed with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Return to text 10. Even though state banking restrictions were eliminated in most states decades ago, the differences in the number of banks across states have persisted. Return to text 11. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Agencies propose community bank leverage ratio for qualifying community banking organizations ," news releases, November 21, 2018. Return to text 12. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Agencies issue proposal to streamline regulatory reporting for qualifying small institutions ," news release, November 7, 2018. Return to text 13. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Agencies issue interim final rules expanding examination cycle for qualifying small banks and U.S. branches of foreign banks ," news release, August 23, 2018 and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Federal Reserve Board issues interim final rule expanding the applicability of the Board's small bank holding company policy statement ," news release, August 28, 2018. Of course, while the holding companies of community banks may be eligible for an exemption from capital rules, the subsidiary banks are still subject to capital requirements. Return to text 14. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles ," news release, October 31, 2018. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: December 05, 2018 Back to Top
