1 Closing the Gap Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Banking and the Economy: A Forum for Minorities in Banking September 28, 2018 Charlotte, North Carolina Thank you very much for inviting me to talk with you today. Diversity is a major priority for us at the Richmond Fed and throughout the Federal Reserve System. And it’s important for us to think about diversity not only in the context of our own workforce and supplier base, but also in the financial industry more broadly. In many ways, the disparities we see at the management level — which I’m looking forward to hearing Daniel Garcia-Diaz discuss in our next session — have their roots very early, in the opportunities available to people even as young children. Today I’d like to talk about those disparities and put them in the context of the macroeconomy. I’ll talk particularly about human capital, which plays a critical role in labor market outcomes. Before I say more, the views I express are my own and might not be shared by my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System or on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 Growing the Labor Force The FOMC met this week and reviewed a pretty healthy economy. Growth is strong. Inflation is moderate, and the unemployment rate is as low as it’s been since the late 1960s. We’ve been adding an average of more than 200,000 jobs per month for over five years, which is a very large number when the “breakeven” to keep up with population growth is around 80,000-100,000 jobs per month. There are actually more job openings than there are people looking for jobs. One question many people have is, how long can this kind of growth last? Economic growth depends on how many people are working and how productive they are. But currently, our labor force is growing quite slowly due to declining fertility rates, an aging population and declining immigration. None of these seem likely to change in the near term. At the same time, productivity growth has been relatively slow. Absent a major productivity surge, then, our growth depends on whether there are still a lot of people on the sidelines who can be drawn into the labor force. There are definitely a lot of people on the sidelines. The labor force participation rate has dropped about 4.5 percentage points since 2000, from a little over 67 percent to less than 63 percent. That might not sound like a lot, but it is a really big number to the people who study this kind of thing. That means that while the unemployment rate has dropped about 6 percentage points since its Great Recession-era peak, the employment-population ratio has barely budged and is still below pre-recession levels. But that doesn’t tell us everything we need to know about how deep the labor market’s bench is — we also need to consider how likely those people are to return to the labor force. Much of the 2 drop is due to demographics, such as baby boomers retiring and more young people attending college. If we look at the labor force participation rate for so-called “prime-age” workers, between 25 and 54, the labor force participation rate is much higher, around 82 percent, and is only 2 percentage points lower than it was in 2000. This suggests that the people most likely to be in the labor force are already in the labor force. So what can we do to bring people off the sidelines? We’re unlikely to force retirees back into the workforce, and we want kids to go to school. But there are large disparities between groups of people of prime working age across a variety of dimensions, particularly education, which in turn is correlated with various measures of socioeconomic status, as well as with race and ethnicity. Education gives us an opportunity to boost labor force participation and improve employment outcomes for these groups. In my view, it’s the biggest opportunity for the growth of our economy. The Education Gap Beginning around 1980, having a college degree emerged as one of the great dividing lines in our economy. College-educated workers earn about 80 percent more than workers with only a high school degree. They’re also less likely to be unemployed and are less affected by swings in the business cycle. Following the Great Recession, for example, the unemployment rate for college-educated workers barely topped 5 percent; for workers with only a high school diploma, it peaked at 11 percent. Currently, the unemployment rate for workers with at least a four-year degree is 2.3 percent, while it’s 4 percent for workers with only a high school diploma. Granted, 4 percent is still a pretty low number. But it has to be weighed against the number of people with only a high school degree who have stopped looking for work: The labor force participation rate for this group is less than 58 percent, compared to 74 percent for college graduates. Putting together unemployment and participation, the employment/population ratio for workers who only completed high school is 55 percent. It’s more than 72 percent for college graduates. College enrollment has increased significantly since the 1980s. But roughly 40 percent of students who enroll don’t graduate within six years — and they often leave with significant debt loads and without the benefits a degree offers. Both enrollment and completion are tied to socioeconomic status: Children from lower-income families and children who attend schools with a higher proportion of lower-income students are less likely to attend college and less likely to leave with a degree. For example, one study found a gap of nearly 30 percentage points in completion rates for students from low-income versus high-income families.2 We also see variation by race and ethnicity, particularly when it comes to graduation rates. Black and Hispanic students are as much as 20 percentage points less likely to complete a degree than white and Asian students. Let’s dig in deeper — why is socioeconomic status tied to college achievement? It’s not as simple as not being able to afford to go, although that is certainly an obstacle for some students. We also see wealth and income interact with how prepared students are for college. College is a risky investment, so, for example, a student from a low-wealth household who doesn’t think he 3 has a great chance of graduating might decide, quite rationally, to not enroll in the first place.3 Similarly, a student from a lower-income family who learns after several semesters that she doesn’t have the necessary skills might be more prone to drop out than a similarly skilled student with more family resources.4 We also know that socioeconomic status is tied to the opportunities students have to obtain those skills in the first place, beginning with access to high-quality early childhood education and continuing on through K-12. Finally, income is linked to how much “knowledge about college” students have, such as navigating the application process, taking entrance exams, and applying for financial aid. In part, this could be because students from lower-income backgrounds know fewer adults who have completed college. It also could be because they attend high schools with fewer resources for college guidance. One avenue for policymakers is looking at how to reduce these differences in access and preparation during the elementary and high school years.5 Schools can also look at how to help their attendees graduate; for example, mentorship programs such as the one offered at the online Western Governors University, which has an 80 percent graduation rate, can be very effective. College Isn’t the Only Option I’ve spent the last few minutes emphasizing the benefits of a college education. But for some people, a four-year college just isn’t the right fit. And at present, as I mentioned, there are actually more job openings than there are people looking for work — and many of those openings are for well-paying jobs that don’t require a college degree. Health care workers, airline mechanics, truck drivers, and skilled tradespeople, for example, are all in high demand right now. Thus, part of preparation at the K-12 level should be informing students about those opportunities and about how they can train for them, for example, at community colleges or via apprenticeship programs. This could help students improve their prospects relative to quitting their labor market preparation after high school, which they might do if they think a four-year school is their only postsecondary option, or by enrolling in and then dropping out of a four-year college. Conclusion The challenges are huge and the stakes are high, both for individuals and for our ability to develop the workforce we need. If we want to increase the diversity of our corner offices and boardrooms — and build a pipeline of diverse candidates for these offices — we need to address the disparities that exist well before the job interview. This is also one of our best opportunities to ensure our economy’s continued growth. The size of the opportunity is significant. If we could bring the employment/population ratio of those with only a high school degree up to the ratio of college graduates, for example, we would have roughly 11 million more people at work. That’s a lot of people contributing to our country’s economic growth. 4 The Richmond Fed is digging deeply into the issues and welcomes any thoughts you have on possible solutions. Now, please join me in learning from what Mr. Garcia-Diaz has to say. 1 Thank you to Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 National Center for Education Statistics. “Education Longitudinal Study of 2002.” 3 Kartik Athreya and Janice Eberly. “Risk, the College Premium, and Aggregate Human Capital Investment.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper no. 13-02R, revised November 2016. 4 Ali K. Ozdagli and Nicholas Trachter. “On the Distribution of College Dropouts: Wealth and Uninsurable Idiosyncratic Risk.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper no. 15-15, November 2015. 5 Urvi Neelakantan and Jessie Romero, “Falling Short: Why Isn’t the U.S. Producing More College Graduates?” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 2017 Annual Report.

1 Crossing the Geographic Divide Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Reinventing Our Communities Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Baltimore Branch October 2, 2018 Thank you for inviting me to talk with you today, and thank you to the many members of our Baltimore Board of Directors and Community Investment Council who have taken the time to join us as well. I’m sure you’re all looking forward to hearing from director Mary Ann Scully, a panelist in the “Women and Wealth Building” workshop later this afternoon. This conference addresses issues that have been of interest to me for a long time and have taken on a particular urgency for me since I joined the Fed. You may have heard of the economist Robert Lucas, who won the Nobel Prize in 1995. Several decades ago, in an article about economic development, he wrote, “The consequences for human welfare involved in questions like these are simply staggering: Once one starts to think about them, it is hard to think about anything else.” He was right. I’ve spent the past nine months traveling around the Fifth District, and I’ve been struck by the tremendous diversity in our communities and by the diversity of the challenges and opportunities facing these communities. The more I learn about our district, the more I want to understand why some areas are thriving while others are struggling — and what can be done to help everyone. Our upcoming panel has a lot of experts on that topic. I thought I might set up their conversation in the context of the macroeconomy. Before I say more, the views I express are my own and might not be shared by my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System or on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1 Growing the Workforce The FOMC met last week and reviewed a pretty healthy economy: GDP growth is strong, inflation is moderate and the unemployment rate is as low as it’s been since the late 1960s. We’ve been adding an average of more than 200,000 jobs per month for more than five years. That’s a very large number when the “breakeven” needed to keep up with population growth is around 80,000 to 100,000 jobs per month. There are actually more job vacancies than there are people looking for jobs. One question many people have is, how long can this kind of growth last? To try to answer that question, let’s look at what drives growth, which you can boil down to a pretty simple statement: Economic growth depends on how many people are working and how productive they are. Right now, productivity growth is fairly slow. So absent a productivity surge, future growth will require increasing our labor force. But our population is also growing slowly — which means the growth in our labor force will have to come from people currently on the sidelines of the labor market. 2 There are a lot of people on the sidelines. The labor force participation rate (which includes people working or actively looking for work) has dropped about 4.5 percentage points since 2000, from a little over 67 percent to less than 63 percent. That might not sound like a lot, but it is a really big number to the people who study this kind of thing. So while the unemployment rate has dropped about 6 percentage points since its Great Recession-era peak, the employment- population ratio has barely budged and is still below pre-recession levels. How likely are people who have left the labor force to return? Much of the drop in labor force participation is the result of demographics, such as baby boomers retiring and more young people attending college. If we look at the labor force participation rate for what we call “prime- age” workers, aged 25-54, it is much higher, around 82 percent, and is only 2 percentage points lower than in 2000. That suggests many of the people on the sidelines intend to remain there. So what can we do? We’re unlikely to force retirees back into the workforce, and we want our students to finish school. But there are large disparities between groups of people of prime working age across a variety of dimensions, including education, race, gender and geography. Growing the labor force requires improving employment outcomes for these groups. I believe it’s the biggest opportunity for the growth of our economy. Urban, Inner City and Rural Divides Given the themes of this conference, I’ll focus today on geographic differences. One thing that’s struck me is the stark difference between the opportunities available to people in urban areas and people in rural areas. It’s remarkable how quickly, and how much, things change as you leave the city. I see it as I travel throughout the Fifth District, and I see it in the data. Across the district as a whole, the employment-population ratio and labor force participation rates are about 6 percentage points higher in urban than in rural areas. (Both those numbers are calculated for people between the ages of 16 and 64, so the difference doesn’t just reflect that rural populations tend to be older.) Interestingly, Maryland is an exception — it’s the only state in the district where these measures are about the same. That probably reflects the state’s size, which puts rural areas in closer proximity to urban areas than in other states. There are a number of factors to untangle about why this divide exists, and it’s something the Richmond Fed has begun studying in depth. But in many cases, it’s because the jobs that traditionally supported these communities have moved, and the people (often understandably) haven’t. While broadly speaking, labor market outcomes are better in urban areas than in rural areas, that’s not true for every part of an urban area: There are divides within cities as well. In this, unfortunately, Maryland is not an exception. Here in Baltimore, at the same time new shops and restaurants are being built on Pratt Street and luxury apartment towers are rising on Light Street, there are parts of the city where people can’t find jobs and row houses sit vacant. 3 This is a topic our Bank has been actively studying for several years. For example, we are currently in the midst of an extensive research project, focused on Baltimore, to understand how some individuals are able to move out of intergenerational poverty.2 And last year, we brought together some of the leading researchers in urban economics for a conference here. I wish I could tell you we’d found a silver bullet, but as you know the challenges and solutions are complex. We have to keep searching for the answers, because the size of the opportunity is significant. Areas with higher employment rates tend to have lower poverty and crime rates and fewer challenges with substance abuse. And on the national level, increasing our labor force is an important opportunity to support continued economic growth. Workforce Development and Mobility While there’s no one-size-fits-all answer, I do think there are some common themes; in particular, workforce development and mobility. I mentioned that there are currently more open jobs than there are people looking for jobs — and I’ve lost count of how many “now hiring” signs I’ve seen outside retail stores and on highway billboards. So why aren’t people in inner cities and rural areas filling these jobs? Part of the answer seems to be a mismatch between the skills employers are seeking and the ones people have. I have heard from a number of my contacts in the district that they’ve having trouble finding skilled workers. One qualification many employers are looking for is a four-year college degree. But students from rural areas are less likely to attend college than students from suburban areas. Economists at the University of Virginia, for example, studied outcomes in that state and found that college attendance ranges from less than 50 percent of high school graduates in some low-income, predominantly rural school districts to more than 80 percent in some high-income, suburban school districts.3 Students who grow up in the inner city also are less likely to attend college than their suburban peers — perhaps because they are significantly less likely to graduate from high school. Getting kids to enroll in college is just part of the challenge; roughly 40 percent of college attendees fail to earn a degree within six years. These students may be left with significant debt and few benefits. So we also need to look at preparing students to succeed in college. That preparation begins very early in life, before a child even enters kindergarten, and continues through high school. Of course, there are well-paying jobs that don’t require a four-year college degree, and there are students for whom a four-year college just isn’t the right fit. Preparation at the K-12 level needs to include informing students about those opportunities and about how they can train for them, for example at community colleges or via apprenticeship programs. All that said, it doesn’t do much good to train people for jobs that don’t exist, so we need to look at the demand side as well. It can be challenging to lure employers to some rural and inner-city 4 areas, but workforce development can help by creating the skilled workers potential employers are looking for. Mobility is another challenge in both rural and inner-city areas: Even if there are jobs, it can be difficult for people to get to them. Rural areas lack public transportation, and in cities, you might have to transfer buses three times. This is a topic outside the purview of a central bank per se, but our community development team has convened several symposia devoted to the topic. Conclusion The challenges are huge but so are the opportunities. If we want to our economy to continue to grow, we need to find ways to address the obstacles many people face to joining the labor force. By doing so, we also can address the poverty and associated ills that afflict far too many of our neighbors. The Richmond Bank is digging deeply into the issues and welcomes any thoughts you have on possible solutions. And now, I look forward to hearing the thoughts of our panel. 1 Thank you to Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 For more on community development efforts in Baltimore, see Jeanne Milliken Bonds, Anne Burnett and Emma Sissman, “Community Finance in East Baltimore: a Study of Phase One Redevelopment and Financing,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Community Practice Paper #3, 2018. 3 See Emily Cook, Jessie Romero, and Sarah Turner, “Transitioning from High School to College: Differences across Virginia,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Brief no. 17-12, December 2017.

1 The Outlook for Tomorrow: Five Numbers to Watch Thomas I. Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond West Virginia Economic Outlook Conference Charleston, West Virginia October 3, 2018 Thank you for inviting me to speak with you this morning. Since I joined the Fed in January, I’ve been traveling throughout our district to talk with the people who live and work here. This is my first trip to Charleston, and my goal is to be interesting enough that you’ll invite me back! I came to Richmond after a 30-year career in consulting at McKinsey, where I served as chief financial officer, chief risk officer and led our offices in the Southeast. I’ve spent my professional life helping firms make decisions about hiring, compensation and prices, and I’ve made a lot of those decisions myself. My colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) are some of the most talented macroeconomists, bankers, academics and financial regulators in the country. But as the only committee member coming from management, I hope I can bring a different perspective. This morning, I’ll share some of that perspective with you. I’ll start with what I’m seeing in the economy today. But my real focus is the outlook for tomorrow, including some key indicators I’m watching. And then I’ll be glad to take your questions. Before I say more, the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of the FOMC or the Federal Reserve System.1 Today GDP Growth In the 1970s, economist Arthur Okun invented the Misery Index, the sum of the inflation and unemployment rates. At its peak in 1980, the index was almost 22 percent. Today, it’s about 6 percent — t hey might want to rename it. What’s contributing to the economy’s strength? Let’s start with growth. Real GDP grew at about 2.6 percent last year and topped 4 percent in the second quarter of this year. We won’t know for a few more weeks if that pace continued in the third quarter, but most estimates put it above 3 percent. Underlying that growth, in my view, is confidence. Business optimism is high, and the University of Michigan’s Index of Consumer Sentiment is as high as it’s been since the early 2000s. We’ve had fiscal stimulus in the form of tax cuts and the omnibus bill. There’s a sense that we’re in a deregulatory moment. People have jobs, and the markets are strong. Overall, it’s starting to feel like we’ve got some tailwinds rather than headwinds. That said, I’m with the Fed, so I will be cautious. And certainly, trade disputes are making people more nervous than they did a few months ago. In the Michigan Survey, the number of households that mentioned tariff concerns has more than doubled since May. In another survey 2 conducted by the Conference Board, we’re seeing a large gap open up between people’s perceptions of today and their expectations for tomorrow. The economy also faces supply chain constraints and the risks of geopolitical instability and market volatility. Labor Markets At least for now, though, businesses and consumers seem to be looking through these risks. One reason they’re doing so is the strength of the labor market. The economy has added an average of more than 200,000 jobs per month since the start of the year. That’s a very large number; for perspective, the “breakeven” to keep up with our country’s population growth is around 80,000 – 100,000 jobs per month. Strong job growth has contributed to unemployment below 4 percent, in the range of our lowest levels since the late 1960s. At the same time, companies still want to hire — at 4.4 percent , the job vacancy rate is higher than the unemployment rate and about the highest it’s been since the Bureau of Labor Statistics started tracking the data in 2000. In short, there are more job openings than there are people looking for work. Vacancies are especially high in fields such as nursing, the skilled trades and truck driving. I should note, however, that there are parts of the country still struggling. Here in West Virginia, for example, there are counties where the unemployment rate remains near or even above 8 percent, and the employment/population ratio is the lowest in the country at around 50 percent. These are real challenges, and it’s important we do not lose sight of them when we talk about the strength of the U.S. economy as a whole. Inflation and Monetary Policy Let’s turn to inflation. We’re coming off a fairly long stretch where inflation ran below the Fed’s 2 percent target. The numbers have firmed around our target in recent months, but it’s reasonable to ask why we’re not seeing more inflation, given the tightness of the labor market, the impact of tariffs and commodity cost pressure in places like pulp and oil. Part of the answer is that many firms don’t think they can pass on higher costs to consumers. There are a number of reasons for this, including lagging productivity at rates that don’t offset wage increases; the buying power of big-box retailers; the price transparency provided by the internet; and competition from lower-priced imports. Another factor keeping inflation in check is that people believe the Fed is going to keep inflation in check. The 1970s taught us that inflation expectations play a large role in determining future inflation. Currently, multiple measures of inflation expectations are holding steady in line with the Fed’s 2 percent target. Tomorrow Now you might be wondering, how long can this continue? After all, the current economic expansion has been going on for more than nine years — one of the longest upturns on record. 3 Well, I should be humble here: Economists are not the best at predicting the future. (Maybe I should be doubly humble: Guys with 30 years in management aren’t that great at it either.) So instead of telling you what’s going to happen, I’ll tell you about the numbers I’m watching, which hopefully will be of interest to you as well. Please recognize that when I talk about these numbers, I’m not trying to anticipate shocks, such as a hard Brexit or a political crisis. Business Investment I watch business investment closely. It’s a strong indicator of continued confidence — firms aren’t going to invest in the future unless they feel good about where we’re headed. This, in my view, is the major challenge presented by the discussions we’re having right now about tariffs. They unsettle businesses at a time when strong growth ought to be motivating them to invest. Investment has lagged for the past 10 years. Of course, we had a severe recession, but even during the recovery it’s looked low relative to previous periods and relative to corporate profitability. The last four quarters have been quite strong, however — as we’ve seen here in West Virginia with, for example, the major expansions Toyota and Hino announced last fall. Some of that might be catch up; some of it might be those tailwinds I mentioned earlier. Either way, we need that confidence to continue for the economy to keep growing at its current rate. Productivity I’m also paying attention to productivity. That’s because if we want the economy to grow, we need more people to work and/or we need them to be more productive. But the labor force is growing quite slowly for a variety of reasons, including declining fertility rates, an aging population and less immigration. This is certainly a challenge facing West Virginia, where the population has been declining since 2010 and which has the highest ratio of older adults to working-age adults of any state in the Fifth District. If the labor force is growing slowly, then that means economic growth depends on faster productivity growth. But productivity growth also has been slow: Between 2006 and 2017, it averaged just 1.3 percent, compared to an average of 2.9 percent between 1995 and 2005.2 I have to confess that I find this challenging to explain because it’s lower than what I think is the potential of American businesses. In my professional experience and in my conversations with contacts throughout the district, businesses believe they are driving more productivity than the data suggest, via automation, capital investments and operating efficiencies. Many are. It’s unlikely that the slowdown is simply the result of measurement error, so there must be something else going on. It’s possible that the past decade of underinvestment has had an impact on productivity. In addition, economists have found a lot of evidence pointing to decreased entrepreneurship.3 Startups are responsible for a lot of innovation, so this could be contributing to slower productivity growth overall. Another explanation could be that some businesses are getting more productive, but they’re doing so at the expense of their competitors, thus dampening the effect in aggregate. 4 Productivity growth was strong in the second quarter of this year, at 2.9 percent. If that marks the start of a sustained upturn due to investments paying off and technology coming to fruition, it could drive long-term healthy growth. If it’s a one-quarter blip and productivity returns to its slower trend, it could limit our economy’s potential growth. Compensation Growth for Job Stayers I’m watching growth in compensation. As I mentioned, the labor market is very tight. Yet wage inflation has been sluggish, averaging just 2.4 percent since 2015 (although it climbed to 2.9 percent in August). During previous upswings, wage inflation approached 4 percent. One factor restraining wage growth is that absent faster productivity, companies don’t think they have the ability to increase prices to compensate for paying higher wages. Another major factor, in my view, is that turnover has been relatively low. A high percentage of wage costs goes to the retained base, and wages tend to rise more when people change jobs. We typically see faster wage increases when companies are competing for each other’s employees. But we’re not really seeing that competition yet. I see three potential paths for the evolution of the labor market. One possibility is that we find ways to draw more people into the labor force. Although the decline in labor force participation over the past two decades is largely the result of demographic changes, there are large gaps by geography, race, gender and education.4 If we can address these gaps and more people come off the sidelines, we would likely see continued economic growth combined with moderate wage growth. West Virginia is a state where the opportunities are huge. The second possibility is that we see more of the same: The labor market remains tight but companies are unable to pass on wage increases so they accept supply constraints instead. In this scenario, wage growth is moderate and job growth eventually falls. The third path is that companies decide they need to hire from their competitors. Turnover increases, and companies start paying their current employees more to retain them. That could drive faster inflation. For this reason, compensation growth for job stayers will be a number I’m watching closely. Consumer Durables Prices I pay attention to prices for durable consumer goods, such as cars and refrigerators. Their prices are a key indicator of core inflation. Until around 1995, the price indices for durables, nondurables and services increased in tandem. But since then, prices for durable goods have declined while prices for nondurables and services have continued to increase. As I noted, the internet and big-box retailers have likely been holding prices down, which has both benefited consumers and restrained inflation. But as consumer goods companies’ margins continue to be squeezed due to increasing pressure from commodity costs and tariffs, they may have no choice but to try to raise prices. We’ve already seen reports of price increases at some prominent consumer products firms. If these and future efforts are successful, inflation might well pick up pace. 5 Yield Curve The final indicator I’m watching closely is the yield curve, which is the difference between short-term and long-term interest rates. When these rates are close together, it could suggest markets are losing confidence in the outlook. Currently, many people are concerned about the compression of the spread between 2-year and-10 year Treasuries. Their concern may well be warranted, since an inversion of this yield curve has predicted seven of the last six recessions. I respect the 2-year/10-year spread as a signal. That said, I’m not inherently inclined to blindly follow the market’s lead, so I’ve been digging into the research. The Board of Governors, for example, recently published an article suggesting that nearer-term spreads have a better forecasting record than the traditional 2-year/10-year measure. 5 These have remained more stable and don’t show an elevated risk of recession at present. Of course, these market reads are complicated by our own large holdings of Treasuries, the desire of foreign governments for safe assets and recent increases in Treasury purchases driven by our increasing deficit. Still, the yield curve is worth watching as well. Conclusion Net, I’m watching five signals: business investment, productivity, compensation for job stayers, consumer durables prices and the yield curve. While forecasting the future evolution of these signals is challenging, I do want to leave you with the thought that the economy’s pulse, as we sit here today, is strong. Growth is solid, unemployment is low and inflation is at target. The challenge is not so much today, but rather ensuring that growth continues. I hope you’ll monitor these five metrics with me over the next year as the Fed tries to do its part to support the country’s economic growth. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. 1 Thank you to Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Based on real output per hour in the nonfarm business sector. 3 For example, see Ryan A. Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda, “Declining Dynamism, Allocative Efficiency, and the Productivity Slowdown,” Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series no. 2017-019, February 7, 2017. 4 Thomas I. Barkin, “Closing the Gap,” Speech at the Forum for Minorities in Banking, Charlotte, N.C., September 28, 2018; and “Crossing the Geographic Divide,” Speech at the Reinventing Our Communities conference, Baltimore, Md., October 2, 2018. 5 Eric Engstrom and Steven Sharpe, “(Don’t Fear) the Yield Curve,” Federal Reserve Board of Governors FEDS Notes, June 28, 2018.
