Neel Kashkari at the Land Data for Promoting Indian Business and Homeownership on Reservations Event President Kashkari's introductory remarks for the July 9th event July 9, 2018 | 8:00 a.m. CT Mystic Lake Center Prior Lake , Minnesota Neel Kashkari President and CEO Neel Kashkari at the Land Data for Promoting Indian Business and Homeownership on Reservations Event Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Thank you, and thanks to the Department of Interior and my own colleagues at the Center for Indian Country Development, or CICD, for organizing this event. I’m glad to be with you today, on the historic land of the Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community, for this convening on Indian Country land data. Land is the essence of Indian Country, and accurate and accessible land records are essential for Indian Country’s prosperity. I applaud your goal today—identifying improvements in how land records are collected, processed, and disseminated to better support residential and commercial development on reservations. What you are talking about are fundamental structural reforms, reforms that not only promote efficient and productive use of Indian Country’s vital land resources, but also affirm tribal sovereignty and self-determination. I’ve been thinking more and more about how to bring about these kinds of structural reforms, those that address critical issues like poverty, job opportunities, and affordable housing by boosting efficiency, productivity, and supply. So let me explain how your concerns are broadly parallel to my own concerns about the need for fundamental structural reforms to land and housing markets, and why I am pleased to join forces with you. Before I do, let me note that the views I express today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. My story is rooted in the nature of the Federal Reserve System. The Fed is the nation’s central bank. Our fundamental responsibility is monetary policy in pursuit of two objectives—maximum employment and stable prices, the so-called dual mandate that Congress has established for the Fed. The Fed also has been given significant authority as supervisor of financial institutions and as a provider of payments services. All of these responsibilities are common to many central banks around the world. But the Fed stands out among central banks because of its decentralized structure. When Congress created the Fed in 1913, it did something unique: It distributed us across 12 regional, independent Federal Reserve Banks, rather than concentrating power in Washington, D.C. Congress did this to ensure that the many locally varying conditions across the United States are considered in economic policymaking. That’s why we have a Federal Reserve Bank in Minneapolis—to understand and represent the economic conditions in our region, the Ninth Federal Reserve District. And that’s why I spend a lot of my time meeting with community leaders across the Ninth District. On one of those trips I met with a business executive who had just moved to Duluth, Minnesota. He said he’d found it very expensive to buy a home there. I was surprised to learn that he had come not from a small town but from Houston, Texas. How could it be that he found homeownership more expensive in Duluth than in one of America’s largest metropolitan areas? But this was not an isolated example. Local leaders consistently tell me that affordable housing is one of the biggest challenges facing their communities. I hear it all the time and everywhere I go. I have heard it in Indian Country too, in recent visits with community leaders from South Dakota’s Native communities and from the Hannahville Indian Community, a small but thriving Native community in Michigan. That tells me that something in our housing system is structurally broken. Otherwise housing supply would respond to demand, and affordable housing would be only a temporary issue in certain fast-growing communities. The only explanation that makes sense to me is that too many barriers impede the supply of land and buildings. However well intentioned, these barriers are driving up the cost of real estate and housing for everyone, although low- and moderate- income families feel the pain of high housing costs the most. These supply barriers can take many forms. In many places the burdens directly raise construction costs—and I’m part of that problem myself because I live in a suburb, Orono, Minnesota, that requires large minimum lot sizes. In Indian Country these burdens often take the form of administrative processes that affect the availability of housing finance, particularly due to the trust status of the land. I know you will be discussing these issues today. Other common restrictions include limits on multifamily or manufactured housing. Some of these regulations sound good, but by pushing costs up, they also help put us in a housing affordability hole. When you’re in a hole, you should stop digging deeper. One way to start is to educate local leaders, including tribal leaders, on how decisions that may seem like good ideas in isolation collectively drive up the minimum cost of housing for families of modest means. In Indian Country, housing is intricately tied to the federal government and its regulation of tribal lands. I understand that part of the discussion today will be around the need to address fundamental problems with the quality of land data and the speed and reliability with which land records are processed. In recent years we have allowed these barriers to mount while seeking ways around the problems they cause, often via additional appropriations for subsidized housing. The complaints about affordable housing that I hear in Indian Country and wherever I go tell me that the strategy of subsidized housing has fallen short of resolving the housing problem—and I can assure you it will continue to fall short. No matter how justified we may think those subsidies are, the number of families struggling with housing cost and availability issues far exceeds the subsidies we can afford. So we need to complement the existing subsidy programs by boosting housing supply and bringing down the cost of housing. I have asked the Research staff at the Minneapolis Fed to help me identify where we can achieve the biggest net gains through reducing barriers to the supply of developable land and new homes. We’re just beginning to scratch the surface on this issue. Given my views, I’m pleased that you are already engaged in a similar search for supply-boosting structural reforms in the Indian Country. The National Native Homeownership Coalition, the CICD, and staff at the Department of the Interior have organized an impressive array of information about how Indian Country housing and mortgage supply, and hence homeownership, have been held back by bottlenecks in loan processing. These include, I understand, fundamental limitations in trust land records and myriad bureaucratic practices for processing Indian Country land, lease, and loan transactions. Your collective goal of making it faster and easier to transact loans on trust land will benefit not only the housing market in Indian Country, but also its business sector. So the work you are doing here—to improve the accuracy of land records and the ease and speed of processing loans on trust land—exemplifies the type of fundamental structural reform we need to boost efficiency, while solving basic social problems. So think deeply and boldly about how to protect what’s essential about trust land while also ensuring that it can be used efficiently to the full benefit of tribal communities. We at the Minneapolis Fed are committed to working with you to make progress on these important issues. Thank you. Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

The Flattening Yield Curve Is the flattening yield curve telling us a recession is around the corner? July 16, 2018 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO The Flattening Yield Curve Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This essay is also available on Medium . This time is different. I consider those the four most dangerous words in economics. Today, policymakers are paying increased attention to the so-called flattening yield curve—the difference in yields between long-term and short-term Treasury bonds. For the past 50 years, an inverted yield curve, where short rates are higher than long rates, has been an excellent predictor of a U.S. recession. In fact, during this half-century period, each time the yield curve has inverted, a recession has followed. Over the past two-and-a-half years, as the Federal Reserve has raised short-term interest rates, the yield curve has flattened dramatically, with the difference between 10-year and two-year Treasuries down from 134 basis points in December 2016 to 25 basis points today, a 10-year low. Is the flattening yield curve telling us a recession is around the corner? Some say, “No. This time is different,” and that the flattening yield curve is not a concern. The truth is we don’t know for sure. But we do know the bond market is telling us that inflation expectations appear well-anchored, the economy is not showing signs of overheating and rates are already close to neutral. This suggests that there is little reason to raise rates much further, invert the yield curve, put the brakes on the economy and risk that it does, in fact, trigger a recession. If inflation expectations or real growth prospects pick up, the Fed can always raise rates then. The primary reason some policymakers argue that this time is different is because the “term premium” is low today, and so they argue that comparisons to past yield curve inversions are misplaced. If the term premium were at its historical average, these policymakers say, the yield curve would be steeper and an inversion would be further off. This is the same argument some policymakers made in late 2006 to explain why they didn’t worry about the then-inverted yield curve. We now know the Great Recession followed that inversion. So what is the term premium? It is the extra returns investors often demand to hold a long-term bond versus a series of short-term bonds. While we’ve given it a technical-sounding name, the truth is we don’t fully understand it. It’s just a residual of the various factors embedded in market prices that we can’t explain. Why is the term premium low? Maybe because the Fed’s expanded balance sheet is holding it down. Maybe investors are nervous about trade tensions and are buying Treasuries to hedge those risks. Maybe there is an excess of savings around the world. We don’t know. If I said this time is different because the residual is low, would you be willing to risk a recession on that hunch without clear evidence that inflation expectations are rising above target? I sure wouldn’t. In the past year, Congress has enacted both a major increase in spending and a large tax cut, and the Federal Reserve has begun winding down its balance sheet. All of these factors increase the supply of Treasury bonds that the private markets must hold. For example, the private sector’s holdings of Treasury securities with remaining maturity of at least 10 years has increased at a rate of $14.2 billion per month so far in 2018 versus a rate of $7.5 billion per month in 2014. This additional supply should be putting downward pressure on Treasury prices, driving yields up. Yet the 10-year yield has increased remarkably little, to 2.83 percent today. The fact that the 10-year yield is, so far, staying around 3 percent suggests that monetary policy, with a federal funds rate of 1.75 percent to 2.0 percent, is near neutral today. If the markets were expecting higher inflation or stronger real economic growth, that should be showing up as higher long-term bond yields. If the Fed continues raising rates, we risk not only inverting the yield curve, but also moving to a contractionary policy stance and putting the brakes on the economy, which the markets are indicating is at this point unnecessary. Deciphering the many signals from financial markets is not an exact science. But declarations that “this time is different” should be a warning that history might be about to repeat itself. More On Monetary Policy Region & Community More On Monetary Policy Region & Community Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Is remote work declining? What the latest data show Article AI adoption in business grows steadily but unevenly Article Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Star Tribune Op-Ed: There’s more to the Hamilton story than the musical Hamilton envisioned a unified national economy built on the strengths of its individual states August 27, 2018 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Star Tribune Op-Ed: There’s more to the Hamilton story than the musical Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This commentary was first published in the Star Tribune . American history is coming alive in Minnesota on Aug. 29 as “Hamilton: An American Musical” opens. Those lucky enough to have tickets will see and hear a hip-hop homage to one of our nation’s most important Founding Fathers. We should all use this opportunity to learn more about Alexander Hamilton and his bold economic ideas, which have powered the U.S. economy for more than 200 years. The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is continuing his legacy through our work to ensure economic stability and a strong job market for all Americans. And during the six-week run of “Hamilton,” we honor that legacy and invite the public to come in and see a special exhibit to learn about this remarkable American hero and about the work we do on your behalf at the Minneapolis Fed. Why is Alexander Hamilton so important to our nation’s history? He was not only instrumental in crafting and ratifying our nation’s Constitution with its unprecedented design of checks and balances, but also, as Treasury secretary for President George Washington, Hamilton developed economic institutions that were decades — and in some ways centuries — ahead of their time. He realized that to unlock the full potential of the United States, the new country needed a national economy that built on the strengths of the individual states, rather than a federation of independent rivals each competing with one another. While this unified vision may seem obvious now, it was highly controversial at the time. The tensions between state and federal authority and between local vs. national control have been with us from the earliest days of the nation and are still with us today. Such challenges aren’t unique to America. Indeed, in 2018, more than two centuries after Hamilton’s era, Europe is struggling with these same issues, and its inability to resolve them is a fundamental source of Europe’s current economic uncertainty. Europe wants the economic muscle that a united France, Germany, Italy and Spain could provide. But the individual countries are reluctant to cede control to a central authority that can act on their collective behalf. The same struggles were a challenge in Hamilton’s time, with individual states such as Virginia, Massachusetts, New York and Pennsylvania each cautious about ceding its own power. Hamilton realized that national institutions, such as a national or central bank, and a national currency could unite the new country and unlock an economic powerhouse. But history rarely moves forward in one continuous motion. It evolves, in fits and starts. The history of our nation’s central banks confirms that. With President Washington’s support, Hamilton created the First Bank of the United States. Unfortunately, Congress allowed it to expire 20 years later. Then Congress created the Second Bank of the United States, which lasted until President Andrew Jackson saw to its demise in the 1830s because he didn’t like the centralization of power that it represented. But after the economy was hammered by repeated banking panics in the late 1800s and a financial crisis in 1907, Congress once again concluded that the United States needed a central bank to stand behind the economy. Tension between local and national control was again paramount; Congress wanted to make sure regions across the country were directly represented in policymaking. So in 1913 it took a concept from the Constitution and built checks and balances into a new central bank, creating the Federal Reserve System, which includes the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and 12 independent, regional Federal Reserve Banks — the 9th of which is here in Minneapolis. The Federal Reserve is the modern manifestation of Alexander Hamilton’s original vision for an American national bank, updated to meet the needs of a large, diverse economy. Our job at the Minneapolis Fed is literally to represent you. The Minneapolis Fed is offering free tours to the public to learn about Hamilton’s vision and about the work we do today to build on his legacy. Come learn about monetary policy, financial stability, the services we provide to the financial system and the research we do to promote an economy where all Americans can thrive. We have 1,000 employees who are proud to represent the Ninth Federal Reserve District in our nation’s economic policymaking. Come visit us, and let’s celebrate Hamilton together. Related content There's more to the story Go to our “Hamilton” page to learn more about the man, take a quiz, and sign up for a tour. Enter the #Hamilton4All social media contest . Students: Win tickets to see “Hamilton” by entering our contest? Check this out . The Flattening Yield Curve Another Neel Kashkari commentary, this one on the flattening yield curve More On Region & Community More On Region & Community Related Content Henry Long from Eden Prairie took his shot in true “Hamilton” style Article The Bank that Hamilton Built Article Hamilton's Central Bank — Then and Now Event Related Content Henry Long from Eden Prairie took his shot in true “Hamilton” style Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Bozeman, MT President Kashkari will give brief remarks, followed by an open-mic Q&A with the audience moderated by Larry Simkins, President & CEO of The Washington Companies. September 5, 2018 | 3:00 p.m. CT Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Bozeman, MT | Montana State University, Ballroom A, 211 Strand Union Building Bozeman , Montana Neel Kashkari President and CEO Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Bozeman, MT Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Do you have a question about how the Federal Reserve affects you? Wondering about economic disparities, regulating big banks, or the Fed's recent interest rate decisions? Curious about how the Minneapolis Fed gathers data and informs its work within the Federal Reserve System? Join us for a conversation with Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari on these topics and more in Bozeman, MT on September 5 at 2:00 pm MT (3:00 pm CT). President Kashkari is a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, the body of the Federal Reserve System that sets national monetary policy. Since taking over as President of the Minneapolis Fed in January 2016, he has spearheaded several new initiatives, including releasing a plan to end the "Too Big to Fail" problem and launching the Federal Reserve's new Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, housed at the Minneapolis Fed. President Kashkari will give brief remarks, followed by an open-mic Q&A with the audience moderated by Larry Simkins, President & CEO of The Washington Companies. This town hall forum with President Kashkari was a public event and discussion held in Bozeman, Montana on September 5, 2018 . Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
