Governor Jerome H. Powell At the C. Peter McColough Series on International Economics Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York Share Watch live Thanks for the opportunity to speak to you today. In these brief remarks, I will discuss the progress of the economy and the path forward for monetary policy. 1 The current expansion is almost six years old and is now one of the longest since World War II. While the pace of improvement has at times been frustratingly slow, by some measures the recovery is now well advanced. By other measures, there is still room for improvement. Assessing the scope for further improvement will be important in judging the appropriate path for monetary policy. After its most recent meeting in March, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) modified its forward guidance to say that an increase in the target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate when the Committee has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term. Such an increase could come as soon as the June FOMC meeting. The timing of liftoff and the pace of subsequent rate increases will depend on incoming data and on realized and expected progress toward our congressionally mandated goals of stable prices and maximum employment. Monetary policy works with long and variable lags, so rate increases need to begin well before we reach those goals. Let us turn to the two main economic conditions for liftoff that the Committee articulated. We have already seen a great deal of progress in the labor market, and I expect that progress to continue. Despite slowing in March, job creation has been particularly strong over the past two years. The unemployment rate has declined from 10 percent in October 2009 to 5.5 percent in March 2015, a level that is not far above many estimates of its natural rate. But the unemployment rate probably understates the amount of slack still remaining in the labor market. The labor force participation rate continues to be unusually low, suggesting that potential workers may be waiting on the sidelines for further improvements in job opportunities and wages. The number working part time who want full-time jobs also remains elevated. The low level of wage increases also suggests additional slack. The Committee said that it will want to be reasonably confident that inflation will move back to 2 percent over the medium term. On a 12-month basis, headline inflation in February, as measured by the personal consumption expenditures price index, stood at 0.3 percent; meanwhile, core inflation, which excludes volatile energy and food components, was 1.4 percent. These low current readings are partly a consequence of two transient shocks--the dramatic decline in oil prices and the effect of the appreciation of the dollar on import prices. Before those shocks, both headline inflation and core inflation were running at about 1.5 percent. When the effects of these shocks pass, I expect that inflation will return roughly to those earlier levels and then rise gradually to our 2 percent objective over the medium term as labor and product markets tighten further. Despite the current low inflation readings, survey-based measures of inflation expectations in the United States have been stable. However, market-based readings on inflation compensation have declined significantly since mid-2014. I view this decline as more likely reflecting movements in risk premiums and other transitory factors, rather than shifts in longer-term inflation expectations. Still, it will be important to keep an eye on the performance of inflation breakevens. I expect that economic conditions will support the first rate increase later this year. I do not expect that such an increase or the associated market reaction will materially restrain the progress of the economy. From a macroeconomic perspective, the precise timing of liftoff is less important than the path of subsequent additional rate increases. My view is that, if the economy continues on its expected path, it will be appropriate for a time to increase rates fairly gradually. Of course, if the economy improves faster or inflation increases more than expected, it will be appropriate to raise rates faster. And if economic performance disappoints or inflation remains lower than expected, it will be appropriate to delay liftoff or raise rates more slowly thereafter. There are several reasons why it may be appropriate to raise rates somewhat gradually, including the proximity of the zero lower bound for interest rates and continuing economic headwinds in the wake of the crisis. 2 I would like to explore a rationale that has received somewhat less attention, which is the unusually high level of uncertainty today about capacity measures such as the natural rate of unemployment. 3 Uncertainty about the precise level of these indicators becomes more important for policy as the expansion continues and the economy approaches its potential, defined as the level of output that is consistent with stable prices. All else equal, a decision to return interest rates to more-normal levels implies that the economy is nearing its capacity. The financial crisis did significant damage to the productive capacity of our economy, and the damage was of a character, extent, and duration that cannot be fully known today. Given this uncertainty, it is even more difficult than usual to assess how much slack remains. It seems plausible that at least part of this supply-side damage could be reversed if the economy enjoys a period of sustained growth. 4 To encourage that outcome, as monetary policymakers consider removing accommodation, we should look for a little more proof than usual that labor markets are tightening or other supply-side constraints are binding. Of course, if the effects of the crisis prove difficult to reverse and, as a result, inflation pressures do emerge, the Federal Reserve will use its tools to contain them. Let us take a brief look at the implications of severe financial crises for economies generally. Studies document that severe financial crises around the world have typically left behind large and sustained reductions in the level of output. 5 The recent crisis is no exception, and figure 1 shows such an effect for the U.S., U.K., euro-area and Canadian economies since 2008. The underlying pattern is an interesting one. Economists and policymakers have tended at first to view a decline in output as a cyclical shock to demand and to realize only gradually over time that a crisis has done substantial and lasting damage to the productive capacity of the economy. 6 As a result, estimates of the gap between actual and potential output often narrow over time, partly through higher actual output but also through lower estimates of potential. For example, figure 2 shows that the Congressional Budget Office has made a series of downward revisions to its estimates of potential output in recent years. 7 This supply-side damage has typically appeared both in the labor market and in the capital stock. 8 Long spells of unemployment cause skills to atrophy and make it more difficult for workers to find new jobs, raising the natural rate of unemployment for those who do remain in the labor force and causing others to throw in the towel and drop out. Extended periods of weak demand appear to cause companies to invest less in plant and technology, which slows the growth of the productivity of the workforce. The number of new business formations declines sharply, perhaps because of reduced credit availability, which may depress hiring, productivity, business innovation, and hence trend output. 9 Corporate spending on research and development has also been strongly procyclical, which may have similar effects. 10 Turning to the recent U.S. experience, many economists now estimate that substantially more than half of the shortfall in gross domestic product relative to its pre-crisis trend represents a reduction of potential output and not just a shortfall in demand. 11 U.S. labor force damage likely accounts for some part of the shortfall. 12 The greater part appears to have resulted from lower trend labor productivity due to reduced capital investment and "multifactor productivity," which is often thought of as capturing the effects of technological innovation. 13 The employment rebound suggests that strong measures--such as those the Fed took during and after the crisis--can prevent even sharp job losses from becoming permanent. But the productivity slowdown suggests that monetary policy cannot, by itself, avert all of the damage. This consideration raises the question I mentioned a moment ago. Should we think of this supply-side damage as permanent or temporary? In many previous episodes around the world, post-crisis reductions in output have proved permanent. Nonetheless, it seems plausible that at least part of the damage can be reversed. As business confidence improves, employers may be more willing to take a chance on someone with an extended spell of unemployment. A stronger job market and rising wages may encourage more potential workers to join the labor force. 14 Over a longer period, stronger demand can produce higher capital investment, driving higher productivity. A long expansion could also produce higher productivity as companies strive to get more out of every dollar of capital and hour of work and as the strong economy encourages entrepreneurship and innovation. To give us the best chance to recover lost ground, we need policies that support labor force participation, business and household confidence, hiring and investment, and productivity growth--policies, I hasten to add, that are, for the most part, outside the remit of the Federal Reserve. Monetary policy also has a role to play by continuing to support the expansion as long as inflation expectations remain stable and realized inflation stays close to our 2 percent objective. Indeed, in the current circumstances, accommodative policy may not only help restore some of our economy's potential, but should also help return inflation to our 2 percent objective more expeditiously. There is no risk-free path for monetary policy. The biggest risk of tightening too early or too fast is that the economy may weaken more than expected, forcing the central bank to reverse course. The record of central banks lifting off from the zero lower bound suggests caution in this regard. A second risk is that we could prematurely truncate the process of healing damage from the crisis, thereby ensuring that the admittedly severe cyclical effects become permanent. Overly accommodative monetary policy also poses risks. First, the economy could overheat, and rising inflation could require the Committee to raise rates faster, which--if overdone--could produce a damaging recession. For now, I would be more concerned with a second risk, which is that more-accommodative policy could lead to frothy financial conditions and eventually undermine financial stability. While I do not see a troubling buildup of these risks today, tighter monetary policy might eventually be necessary if such risks do appear. Conclusion To wrap up, with the support of extraordinary monetary accommodation, our economy has made substantial progress. As the FOMC moves to return monetary policy to a more normal footing, it makes sense to me to move fairly gradually as long as the incoming data evolve about as expected. Doing so would, among other benefits, give our economy the best chance to make up lost ground. 1. The views I express here today are mine alone and not necessarily those of any other member of the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Janet Yellen (2015), " Normalizing Monetary Policy: Prospects and Perspectives ," speech delivered at "The New Normal Monetary Policy," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 27. Return to text 3. The natural rate of unemployment can be thought of as the unemployment rate at which the labor market is at its long-run equilibrium and inflation is stable. We cannot directly observe the natural rate but must infer it based on the performance of wages, prices, and labor market indicators. Most FOMC participants estimate that the longer-run normal rate is currently in the range of 5.0 to 5.2 percent. Confidence intervals around statistical estimates of the natural rate are routinely estimated to be quite wide. For example, Staiger, Stock, and Watson estimate a 95 percent confidence range around the natural rate to extend nearly 1-1/2 percentage points on either side of the point estimate. See Douglas Staiger, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997), " How Precise Are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment? " in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press). Return to text 4. See, for example, Laurence M. Ball (2014), " Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession in OECD Countries ," NBER Working Paper Series 20185 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May); and Robert E. Hall (2014), " Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial Crisis ," NBER Working Paper Series 20183 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May). Return to text 5. See Robert F. Martin, Teyanna Munyan, and Beth Anne Wilson (2014), " Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves? " IFDP Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 12); Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009), This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly (Princeton: Princeton University Press); Valerie Cerra and Sweta Chaman Saxena (2008), " Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery ," American Economic Review , vol. 98 (March), pp. 439-57; and Davide Furceri and Annabelle Mourougane (2009), " The Effect of Financial Crises on Potential Output: New Empirical Evidence from OECD Countries ," OECD Economics Department Working Papers 699 (Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, May). For a different view, see Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer (2015), " New Evidence on the Impact of Financial Crises in Advanced Countries ," NBER Working Paper Series 21021 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March). Return to text 6. For example, Martin, Munyan, and Wilson show that estimates of potential output generated by common filtering techniques tend to revise down following recessions as actual output grows slower than its pre-recession trend; see Martin, Munyan, and Wilson, "Potential Output and Recessions," in note 5. In other words, looking backward with many years of hindsight at the evolution of output following a financial crisis, the negative effect on potential output is clearer than it is when estimating the level of potential output in real time immediately following the crises. As an example of this type of exercise, see Furceri and Mourougane, "Effect of Financial Crises on Potential Output," in note 5. Return to text 7. See Congressional Budget Office (2014), Revisions to CBO's Projection of Potential Output since 2007 (PDF) (Washington: CBO, February). Return to text 8. See Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2013), " Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-77 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November); and Hall, "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy," in note 4. Return to text 9. For evidence regarding the link between fewer start-ups and lower job growth, see Ryan Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2014), " The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism ," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3-24. For an estimate of how the latest recession affected aggregate trend productivity growth in the United States, see Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox, "Aggregate Supply in the United States," in note 8. Return to text 10. See Gadi Barlevy (2005), " Why Don't Recessions Encourage More R&D Spending? (PDF) " Chicago Fed Letter 220 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, November); and Diego Comin and Mark Gertler (2006), " Medium-Term Business Cycles ," American Economic Review , vol. 93 (June), pp.523-51. Return to text 11. See Congressional Budget Office, Revisions to CBO's Projection of Potential Output, in note 7; Hall, "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy," in note 4; Ball, "Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession," in note 4; and Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox, "Aggregate Supply in the United States," in note 8. Return to text 12. There is considerable debate about how much of the decline in the employment-to-population ratio and labor force participation has been due to the recession, how much of that decline is reversible, and, relatedly, how much of the decline would have occurred regardless in the absence of a recession. For the argument that much of the decrease in labor force participation would likely have occurred even in the absence of the recession, see Stephanie Aaronson, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014), " Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197-275; for the argument that most of the decline is related to the severity of the recession and is likely reversible, see Christopher J. Erceg and Andrew T. Levin (2013), " Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession ," IMF Working Paper 13/245 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, July). Return to text 13. See Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2013), "Aggregate Supply in the United States," in note 8. Return to text 14. In fact, as the recovery has progressed, the labor force participation rate and other broad indicators have moved back toward their longer-run trends. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: April 08, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Annual Community Bankers Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Share Good morning. I am delighted to join you here today to discuss the state of community banking and issues of importance to community banks like yours. 1 New York may be home to Wall Street, but, just like the rest of the country, most of the banks in the Second District are community banks. There are more than 170 banking organizations here with less than $10 billion in assets, serving millions of customers. Community banks play an essential role in our financial system, supporting the economic health and vitality of the communities you serve. Unlike many of your larger competitors, community banks offer customers face-to-face interaction with a local banker who has the authority to make the final decision on a loan--a banker with a long-term investment in the community who will not be moving to another branch in a new town within a few years. Community bankers benefit from local knowledge and relationships that often lead to more successful and efficient lending decisions. These advantages have enabled many community banks in the Second District and around the country to maintain or increase their local market shares while competing with larger regional and money center banks, and I expect that they will continue to do so. Nonetheless, community banks face significant challenges today. The number of community banks has declined significantly over the past decade. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's "Problem List" of at-risk banks has declined from 888 at the peak of the financial crisis to 291 at the end of 2014, but that is still well above typical pre-crisis levels of fewer than 100. There are several factors driving consolidation and elevating the number of problem banks, beyond the lasting effects of the recession. For starters, community banks have been challenged in some of your traditional product lines by competition from larger financial institutions that can achieve lower costs through economies of scale. At the same time, historically thin net interest margins have constrained profitability, and, although not aimed at community banks, new post-crisis regulations meant to strengthen the financial system are coming into place that require additional management attention. The Federal Reserve recognizes the importance of a healthy community banking sector for our nation's prosperity, and we are committed to understanding the challenges faced by community banks and to carefully considering the effects of new regulations on these institutions. Our mandate is to protect the safety and soundness of the nation's financial system, and we aim to do so in a manner that promotes a level playing field for all institutions while taking into account the risks those institutions could pose to our financial system. As you know, the Federal Reserve tiers its regulations to be commensurate with the risks presented by different institutions. The risks presented by an institution with $300 million in assets are very different from those presented by an institution with $300 billion in assets. Although the credit that a community bank extends to households and businesses within its local area may be difficult to replace, the failure of a community bank would not cause a widespread contraction in credit or have any other systemic consequences. For that reason, community banks are not subject to the same regulations that are applied to the most systemically important banking organizations. The Federal Reserve's 2013 capital guidelines are a good example of how we have taken into account the effect of our regulations on community banks. The recession made it clear that strong capital positions are essential for banks of all sizes, including community banks. After issuing our proposed guidelines, we received considerable input from community bankers helping us to identify which portions of our original proposal were, and were not, appropriate for community banks. Based on this input, we made some significant adjustments to the proposal to alter, for example, the risk-weighting of mortgage loans and the regulatory capital treatment of certain unrealized gains and losses and trust preferred securities for community banking organizations. Regulators also developed a community bank guide, which outlined the relevant provisions for smaller, noncomplex institutions and compared the new requirements to the previous standards. 2 In addition, the Federal Reserve Board recently issued a final rule raising the limit on the maximum size of banks covered by our Small Bank Holding Company Statement. 3 This policy statement, originally issued in 1980, fosters local ownership of small community banks. While the Board generally discourages the use of debt by bank holding companies to finance acquisitions, it recognizes that the limited access small institutions have to equity funding means that such firms often must rely on acquisition debt to accomplish a transfer of ownership. The policy statement allows small, noncomplex bank holding companies to temporarily operate with higher levels of debt than would otherwise be permitted. It also exempts them from the Board's risk-based and leverage capital guidelines and eliminates some regulatory reporting requirements. Of course, regulatory capital requirements will continue to apply to the depository institution subsidiaries of these companies. The policy statement originally applied only to qualifying holding companies with no more than $150 million in total consolidated assets. In 2006, the maximum asset size was raised to $500 million. Significant changes in the structure of the banking industry since 2006 led Board members to believe that a further increase in the limit to $1 billion in assets should be considered. However, because of limitations imposed by the Collins Amendment to the Dodd-Frank Act, the Board could not raise the limit without further statutory action. We are very pleased that the Congress passed legislation in December 2014 that enabled the Board to raise the limit. The policy statement now covers nearly 90 percent of bank holding companies. The Volcker rule and incentive compensation are two additional areas where I believe relief for smaller institutions would be helpful. The risks identified by the Dodd-Frank Act in these areas apply almost exclusively to larger financial institutions. Community banks rarely engage in any of the activities prohibited by the Volcker rule, and community banks generally do not face the adverse incentives of compensation agreements that may encourage executives and loan officers to maximize lending volume at the expense of safety and soundness. I believe community banks should not face significant burdens from complying with these requirements, so I support raising the asset threshold for both the Volcker rule and incentive compensation rules, perhaps to $10billion. In the event where the actions of a community bank might raise concerns in either of these areas, that could be addressed through our normal examination process. The Board has undertaken substantial efforts to tailor its supervisory practices to the size of the bank examined. We supervise banks in four tiers, with requirements that are lowest for smaller, local institutions and increase with the size, complexity, and geographic reach of firms. This system helps community banks by eliminating requirements that are relevant only to large, geographically diversified banks. This tiered approach allows us to account for the differences in business models and risk levels among different types of banks. Our goal is not to develop one state-of-the-art approach to regulation and supervision, but instead multiple state-of-the-art approaches that are appropriate for each type of institution we oversee. Supervision of community banks is not a watered-down version of supervision of larger banks, but a significantly different process tailored to the business model of smaller banks. For community banks, the primary purpose of prudential regulation is to ensure the safety and soundness of each individual institution, thereby protecting the deposit insurance fund. The crisis showed that such a focus on individual institutions was inadequate to account for and contain the systemic threats posed by risks at larger, more complex institutions, and much of the improvement in oversight has been directed at systemic risk. The Board is committed to making sure that new supervisory standards do not trickle down to community banks when they may only be appropriate for larger institutions, whether they be systemically important institutions overseen by the Large Institution Supervision Coordination Committee, other large banking organizations with more than $50 billion in assets, or regional banking organizations with between $10 billion and $50 billion in assets. 4 For example, the Board has made it clear that capital stress tests and other aspects of the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review requirements do not apply to community banks, either explicitly or implicitly. In addition to Board members making this point in public speeches and in meetings with bankers, the Federal Reserve's examiner training emphasizes that these requirements, which were established under the Dodd-Frank Act, will apply only to large banking organizations. The Fed also made changes in 2014 to better tailor our program of consumer compliance supervision of smaller institutions. Under the new approach, the intensity of bank examinations is based on our assessment of the risk profile of individual community banks, including how each identifies and manages consumer compliance risk. Risk assessment begins before examiners arrive at the bank, allowing examiners to focus on higher-risk concerns at the banks they supervise. We have also directed examiners to spend less time on those areas of consumer compliance where problems are uncommon, although we are ready to ramp up that scrutiny if we have concerns about practices at a particular institution. Since making these changes 16 months ago, the average length of time for examinations has dropped, and the feedback we have heard from you is mostly positive. Bankers have told us that the examiners seem to have a better grasp of the key issues and that exams are, as we intended, more closely tailored to the business characteristics and risk profile of individual institutions. Examiners also tell us they sometimes see increased consumer compliance risk at community banks that are expanding beyond their traditional product offerings, often using outside vendors to introduce new products such as prepaid cards or credit card add-ons. These products are often complex, and community banks may not always be familiar with the risks the products pose. Banks may not have sufficient expertise to thoroughly check out a vendor and monitor its performance. Beyond consumer compliance supervision, the Federal Reserve has expanded our ability to conduct more of the work of bank examinations off site. If banks have electronic loan records, it is possible for examiners to assess loan quality and underwriting practices remotely, spending much less time on site. This approach has the potential to improve examination efficiency and to reduce the examination-related disruption to banking operations. However, if banks prefer more face-to-face interaction with examiners--and there are banks that do--we will continue the traditional on-site review. Our efforts to further tailor bank supervision at community banks continue. Staff members from the Federal Reserve, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation are working through a major review of regulations called for in the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). We are still in the midst of this effort, which is being conducted with a broad mandate to identify and revise where possible outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome regulations, including those that apply to community banks. The agencies are carefully considering public comments. Although some burden-reducing measures may require congressional action, the agencies will act to implement regulatory relief when possible before the end of the EGRPRA review period. The results of our EGRPRA review will be included in the agencies' joint report to the Congress. In addition, the Federal Reserve System has expanded our economic research into issues of consequence to community banks and has worked to encourage similar research efforts at academic institutions. Several years ago, a group of economists from across the System formed an informal working group to share ongoing research related to community banking. Encouraging results from this internal forum led, in 2013, to an inaugural research and policy conference titled "Community Banking in the 21st Century," sponsored jointly by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors. The conference provided a unique opportunity for researchers, community bankers, and bank supervisors to come together to hear some of the latest research on topics related to community banking and discuss the practical implications of this research. The 2013 conference was so successful that we decided to make it an annual event. The third annual conference will take place this coming fall at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, and Chair Yellen is scheduled to provide opening remarks. I had the pleasure of participating in the first two conferences and found the presentations and conversations to be extremely enlightening. Many of the researchers who presented at these conferences said that the feedback they received from bankers and bank supervisors was valuable in helping them shape their future research endeavors. The conference organizing committee has launched a new website with the URL " www.communitybanking.org ," which they hope will become a focal point for all who are interested in community banking research. The website provides links to the papers and presentations from the previous conferences, news about future conference plans, and other information that might be of interest to community banking researchers. Although research is an important avenue for improving our understanding of the community bank business model and the effects of changing market and regulatory conditions on the viability of that model, understanding is further enhanced through direct interactions between regulators and community bankers. For this reason, the Federal Reserve System has taken a number of steps to expand its outreach to community banks. As you probably know, in 2010 the Board created the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, which includes representatives from community banks, credit unions, and savings associations from each Federal Reserve District. 5 The Board of Governors meets twice each year to hear the council's valuable insights into the most pressing concerns of community bankers from across the country. There is also a council for each of the 12 Reserve Banks, which meets regularly with its Reserve Bank leadership. We have taken other steps to improve communications with community bankers so that we may better explain our supervisory expectations for community banks and hear your concerns as well. Our Reserve Banks have together developed a number of channels of communication with community banks over the years, and some of the most promising of those initiatives have been expanded nationwide. Two programs, Ask the Fed and Outlook Live, have become quite popular with community bankers who are interested in learning more about timely financial or regulatory topics of interest to both bankers and supervisors. Ask the Fed is a program for officials of state member banks, holding companies, and state bank commissioners. Outlook Live is a webinar series led by Federal Reserve staff that serves as a companion to our quarterly publication, Consumer Compliance Outlook. 6 Last year I participated in a webinar hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and very much enjoyed hearing directly from community bankers. 7 Another effort to improve communication with community bankers is our new Community Banking Connections website and quarterly newsletter. These sources of information focus on safety-and-soundness issues that are of practical interest to community bankers and bank board members. We have also launched a series of special-purpose publications called Fed Links that highlight key elements of specific supervisory topics and discuss how examiners typically address the topic. 8 The common goal of all of these outreach efforts is building and sustaining an ongoing dialogue with community bankers. Despite the challenges that you face, I firmly believe that community banks are here to stay. Banks of different sizes serve different functions, and both large and small banks are needed to meet the funding needs of a healthy economy. The Federal Reserve does not use a one-size-fits-all approach to regulation and supervision and is committed to continually reevaluating and improving oversight to meet the complementary goals of bank soundness, financial stability, and economic growth. The risks and vulnerabilities of community banks differ substantially from those of larger banks, and an explicit tailoring of regulation and supervision for community banks is appropriate. I look forward to our discussion. 1. The views I express here today are my own, and not necessarily those of any other person in the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. The document New Capital Rule: Community Bank Guide (PDF) , issued July 2013 by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; and the table "Final Rule on Enhanced Regulatory Capital Standards--Implications for Community Banking Organizations" is available at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/commbankguide20130702.pdf . Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), " Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Rule to Expand Applicability of Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement and Apply It to Certain Savings and Loan Holding Companies ," press release, April 9. Return to text 4. More on the Large Institution Supervision Coordination Committee is available on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm . Return to text 5. More on the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council is available on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cdiac.htm . Return to text 6. Current and past issues of Consumer Compliance Outlook are available at https://consumercomplianceoutlook.org . Return to text 7. See Jerome H. Powell (2014), " Opening Remarks ," speech delivered at the Webinar on Community Banking, Washington, October 20. Return to text 8. More information is available for Community Banking Connections at https://communitybankingconnections.org and for Fed Links at https://www.communitybankingconnections.org/fedlinks . Return to text Last Update: May 14, 2015 Back to Top
