President Kashkari’s New York Times interview on racism and the economy Following the death of George Floyd, Neel Kashkari took to Twitter to talk about the killing and why America needs to address underlying racism June 17, 2020 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Article Highlights If people don’t speak out, “then nothing changes” Large portions of the population’s talents and skills are “being squandered” because they’re not getting a quality education Lessons learned from TARP: “We have to err on the side of being generous” President Kashkari’s New York Times interview on racism and the economy Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter President Kashkari was interviewed by the New York Times’ Jeanna Smialek about Floyd’s death and the Fed’s role in responding to COVID-19. Smialek can be followed on Twitter @jeannasmialek and Kashkari @neelkashkari . Two days after George Floyd was killed at the hands of police and as videos of his death circulated on social media, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Neel Kashkari, did something unusual for an official in his position: He sharply and publicly denounced law enforcement actions. The Fed is a famously tight-lipped institution when it comes to social issues, and most of its officials are not active on social media, so it was notable when Mr. Kashkari posted on Twitter that the killing indicated “institutional racism that is actively taught and reinforced.” His colleague Mary C. Daly, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, followed two days later with a post stating that “hate thrives when people stay quiet.” And Raphael Bostic, the Atlanta Fed president and the Federal Reserve’s only black policy maker, published a June 12 post online decrying systemic racism . The comments mark the latest stage in long-running evolution at the Fed, which has increasingly weighed in on societal concerns with an economic bent — like wealth and income inequality and job market disparities — in recent years. In an interview with The New York Times, Mr. Kashkari, who joined the Fed in 2016, said he believed it was important to use his platform to speak up, and that race in America ties back to foundational economic issues, from who has the opportunity to obtain a good education to who has the resources to build wealth. Racial disparities, he said, are holding back workers from reaching their full potential. Mr. Kashkari, a former assistant secretary in the Treasury Department who oversaw the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the $700 billion bailout that Congress passed in 2008, also discussed the lessons the Fed was taking from the financial crisis as it rushes to save a pandemic-damaged economy, and what dangers might lie ahead in the banking sector. The following is a partial transcript of that June 12 conversation. JEANNA SMIALEK, Fed reporter for The Times : You wrote on Twitter that the fact that police treated George Floyd so violently while being recorded “indicates institutional racism that is actively taught and reinforced.” That is an unusually strong remark for a Fed president to make on a social issue. What prompted you to express your views? NEEL KASHKARI : It was just an honest expression of my reaction. It had been in the news for the past day or so, and I’d seen it, and I’d seen other footage of black men being killed by the police, and I was struggling to figure out — why did this feel so different to me? And it felt so different to me because you could see, there were witnesses standing around the police officers and the police officers didn’t care. They were so confident in what they were doing, they were sending a message, that we’re not doing anything wrong. I think I’ve just learned — if we don’t speak out about what we’re seeing, if everyone doesn’t speak out about what they’re seeing, then nothing changes. SMIALEK : Do you think it’s the Fed’s place to weigh in on such matters, and, if so, why? KASHKARI : I don’t think it’s the Fed’s place to weigh in on partisan political issues or picking sides Republican versus Democrat. But I live in Minnesota, I’m a voter in Minnesota, our employees live here. We live in our community, and if there are really pressing issues in our community, I think we have a responsibility to speak up. We’ve launched the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute , we’ve already made a commitment that we’re going to do what we can to improve economic outcomes for all Americans. We’ve already said this is going to be an important issue for us, and then you have George Floyd being murdered in Minnesota itself — the epicenter of this — I think it’s totally appropriate for us to weigh in. SMIALEK : Do you think institutional racism hurts the economy, and do you see that playing out in Minneapolis? KASHKARI : If white children in Minneapolis had the educational attainment that African-American children have, this problem would have been solved a long time ago. I think racism is an undercurrent of the status quo, and then, you have huge chunks of our population who are not getting a good education, who do not have good job opportunities — it absolutely holds our economy back. There are big chunks of our population whose innate human capital is basically being squandered because they are not getting an education that enables them to take advantage of their natural talents and gifts. That not only hurts them, that hurts all of us. It hurts our society and our economy. SMIALEK : What role can the Fed play here? KASHKARI : If we can use our economic research capabilities to analyze issues using the best data and evidence possible, and put forward policy recommendations that other policymakers can implement, that’s an important contribution for us to make. For the first time, the reality television show “The Bachelor” will have a black lead. The show, which kicked off in 2002, has long received criticism for its lack of diversity. The Fed has a big role to play, even if it’s outside of monetary policy, because people trust us as honest researchers. (Mr. Kashkari has pushed for legislation in Minnesota that would make quality education a right in the state. The Minneapolis Fed is also conducting an analysis of what the impact would be of a local minimum wage increase, he said.) SMIALEK : This isn’t the only thing on your mind right now, clearly. There’s a debate at the Fed right now about whether banks should be forced to conserve more capital as the pandemic continues, including halting dividend payments. You’ve been outspoken that they should. Why? KASHKARI : The longer this crisis goes on, the more likely the losses roll up into the banking sector. When the virus crisis flared up, we didn’t know — maybe it will only be a two month crisis. It seems very clear now this is a year, 18 month, even two-year journey that we’re on now until the economy fully recovers. (Mr. Kashkari has called for a suspension to bank dividend payouts, and thinks that banks should raise equity instead. While the Fed Board in Washington could stop banks from making payouts, it has so far chosen not to. Officials have suggested that could change after the results of annual bank stress tests are reported on June 25.) SMIALEK : The Fed is also a cornerstone of the government’s relief program for businesses and local governments. What lessons did you learn during TARP that should carry through to the current moment? KASHKARI : We have to err on the side of being generous. We tried to be very targeted in our assistance, helping homeowners who were deserving, who needed only a little bit of help. It ended up that we didn’t help very many homeowners and the housing correction was more severe than it needed to be. It’s better to be generous in your assistance, even if that means you help people who are quote-unquote not deserving. SMIALEK : Will more be needed, especially on the fiscal side, and if so, what? KASHKARI : I think more will be needed on the fiscal side. Many of these jobs are not going to come back for a long time. Those workers who have been laid off are going to need to be able to pay their bills. More focus on unemployment assistance for those jobs that are not coming back anytime soon, I think that’s going to be critical. Not only for the families themselves, but also for the economy as a whole. If people can’t pay their rent, can’t pay their mortgage, that’s how things start to spill over. SMIALEK : When the economy does rebound, should the Fed pay attention to racial unemployment rates when it thinks about when to raise rates? KASHKARI : I don’t think we have the ability to say “we’re going to target a reduction in this type of inequality through interest rates.” But I do think paying attention to these disparities gives us better insight into labor market slack in general. “The fact of the matter is — the Fed raised rates too quickly and too soon,” Mr. Kashkari said, referring to increases that began in late 2015 as the central bank tried to make sure inflation didn’t rocket higher as the jobless rate fell. “We thought there was less slack out there than in fact there turned out to be. We have to learn from that. And how were we surprised? It turned out that there were more minorities who wanted to work, and more old people who wanted to work, than our models anticipated.” “We need to understand the disparities,” he said. See Neel Kashkari's interview in the New York Times Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Introducing the HPOP: How Our New Homeownership Measure Puts People First Event In pursuit of maximum employment Article Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Neel Kashkari, Alan Page: Our push for an education amendment has only gotten more relevant The data already supported it. Now there's new energy for equal justice, and the ideas are connected PDF Version July 13, 2020 Authors Neel Kashkari President and CEO Alan Page Minnesota Supreme Court Justice (ret) Neel Kashkari, Alan Page: Our push for an education amendment has only gotten more relevant Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Photo taken at the Children First Community Conversation at the Minneapolis Fed on January 13, 2020 This commentary was first published in the Star Tribune . George Floyd’s killing has awakened America to the need for fundamental police reform. Police brutality, in particular toward Black men, has been happening for decades. At its core, this police brutality is symptomatic of an abuse of police power and of a justice system that denies communities of color and Indigenous people equal justice under the law. Many people are finally learning about these abuses because of the shocking and undeniable images captured on camera. They are outraged by what they’ve seen and are joining those demanding change. While it can’t be captured in a short, powerful video, our education system, in its own way, has been quietly, but persistently, denying equal educational opportunity and killing the futures of children of color, Indigenous children, and low-income White children for decades. Research by the Minneapolis Fed finds that only 37 percent of low-income Minnesota students of all races are proficient in math and reading compared with 68 percent of their higher-income peers. Only 30 percent of African American students perform at grade level, compared with 65 percent of White students. And, when it is time to enter college or the workforce, large disparities remain. Only 25 percent of African American students are college-ready compared with 69 percent of their White peers. Is it hyperbolic to make a comparison between the abuse of police power and an education system that is failing so many Minnesota students? No, it is not. Minnesota has some of the largest disparities in the country—in incomes, job opportunities, housing, and health care—with enormous variations from neighborhood to neighborhood. The research is clear: Education is at the root of all of these disparities. It is well-documented that people who have more and higher-quality education have more job opportunities, higher incomes, and better housing options and health care outcomes. They are also far less likely to enter the criminal justice system. A quality education is without question the most powerful tool we have to break the cycle of poverty and create a society in which everyone can fully participate. It doesn’t just change one child’s life. It has the potential to improve the future for generations to come and leads to a more productive, vibrant society for all of us. Earlier this year, as a vehicle for eliminating educational disparities, we proposed amending Minnesota’s constitution to give every child a civil right to a quality public education. Many parents were surprised our constitution doesn’t already guarantee all children that right. In fact, today our constitution simply says children have the right to access an adequate education system. What is an adequate education system? It is a system that works well for children from well-to-do families and fails children from low-income families, both in the Twin Cities and in greater Minnesota. Tough luck if your child is at the bottom of that system. While education should be the great equalizer, the Minnesota education system perpetuates the status quo. Our current constitutional education provision was written in 1857, while slavery was legal in much of America. The language hasn’t changed since then. An education system that leaves behind large groups of its citizens with little chance for upward mobility is a crisis—one that demands fundamental transformation. Numerous targeted education reforms of the past have failed to make any difference in outcomes for Minnesota’s children. Updating our constitution can transform our education system over time to one that promotes justice and meets the needs of all Minnesotans and our modern economy. Most important issues the Legislature considers are partisan, and it can be difficult to reach agreement on anything other than incremental changes. The good news is that amending the constitution to create a civil right to a quality public education isn’t partisan. While we had to pause our pursuit of the amendment because of the COVID-19 crisis, we had generated strong bipartisan support in the Legislature, uniting members of the DFL People of Color and Indigenous Caucus with conservative Republicans from greater Minnesota. We know that leaders are focused on the important work of police reform and continuing to address the COVID-19 crisis. Looking ahead, we are committed to moving this amendment forward, and we encourage our elected leaders and the people of Minnesota to put education at the forefront of their agendas. The world is watching Minnesota because of our failings. This is an opportunity to show the world that Minnesotans can unite to lift all of our children. Neel Kashkari is president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Alan Page is a retired Minnesota Supreme Court justice and a founder of the Page Education Foundation. Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Introducing the HPOP: How Our New Homeownership Measure Puts People First Event In pursuit of maximum employment Article Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

New York Times op-ed: Here’s how to crush the virus until vaccines arrive To save lives, and save the economy, we need another lockdown August 7, 2020 Authors Neel Kashkari President and CEO Michael Osterholm, Ph.D., MPH Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy, University of Minnesota Allison Bertelson/Minneapolis Fed; Getty Images New York Times op-ed: Here’s how to crush the virus until vaccines arrive Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This commentary was first published in The New York Times In just weeks, we could almost stop the viral fire that has swept across this country over the past six months and continues to rage out of control. It will require sacrifice but save many thousands of lives. We believe the choice is clear. We can continue to allow the coronavirus to spread rapidly throughout the country or we can commit to a more restrictive lockdown, state by state, for up to six weeks to crush the spread of the virus to less than one new case per 100,000 people per day. That’s the point at which we will be able to limit the increase in new cases through aggressive public health measures, just as other countries have done. But we’re a long way from there right now. The imperative for this is clear because as a nation what we have done so far hasn’t worked. Some 160,000 people have died and, in recent days, roughly a thousand have died a day. An estimated 30 million Americans are collecting unemployment. On Jan. 30, when the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a public health emergency, there were 9,439 reported cases worldwide, most in China, and only six reported cases in the United States. On July 30, six months later, there were 17 million cases reported worldwide, including 676,000 deaths. The United States had 4 million reported cases and 155,000 deaths. More than a third of all U.S. cases occurred during July alone. And the next six months could make what we have experienced so far seem like just a warm-up to a greater catastrophe. With many schools and colleges starting, stores and businesses reopening, and the beginning of the indoor heating season, new case numbers will grow quickly. Why did the United States’ COVID-19 containment response fail, particularly compared with the successful results of so many nations in Asia, Europe, and even our neighbor Canada? Simply, we gave up on our lockdown efforts to control virus transmission well before the virus was under control. Many other countries didn’t let up until the number of cases was greatly reduced, even in places that had extensive outbreaks in March and April. Once the number of new cases in those areas was driven to less than one per 100,000 people per day as a result of their lockdowns, limiting the increase of new cases was possible with a combination of testing, contact tracing, case isolation, and extensive monitoring of positive tests. The United States recorded its lowest numbers on June 8, when the seven-day average was 21,000 cases, or 6.4 new cases per 100,000 people per day. This rate was seven to 10 times higher than the rates in countries that successfully contained their new infections. While many countries are now experiencing modest flare-ups of the virus, their caseloads are in the hundreds or low thousands of infections per day, not tens of thousands, and small enough that public health officials can largely control the spread. In contrast, the United States reopened too quickly and is now experiencing around 50,000 or more new cases per day. While cases are falling in the hard-hit areas of Arizona, California, Florida, and Texas because of the imposition of some physical-distancing measures, they are rapidly increasing in a few Midwestern states. In Minnesota, we just documented the most new cases in a one-week period since the pandemic began. At this level of national cases — 17 new cases per 100,000 people per day — we simply don’t have the public health tools to bring the pandemic under control. Our testing capacity is overwhelmed in many areas, resulting in delays that make contact tracing and other measures to control the virus virtually impossible. Don’t confuse short-term case reductions in some states as permanent. We made that mistake before. Some have claimed that the widespread use of masks is enough to control the pandemic, but let us face reality: Gov. Gavin Newsom of California issued a public masking mandate on June 18, a day when 3,700 cases were reported in the state. On July 25, the seven-day daily case average was 10,231. We support the wearing of masks by all Americans, but masking mandates and soft limitations on indoor crowds in places such as bars and restaurants are not enough to control this pandemic. To successfully drive down our case rate to less than one per 100,000 people per day, we should mandate sheltering in place for everyone but the truly essential workers. By that, we mean people must stay at home and leave only for essential reasons: food shopping and visits to doctors and pharmacies while wearing masks and washing hands frequently. According to the Economic Policy Institute, 39 percent of workers in the United States are in essential categories. The problem with the March-to-May lockdown was that it was not uniformly stringent across the country. For example, Minnesota deemed 78 percent of its workers essential. To be effective, the lockdown has to be as comprehensive and strict as possible. If we aren’t willing to take this action, millions more cases with many more deaths are likely before a vaccine might be available. In addition, the economic recovery will be much slower, with far more business failures and high unemployment for the next year or two. The path of the virus will determine the path of the economy. There won’t be a robust economic recovery until we get control of the virus. If we do this aggressively, the testing and tracing capacity we’ve built will support reopening the economy as other countries have done and allow children to go back to school and citizens to vote in person in November. All of this will lead to a stronger, faster economic recovery, moving people from unemployment to work. We know that a stringent lockdown can have serious health consequences for patients who can’t get access to routine care. But over the past six months, medical professionals have learned how to protect patients and staffs from spreading the coronavirus; therefore, we should be able to maintain access to regular medical care during any new lockdown. This pandemic is deeply unfair. Millions of low-wage, frontline service workers have lost their jobs or been put in harm’s way, while most higher-wage, white-collar workers have been spared. But it is even more unfair than that; those of us who’ve kept our jobs are actually saving more money because we aren’t going out to restaurants or movies, or on vacations. Unlike in prior recessions, remarkably, the personal savings rate has soared to 20 percent from around 8 percent in January. Because we are saving more, we have the resources to support those who have been laid off. Typically, when the government runs deficits, it must rely on foreign investors to buy the debt because Americans aren’t generating enough savings to fund it. But we can finance the added deficits for COVID-19 relief from our own domestic savings. Those savings end up funding investment in the economy. That’s why traditional concerns about racking up too much government debt do not apply in this situation. It is much safer for a country to fund its deficits domestically than from abroad. Congress should be aggressive in supporting people who’ve lost jobs because of COVID-19. It’s not only the right thing to do but also vital for our economic recovery. If people can’t pay their bills, it will ripple through the economy and make the downturn much worse, with many more bankruptcies, and the national recovery much slower. There is no trade-off between health and the economy. Both require aggressively getting control of the virus. History will judge us harshly if we miss this life- and economy-saving opportunity to get it right this time. Neel Kashkari is president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Michael T. Osterholm is a professor and director of the Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota. More On Public health Policy More On Public health Policy Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Optimism prevails among services firms despite year of uncertainty and sluggishness Article Services firms remain optimistic after a year of slight growth Data Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
