News Release Fed President Patrick Harker Discusses Economic Outlook and Community Reinvestment Act 17 Jan ’20 Patrick T. Harker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told an audience of New Jersey bankers that the economy is looking “pretty good,” holding steady his view of the economic outlook. Share For immediate release Contact: Daneil Mazone , Manager, Media Relations, 215-574-7163 Somerset, NJ — Patrick T. Harker , president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told an audience of New Jersey bankers that the economy is looking “pretty good,” holding steady his view of the economic outlook. Speaking at the 2020 Economic Leadership Forum, hosted by the New Jersey Bankers Association, Harker reviewed some of the latest data on the U.S. labor markets, consumer sector, and inflation. Echoing his previous outlooks, Harker said he expects the U.S. economy to grow by about 2 percent in 2020. He also continues to expect the inflation rate to close in on the Fed’s target rate of 2 percent. Harker also said he thought the New Jersey economy was in “good shape,” with an unemployment rate slightly below the national average. Harker, who is a voting member of the Federal Open Market Committee this year, also discussed regulators’ efforts to modernize the Community Reinvestment Act. The legislation, passed in 1977, requires banks to meet the credit needs in the low- and moderate-income communities they serve. Related Content Monetary Policy Speech Economic Leadership Forum, New Jersey Bankers Association | Somerset, NJ

Economic Outlook Economic Leadership Forum New Jersey Bankers Association Somerset, NJ January 17, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 1 Economic Outlook Economic Leadership Forum New Jersey Bankers Association Somerset, NJ January 17, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia One of the things I’ve noticed about this job is that people find me a lot more interesting when I’m a voting member of the FOMC. So I won’t take it personally that the last time I spoke to this group was almost exactly three years ago … Some things look very different in 2020 than they did in 2017. The makeup of the Fed’s Board of Governors has changed. We are in a different part of the business cycle. My outlook for interest rates is markedly dissimilar. But some things have held firm. Specifically, while the outlook for rates may be starkly different, a lot of the phrases I used to describe the state of the economy back in 2017 still apply today. That’s positive news and pretty amazing when you consider how much the world has changed since 2017. Today I will touch on three issues that are integral in today’s banking world. The first is the economic outlook, a key driver for loan demand and investment opportunities. The second is an aspect of monetary policy that has been in the news over the past few months; namely, how the Fed is normalizing its balance sheet. Last, I will touch on the ongoing efforts around modernizing the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). Let me begin with the standard disclaimer — which I used three years ago — about my views being my own and not necessarily reflective of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The Economic Outlook Overall, the economy is looking pretty good. We are in the longest economic expansion on record, and I see growth returning to trend of about 2 percent this year, a view that is widely shared. 2 Just as I said last time I was here in 2017, I will note that the labor market continues to show considerable strength. In fact, it has outperformed most people’s expectations, with continued job creation, continued low unemployment, and more people continuing to come off the sidelines. At some point, we’ll return to a trend of creating about 100,000 net new jobs per month. I’ve said that, too, in years past, and it hasn’t yet come to fruition, which is great for the American workforce. And when we do return to trend — whenever that may be — it’s important to note that, while 100,000 jobs a month may look disappointing in comparison with the strong numbers we’ve seen over the past several years, it will more than keep pace with growth in the labor force. More good news in the labor market includes the fact that wages on the lower end of the pay scale have finally started to rise — as they have on the higher end — although midrange paychecks could still use a boost. The continued strength of the labor market has contributed to booming consumer confidence. And with consumer spending making up some 70 percent of the U.S. economy, that makes it the hero in the growth story. Business investment, however, is lagging, and the uncertainty attached to fiscal and other policies, has continued to hold it back. So, too, have international developments, including the global slowdown, trade uncertainty, and geopolitical tensions. Here’s something else I said in 2017 — and in 2018 and in 2019 — while we haven’t quite met our 2 percent inflation target, we’re on track to get there. I still believe that inflation will rise to meet our goal, albeit slowly, and we’re closing in on the target. But it has been a long time coming. To most people, this is a purely academic problem — who else but policymakers are going to complain that inflation is hovering below 2 percent? But because of our dual mandate, focusing on the inflation rate is more than an academic exercise. New Jersey’s Economy As for the Garden State’s economy, some numbers show New Jersey outperforming the nation, and others show some shortfall — but not by a lot. And as a lifelong South Jersey boy, I am happy to say our state’s economy is in good shape. Job growth has hovered around 1 percent over the past three years, a little below the U.S. rate of about 1.5 percent. However, the unemployment rate is 3.4 percent, which is slightly better than the national average. That is despite the fact that New Jersey’s jobless rate has ticked up in recent months. But even here, I view the news as positive. That’s because the rise in the rate reflects more people coming back into the labor force. The state’s labor force participation rate has 3 risen from about 62 percent last summer, to 63.6 percent at the end of 2019. That suggests more residents are feeling confident about the labor market and their ability to find work. I should mention that the Philadelphia Fed’s own state leading index for New Jersey recently turned negative. But that reflects the rise in the jobless rate. Since that rise is the result of more people coming into the labor market, I am not worried about New Jersey’s economic future. Monetary Policy The main subject of this speech is monetary policy. While it is usual to discuss interest rates, today I want to touch on another key aspect of monetary policy going forward, and that is the Fed’s efforts to normalize the balance sheet. This has received great attention lately, ever since the repo market problems of last September. As you know, at the start of 2019, the FOMC decided that we would continue to conduct monetary policy in a regime of “ample reserves,” in which control over the federal funds rate is exercised primarily through the setting of administered rates, and the supply of reserves does not need to be actively managed. Shortly after that, we announced our plan to cease asset redemptions and hold the balance sheet to roughly a constant size come September. As currency and other non-reserve liabilities grew, aggregate reserves naturally declined. Our end game was for reserves to reach a level “consistent with efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy.” There were two primary objectives to this approach. First, to reduce uncertainty about asset purchases by announcing our plans well in advance. Second, to approach the necessary level of reserves, which is itself filled with uncertainty, with an abundance of caution. We only have estimates of the demand for reserves, although we’ve conducted a great deal of research around the Federal Reserve System, including continued conversation with market participants. In fact, staff at the Philadelphia and New York Feds were among the first to identify that the need for reserves could be much larger than initially anticipated. To be on the safe side, it made sense to move slowly, buying time to carefully observe market developments and better assess their implications. That is, we gave ourselves time for the inevitable “unknown unknowns” of life. Just such an unknown arose in September. 4 The episode was clearly triggered by the outsized flows of funds to the Treasury. But the dates for tax payments and bond settlements are not a surprise; they are fixed on the fiscal calendar and well known to both policymakers and markets. Everyone was expecting large liquidity flows. The impact, however, was clearly much larger than anyone anticipated, markets included. The repo market took the brunt of the impact, as the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) rose above 5 percent on Tuesday, September 17, with some trades executed at rates as high as 10 percent. While this was certainly not an average day, it’s important to note that the repo market did not freeze. The volume of secured overnight finance remained steady, at the $1.2 trillion level it had maintained for the past several months. The funding pressures in secured markets passed through to the federal funds market. The effective federal funds rate rose to the top of target range on Monday the 16th, and surpassed the top of the range by 5 basis points the next day. We immediately took action to ensure that the effective fed funds rate returned to, and stayed within, the target range. The very next day, the Desk started repurchase operations to stem the pressures on money markets, and these actions have continued — including term operations — to date. In October, the FOMC decided to restart asset purchases to keep reserves at or above the level reached in early September, at a little over $1.5 trillion. Additionally, the Desk has been conducting term and overnight repurchase agreement operations to offset money market pressures — for instance, the quarter-end dynamics that are inevitably more burdensome at the year’s end. All in all, since September, we have supplied about $400 billion in additional reserves; about $250 billion via repo agreements, and the rest in asset purchases. These measures clearly worked, with the effective fed funds rate maintaining a virtually constant level since October, and repo markets staying calm. Instead of wreaking havoc, the year’s end was a non- event. Going forward, the Committee remains committed to implementing monetary policy in a regime of ample reserves, which, again, does not require active management of the supply of reserves. The Treasury purchases announced in October will continue until at least the next quarter to ensure we meet that goal. 5 Central to this event is the question of why liquidity did not flow smoothly to where it was needed most. Are some of the market’s pipes rusty? Clogged? Are more needed? Has regulation inadvertently contributed to some erosion or blockage? Another question is whether the Fed ought to expand our toolkit — whether we could, or should, do more to ensure interest-rate control. One possibility under discussion is a standing repo facility. We are in the process of evaluating such a facility’s potential costs and benefits, and exploring possible designs as well as alternatives, so it is still very much in the discourse, rather than the decision, phase. While September’s turmoil offered perhaps too much excitement, it also provided a good deal of information. It showed that we need a larger pool of reserves than most of our estimates had initially indicated. It showed that when reserves are scarce, even for as short a period as a week or so, it can generate large spikes in money market rates. And it showed, unfortunately, that banks remain extremely reluctant to borrow from the discount window, even when that reluctance results in outsized penalties far above the primary credit rate. CRA Modernization Finally, I know the banking community is awaiting final resolution to the discussion about modernizing the Community Reinvestment Act. Our meeting here today is taking place north of the jagged line that divides New Jersey between the New York Fed and the Philadelphia Fed. For those of you in the audience from South Jersey, you know that the discussion about the CRA takes on significant importance in the Fed’s Third District, and we have hosted one-on-one meetings, roundtable discussions, and conferences with both banks and community members to better understand their concerns and gather their insights on updates to the regulation. The CRA was passed in 1977, and the last significant update to the legislation was done back in 1995. As regulators, we have heard feedback over the years for the need to update and revise the CRA, and in 2018, we began an interagency process to make significant changes that reflect modern banking and community needs. The Philadelphia Fed hosted a conference on CRA modernization in February 2019, and that event allowed us to listen as various community development experts and financial industry leaders weighed in on the best approach. We recognize there is value in modernizing the regulation to address the changing channels that serve customers beyond bank branches, to strengthen the law’s focus on local communities, and to help bring greater consistency and predictability to CRA ratings. 6 As you probably know, the FDIC and OCC released their proposals in the fall of 2019. Last week, Governor Lael Brainard unveiled the Fed’s own approach. The Fed’s proposal is based not only on the feedback we heard from bankers and communities but also insights from the advanced notice of proposed rulemaking public comment process and a thorough review of a number of performance evaluations. In my view, modernizing the CRA will help banks better meet the credit needs in the low- and moderate-income communities they serve. Because these updates to the CRA will impact your business models, I assume that you have read the ideas and the metrics of the Fed’s plan, so I won’t go into much detail. But let me make some points about the Fed’s proposal. The Fed is proposing the creation of two tests: a retail test to assess a bank’s record of retail loans and services in its assessment area; and a community development test for large banks, and wholesale and limited-purpose banks to measure a bank’s performance on community development loans, qualified investments, and other services. A separate retail test will align with the key focus of the CRA, which is to ensure that banks are meeting the credit needs of underserved markets. Separate tests also underscore the importance of the ability to tailor exams to each institution’s asset size, business lines, and local conditions. Our proposal also hones in on the importance of metrics and data dashboards, and distilling that data into helping banks better track and benchmark their CRA performance. We at the Fed like to say we are “data driven,” and these dashboards will show that data matter not just in monetary policy but in the work the Fed does in ensuring the U.S. has a robust and equitable financial system. To reiterate what Governor Brainard said last Wednesday, “it is more important to get reforms right than to do them quickly.” I couldn’t agree more with that sentiment when it comes to an important piece of legislation like the CRA. To achieve that goal, regulators at the Fed are having discussions with the other banking regulators. We are mindful of the business costs that two sets of rules would impose on banks. And I am hopeful that we can create a consensus going forward. Conclusion Congress gave the Federal Reserve a dual mandate to maximize employment and stabilize prices. The data show that the labor market is doing incredibly well, and I believe the economy is nearing our target inflation rate of 2 percent. All in all, my outlook for the economy is positive, but let me add that my outlook will continue to be driven by the data as each report is released throughout 2020. 7 The data will also determine my view on monetary policy. And policy entails more than interest rates. As the Fed oversees its balance sheet, we will be mindful of the unexpected, such as happened last September. And with that, let me open the floor up to questions.

The Opportunities of a Tight Labor Market 2020 Lyons CEEE Economic Forecast University of Delaware Newark, DE February 10, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 1 The Opportunities of a Tight Labor Market 2020 Lyons CEEE Economic Forecast University of Delaware Newark, DE February 10, 2020 President Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Good afternoon, and it is a pleasure to be here with you and to also be back on my old stomping grounds of the University of Delaware. Being here again feels like Groundhog Day — but without Sonny and Cher singing on the radio. Another thing that feels like Groundhog Day is the usual disclaimer I say over and over again: The views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else on the Federal Open Market Committee or across the Federal Reserve System. With that out of the way, let me outline my remarks today. I will start with my outlook for the economy — which I know takes on greater significance since I am a voting member this year of the Federal Open Market Committee. My outlook for the economy — specifically for the labor market — ties into the final section of my speech: workforce development. In my view, with the labor market the tightest it has been in decades, now is the time to create new approaches to how companies hire, train, and retain employees and how the U.S. can create career paths for all of its workers. Economic Outlook Let’s start with the economy. Overall, I think the economy is in good shape. We are in the longest economic expansion on record, and I see growth returning to trend of about 2 percent this year, a view that is widely shared. Friday’s employment report showed the labor market began 2020 on the same positive trend it showed through 2019. We added 225,000 net new jobs in January — better than the monthly average of 2 175,000 for all of 2019. Hourly wages increased 3.1 percent from last January, and the unemployment rate stood at 3.6 percent. At some point, we’ll return to a trend of creating about 100,000 net new jobs per month. That number sounds disappointing — compared with the stronger monthly gains we’ve seen in recent years. But it’s important to recognize that 100,000 jobs per month is more than enough to keep pace with the expected growth in the U.S. labor force. That’s one reason why I expect that the unemployment rate will stay below 4 percent for the next couple of years. The health of the labor market, especially when it comes to paychecks, is key to my economic outlook since consumer spending accounts for about 70 percent of the U.S. economy. The news in general continues to be good for the consumer sector. Thanks to the lowest unemployment rate in 50 years and growth in wages, consumers are upbeat about the economy. Consumer confidence is high, and the optimism should support household spending this year. Another support to consumer spending this year is the prospect of more homeowners refinancing their mortgages. Research done at the Philadelphia Fed’s Consumer Finance Institute1 shows that lower rates in 2019 resulted in a large number of borrowers who are in a position to refinance their residential mortgages. Mortgage refinancing fuels consumption in two ways: First, homeowners are able to lower their monthly house payment, freeing up money that can be spent elsewhere. Second, homeowners may choose to extract some home equity by using a cash-out refinance. This also provides money for other consumer spending. Our research shows that in September 2019 — when the 30-year fixed mortgage rate averaged 3.61 percent — about 19 percent of all active mortgages were refi candidates. The Bank’s research — supported by industry analysis — suggests that with no change in mortgage rates, about 60 percent of borrowers will probably refinance this year, and over the next two years, we would expect an estimated $11.2 billion in added consumption from this refi activity. On an individual level, an average homeowner would have about $2,000 to spend in extra consumption within the first year after refinancing — a nice lift to almost any budget. My positive view about the consumer contrasts with concerns about business investment. Spending on new plant and equipment and intellectual property is lagging, and the uncertainty attached to fiscal and 1 The analysis is based on Black Knight McDash data and Equifax Credit Risk Insight Servicing data. 3 other policies has continued to hold spending back. So, too, have international developments, including the global slowdown, trade uncertainty, and geopolitical tensions. It’s too early to say what impact the spread of the coronavirus will have on the global economy, but the negative effects on the Chinese economy and international travel are something to watch. That’s my view on the labor markets and economic growth. Let me talk about the other side of the Fed’s dual mandate: inflation. We haven’t quite met our 2 percent inflation target, but we’re on track to get there. While the process has been a slow one, I still believe that the inflation rate will rise to meet our goal. Against this backdrop of a generally positive economic outlook and expectations that inflation will eventually hit the Fed’s target, I come to the part that everyone really cares about: rates. As you know, at the January FOMC meeting, the Committee decided unanimously to hold the federal funds rate target stable at the range of 1½ to 1¾ percent. My own view right now is that we should hold steady for a while and watch how developments and the data unfold before taking any more action. The Regional Economy Turning to Delaware and the Philadelphia region, the economic outlook is more mixed than the national one. Over the past five years, Delaware employment grew less than 1 percent per year, which is lower than the 1.5 percent posted for the nation. In the recent months, however, Delaware’s job growth has picked up to a rate similar to the national average. At a more granular level, northern parts of Delaware seem to be doing better than the southern parts. Delaware’s unemployment rate was 3.9 percent in December (slightly higher than the national figure). Unemployment in the southern areas tends to be higher. Delaware’s job growth has been reasonably broad based, with the usual suspects such as the financial industry and education and health care — often referred to as “Eds and Meds” — leading the way. The professional and business services sector has seen a slight decline in the past year. But this could be due to a reduction in temporary-service jobs, which show up in the business services sector. With the local labor market remaining tight, companies are shifting temporary and part-time workers into permanent, full-time jobs, which results in a reduction of employment in the professional and business services sector. 4 In the Philadelphia metro area, which, of course, encompasses parts of Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and Maryland, job growth had been running around 1.5 percent, until several years ago when it slowed to 1 percent annually. In general, the Philadelphia metro area’s job growth since the last recession has outpaced that of the Pennsylvania average for the most part, but has been below that of the nation during the same period. Like Delaware, the Philadelphia metro area’s job growth has been consistently broad based for the past several years, thanks to net new job gains in Eds and Meds and professional and business services. The local labor market is also feeling the direct impact of e-commerce versus brick-and-mortar stores. We have had a decline in retail employment, but we are seeing continuous growth in transportation and warehousing employment. As for the jobless rate, the Philadelphia area’s rate stood at 4.1 percent in December. This is lower than the state average but is higher than the national average. In recent months, we have seen a slight uptick in the region’s and the state’s unemployment rates. This is likely due to an increase in the labor force participation rate at the state level during the same period. As more people enter the labor force, the unemployment rate will temporarily increase until they find jobs. Tight Labor Market Could Be a Workforce Development Opportunity The very tight labor markets we are seeing locally and across the nation have put employers in a challenging position that was not evident in the years following the Great Recession. Companies report difficulty filling open positions, and many of those slots stay vacant for a long time. The difficult recruiting environment is also one that is likely to stay with us for some time as demographic trends indicate that the workforce will continue to age and the labor force relative to the population will continue to decline. This challenge may also be viewed as an opportunity, and those that successfully invent new ways to attract workers will enhance their chances of success. Now is a chance to rethink the same-old, same- old ways of building a productive workforce. This can perhaps be done by rethinking job requirements or additional ways of training. One such innovative program has begun in Philadelphia. It is a public–private partnership to train workers here in Philadelphia. This project was developed by the Bank’s Economic Growth & Mobility Project, in concert with Philadelphia Works and Comcast. It seeks to gain a better understanding of what 5 programs and strategies expand opportunities for individuals who live in low- and moderate-income communities. The pilot program, announced last fall, has Philadelphia Works providing the upfront investment for training workers to master the skills needed by Comcast. As part of this new financial model, Comcast is committed to paying for outcomes once they are achieved, such as staying on the job for over six months. Philadelphia Works provides the training. The model also creates a better feedback loop between employers and the workforce board to make the program more effective and responsive to changing employer and employee needs. The program is helping Comcast find workers in a tight labor market and let me assure you: The tight labor market we hear about from most of you is not imagined. Economists at the Philadelphia Fed have been looking into the amount of time needed to fill positions in metro areas across the U.S. In our region, it took 41 days, on average, to fill a position. That was longer than the national average of 37 days, and put Philly 47th out of the 50 largest metro areas. It is hard to say exactly why it takes longer in Philadelphia than in other places, but one thing our researchers noted is that job ads in the Philadelphia metro area tend to list slightly higher education requirements than other metro areas. This underscores a need to switch gears and investigate if programs such as the one I just mentioned could be adapted to the challenges you face. But here’s another finding of the study that I found very interesting: The skills in highest demand in the Philadelphia region, and across the U.S., are not those dependent on acquiring a four-year degree, but instead are soft skills, such as communication, customer service, and teamwork. That could indicate that a rethinking of job requirements could help counter the tight labor market conditions that are a prevalent feature of the current economy. Sometimes that means a college or graduate degree is needed, but sometimes it doesn’t. That leads to another issue about workforce development, an issue I have championed for a few years now. And it might be strange to hear this from me — a former president here at the University of Delaware — but not every high school graduate needs to go to college. And that would be even truer if there were greater innovation in recruiting and training. To reiterate, the difficulty of finding new employees is likely to be a feature of the labor market for some time to come because demographic trends are not short-run fluctuations. Innovation in attracting and retaining workers is likely to be one of 6 the key aspects governing success. It expands the pool of workers, helping to create better matches and a more productive workforce. And, importantly it opens pathways for workers. Opportunity Occupations Of course, workers without a college degree still need to find well-paying jobs. As I mentioned earlier, my positive outlook for the U.S. economy rests on the consumer sector. We need everyone who wants a job to be able to find a well-paying and sustainable career path. Researchers within our Community Development and Regional Outreach Department have identified several employment categories that pay above the national annual median wage but do not require a four-year college degree. We call these opportunity occupations. My colleague Keith Wardrip worked with researchers from the Cleveland Fed to catalogue these occupations by looking at education requirements in job postings and hourly wage data from the Labor Department. The list of opportunity occupations vary from registered nurses to truck drivers, retail sales supervisors, carpenters, and patrol officers. So whether a person likes dealing with people or working with their hands, and whether they are interested in a career in health care, construction, transportation, or sales, one of the many opportunity occupations may fit their idea of a good job. To be clear, many of these jobs require on-the-job experience or some type of training after high school, and some positions advertised online required a college degree. But nationally, Keith and his colleagues calculated that 21.6 percent of jobs in 2017 could be classified as opportunity occupations. In the Philadelphia–Camden–Wilmington metro area, the share was slightly lower, at 20.1 percent. These occupations offer workers without college degrees the chance to be part of our growing economy and to become financially secure. Giving more people the opportunity to participate in the economy strengthens our economy because more paychecks support increased consumer spending. It’s a win– win situation for all of us. Indeed, emphasizing skills rather than degrees might help to reverse a troubling longer-run trend in the U.S. economy, and that is the high number of adults who are not in the labor force. The share of working-age adults who are participating in the labor force — which includes those who are employed and those who are unemployed but actively looking for work — came in at just 63.1 percent in 2019, down from 65.4 percent 10 years ago. What this says to me is that the U.S. is missing out on the 7 potential these adults could bring to the economy. This will, no doubt, require innovative thinking and new ways of investing in the workforce, but the payoffs are likely to be substantial. I know the popular notion is that artificial intelligence and robots will make workforce development unnecessary. But let me return to our study about the time needed to fill job openings and mention that the occupations that are hardest to fill include registered nurses, retail store managers, and physicians. These are jobs that are least at risk for automation. They require uniquely human skills and can’t easily be done by robots. Employers can’t expect these jobs to disappear any time soon, and that is why it is imperative for employers to invest in those unique humans who can develop the communication, teamwork, and service skills that will get the job done.

News Release Fed President Patrick Harker Will Watch ‘How the Data Unfold’ Before Deciding Policy 10 Feb ’20 Describing the U.S. economy as in “good shape,” Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, said he thinks monetary policy should stay on hold. Share For immediate release Contact: Daneil Mazone , Manager, Media Relations, 215-574-7163 Newark, DE — Describing the U.S. economy as in “good shape,” Patrick T. Harker , president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, said he thinks monetary policy should stay on hold. “My own view right now is that we should hold steady for a while and watch how developments and the data unfold before taking any more action,” he told the audience attending the 2020 Lyons CEEE Economic Forecast event, hosted by the Lyons Companies and the University of Delaware. Harker, who is a voting member of the Federal Open Market Committee this year, said gains in net new jobs and rising wages should support the consumer sector in 2020, but business investment is lagging. He also said it was too early to assess the full impact on the global economy coming from the coronavirus. He also said that the tight labor markets afforded an opportunity to rethink how workers are recruited and retained. “This can perhaps be done by rethinking job requirements or additional ways of training,” he said. Related Content Monetary Policy Speech 2020 Lyons CEEE Economic Forecast, University of Delaware | Newark, DE

News Release Fed President Patrick Harker Sees Two Possible Paths for U.S. Economy in Months Ahead 07 May ’20 Describing the U.S. economy as in “good shape,” Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, said he thinks monetary policy should stay on hold. Share For immediate release Contact: Daneil Mazone , Manager, Media Relations, 215-574-7163 Philadelphia, PA — Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told an audience at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs that he foresees two possible paths for the U.S. economy, depending on how measures to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 play out. Harker addressed the council via Zoom. Harker said that if the U.S. economy reopens in June with smart measures to stop the spread of the virus in place, he expects the sharp contraction this quarter to be followed by robust growth in the second half of the year. We would then see very healthy growth in 2021. But Harker warned that if the economy reopens without effective mitigation measures and the U.S. experiences a significant second wave of the virus, the economy could severely contract again in 2021. Harker, who is a voting member of the Federal Open Market Committee this year, also laid out the actions the Federal Reserve has taken to mitigate the economic fallout from the crisis, including lowering the bank’s policy interest rate to near zero and setting up lending facilities for municipalities and small businesses. Related Content The Economy Speech Chicago Council on Global Affairs | Chicago, IL Regional Economics News Release Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told the Delaware State Chamber of Commerce that he foresees an uneven economic recovery for the state. He presented his remarks via conference call. Monetary Policy Speech Delaware State Chamber of Commerce | Wilmington, DE

News Release Fed President Patrick Harker Forecasts Uneven Recovery for Delaware 12 May ’20 Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, told the Delaware State Chamber of Commerce that he foresees an uneven economic recovery for the state. He presented his remarks via conference call. Share For immediate release Contact: Daneil Mazone, Manager, Media Relations, 215-574-7163 Wilmington, DE — Harker said he expects manufacturing to bounce back quickly but warned that the state’s southern counties, which are heavily dependent on tourism, could be in for a longer contraction. He also noted that traffic in and out of Wilmington port will depend heavily on how the rest of the world responds to the coronavirus. He added that, unlike the last recession, finance and banking employment should remain steady. The state’s thriving “eds and meds” sector — universities and health care — may require direct lending from the Federal Reserve, according to Harker. Harker also addressed the national economy, laying out two paths it may take this year and next, depending on whether the country experiences a significant second wave of the coronavirus. Additionally, Harker, who is a voting member of the Federal Open Market Committee this year, described the actions the Federal Reserve has taken to mitigate the economic fallout from the crisis, including lowering the bank’s policy interest rate to near zero and setting up lending facilities for municipalities and small businesses. Related Content Monetary Policy Speech Delaware State Chamber of Commerce | Wilmington, DE The Economy Speech Chicago Council on Global Affairs | Chicago, IL Monetary Policy News Release Describing the U.S. economy as in “good shape,” Patrick T. Harker, president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, said he thinks monetary policy should stay on hold.

The Economic Outlook for Delaware and the Nation Amid COVID-19 Delaware State Chamber of Commerce Wilmington, DE (via conference call) May 12, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 1 The Economic Outlook for Delaware and the Nation Amid COVID-19 Delaware State Chamber of Commerce Wilmington, DE (via conference call) May 12, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Good morning. As you probably know, I used to be the president of the University of Delaware, so it’s great to be back! At least virtually … Before we begin, let me dispense with the usual Fed disclaimer: The views I express today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System. It’s no secret that we find ourselves in the midst of a crisis like none of us have experienced in our lifetimes. The coronavirus that arrived on our shores just a few months ago has already killed tens of thousands of Americans, ended a years-long streak of solid economic growth, and caused tens of millions of our fellow citizens to lose their jobs. It’s amazing to think how different my remarks would have been had I given them just two months ago. The coronavirus is above all a public health crisis and the Federal Reserve as an institution — and me personally — can’t say enough to adequately convey our gratitude toward America’s health-care workers, as well as other frontline workers like police, grocery-store workers, truck drivers, and innumerable others who are risking their own health for the well-being of the country. Quantifying the Downturn Nationally and in Delaware The economic ramifications of this crisis, of course, have been stark as well. Perhaps most notable has been a collapse in most forms of consumer spending, a component of GDP that accounts for about 70 percent of our country’s economic activity. 2 In March, we experienced a literally unprecedented 7.5 percent fall in consumer spending, and April data will surely be even worse. In the same month, manufacturing output fell to levels not seen since 2011. And data from the Institute for Supply Management showed a stark contraction for April as well. Falling spending and output are reflected in the national unemployment rate, which now stands at 14.7 percent. Delaware has suffered along with the rest of the country. Between March 21 and May 2, nearly 100,000 Delaware residents filed for unemployment — in one week alone, 21,600 did. By contrast, before the onset of the crisis, weekly applications for unemployment in Delaware came in between 500 and 600. Job losses in Delaware have been heavily concentrated in accommodations and food services, though there has also been a slight decline in manufacturing employment. Banking and finance jobs, crucial in Delaware, have held up fairly well — in stark contrast to the last recession, which began, after all, with a financial crisis. It’s notable the economic slowdown, particularly on the consumer side, was observable even before states like Delaware took serious action to curtail the spread of the virus. That strongly suggests that the coronavirus itself, and not just government policies designed to mitigate it, are harming the economy. Before states and cities started imposing lockdowns and shutting down businesses that they deemed nonessential, data show the cutbacks in spending: Airline bookings were collapsing and foot traffic into restaurants had already begun a steep decline, for instance. Consumers were voting with their feet — or at least with their wallets. The point is this: Until the virus itself is under control, even as more states gradually open up, we can expect the economy to underperform relative to where it was just a couple of months ago. Federal Reserve Actions Does that mean we should simply sit on our hands until effective therapies, or a vaccine, emerges? Of course not. And as you probably know, our institution, the Federal Reserve, has taken bold action to help deal with the economic consequences of what is fundamentally a public health crisis. At the Federal Reserve, we have essentially found ourselves in the role of firefighter — and we’ve poured water on the fire. But we want to avoid damaging the underlying infrastructure of what just a few months ago was a very healthy economy. Our goal is to use our vast lending powers to maintain our 3 underlying economic infrastructure by making sure that every sector of the economy has access to liquidity. We have, first and foremost, acted by lowering our policy interest rate to near zero — and we expect to keep it there for some time. We’ve also taken a number of actions to keep credit flowing. Beginning in March, as the depths of the crisis became apparent, we started buying large amounts of Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities to prevent credit markets from seizing up. The markets have largely stabilized, and we’ve now slowed the rate of those purchases. We’re also focusing on using all of our available tools to get loans directly into the hands of those who need them most. To do that, we’re going to be buying bonds from cities and states, most of whose sales tax revenues have tanked along with consumer spending. This program, called the Municipal Liquidity Facility, will provide essential liquidity to local governments as they fight the pandemic. We’ve also set up what we’re calling our Main Street Lending facility. The goal here is to get cash in the hands of small- to medium-sized businesses whose operations have been hampered by the virus. These businesses tend to be the economic lifeblood of their local communities, and this lending facility is designed to forestall mass closures of small and medium-sized businesses on Main Streets across the country. The Federal Reserve is also bolstering the Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program by supplying liquidity to financial institutions that are issuing loans to those crucial businesses. We know that this crisis is severely harming the nonprofit sector as well. As a recovering academic and university president myself, I’m acutely aware of the stress this crisis is inflicting on, for instance, the higher education sector. The Federal Reserve is thinking carefully about setting up facilities that can provide direct lending to colleges, universities, and nonprofit medical institutions. This is crucial for Delaware because “eds and meds” are vitally important to the state’s economy. Now, 17.4 percent of Delaware workers are employed in the sector, more than even work in professional and business services. I want to be clear. We’re not in 2009 anymore and this is not quantitative easing 2.0. 4 The principle behind quantitative easing was that people weren’t engaging in investments because the cost of capital was too high. That is simply not the case now. The reason people aren’t engaging economically is the health crisis. I also want to be clear that these facilities — as well as the actions that have been taken on the fiscal side, especially the CARES Act that Congress passed a few weeks ago — are not economic stimulus. Our facilities, instead, are a form of emergency relief — of insurance. We’re doing everything we can to help people get through a really painful time. Looking to the Future So, now the $64,000, or perhaps the $22 trillion, question. What happens next economically? The second quarter data will be brutally painful as a result of both the virus and the government- mandated economic shutdown. Take your pick of bad, really bad, or really, really bad. What happens after that to a large extent depends on how the virus moves through our society, and our reaction to it in terms of balancing stay-at-home policies versus an intelligent — and I want to stress, intelligent — reopening. There are multiple scenarios as to how this plays out. But here are just two to consider: In the more optimistic scenario, the economy largely opens in June, we have technology in place to contain the spread of the virus, and there is no second wave in the fall. In that scenario, I would expect a severe contraction in GDP in the second quarter followed by a significant rebound in the second half. However, the second half rebound is not enough to fully offset the contraction in Q1 and Q2; 2021 would then show above-trend annual GDP growth. The less optimistic scenario is that we open too quickly and see a significant second wave of the virus. Not only would this be a health catastrophe, but it would reverse the recovery as well. In this less hopeful scenario, I project a similar growth path to the baseline for 2020, followed by a painful economic contraction of GDP in 2021 as shutdowns are reintroduced. Longer term, of course, there will be a recovery. But I also want to stress that it might be an uneven one. There’s an old saying that a rising tide lifts all boats. But that might not apply here. 5 Manufacturers of durable goods, for instance, should come back quickly. One large manufacturer in our District who temporarily halted operations reports that orders themselves never evaporated — they were simply delayed as virus mitigation measures took effect. But as Delaware and other states slowly and intelligently reopen, I think we can expect manufacturing output to quickly bounce back. Travel and hospitality, on the other hand, may be in for a longer and more painful contraction. Businesses may have enough experience teleconferencing instead of holding physical meetings that they may decide to cut back on corporate travel. Families may choose to avoid crowded spots like amusement parks, cruise ships, and packed Eastern Shore beaches. The knock-on effects to airlines, hotels, and restaurants that cater to travelers could be severe and long lasting. That, unfortunately, is bad news for southern Delaware, particularly Sussex and Kent counties, both of which rely heavily on tourism. Delaware, with its large port in Wilmington, is also exposed to the vicissitudes of the global economy. That was already visible in March’s data, where the total value of exports from the state totaled $335.5 million. That sounds like a lot except when you consider that in March 2019, the figure stood at a high of $711.8 million. A pickup in export values is dependent on economies in Europe, Asia, and elsewhere once again showing growth. But that too depends on how those countries manage the coronavirus and its economic fallout. Commercial real estate could also be in for a rough stretch. Companies may find that working from home isn’t so bad after all and reduce physical office space. There is also a strong possibility that many hotels and restaurants will never reopen. There will probably be retailers, big and small, that also shutter permanently. In the long term, the uneven recovery will present a risk to our banking sector, which is heavily exposed to sectors like commercial real estate. The good news is we went into this crisis with a well-capitalized regulated financial system. But I want to urge banks to retain capital as we prepare to enter a tough period. In my personal opinion, they probably shouldn’t be issuing large dividends at the moment. I want to close by mentioning a subject dear to my heart: diners! Near my house up here in South Jersey there’s a diner that, just a few days after restaurants were shut down here, quickly turned into a full-service grocery store. 6 Now, perhaps this only demonstrates the ingenuity of the South Jersey diner sector. And I’ll admit I’m biased on that score … But I also think it underlines Americans’ boundless ability to adapt — to retool when the times call for it. I’m sure that we will get through this.

Equity and the Recovery Reinventing Our Communities: Planning for Equity in Recovery – Lessons We’re Learning from COVID-19 (webinar) Philadelphia, PA May 28, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia The views expressed today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). 1 Equity and the Recovery Reinventing Our Communities: Planning for Equity in Recovery – Lessons We’re Learning from COVID-19 (webinar) Philadelphia, PA May 28, 2020 Patrick T. Harker President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Good afternoon. Thank you very much to Daniel for that introduction and a big thank you to everybody at both the Philadelphia and St. Louis Federal Reserve Banks who worked tirelessly to make this virtual event possible. We usually hold these biennial Reinventing Our Communities conferences in Philadelphia, though two years ago we met in Baltimore for the first time. Back then, we thought that was a big change! Little did we know … Now, we may be meeting in a very different format this year, but I still have to begin by mentioning my usual Fed disclaimer: The views I express today are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System. The COVID-19 crisis has certainly changed America in the course of just a few months. Many of us have become expert “social distancers” and furious handwashers. Some of us have even become amateur barbers. But in other important ways, this health crisis has not so much changed things as simply exposed, and in some cases accelerated, trends that were already present in our society. The United States went into this crisis a troublingly unequal place, beset by serious inequities in income, wealth, and opportunity. Perhaps most disturbing is that the multiyear economic expansion we experienced through much of the last decade did nothing to reduce American inequality. Indeed, last year, even as by many measures, the economy was in great shape, the Census Bureau calculated that income inequality in 2018 was the highest it had been in the 50 years it has measured it. The Gini coefficient — which measures the equality of income distribution — shows that incomes in the U.S. are far less equally distributed than in other industrialized countries like Germany and Japan. 2 Wealth inequality is even starker. My colleagues at the St. Louis Fed calculated last year that, as of 2016, the top 10 percent of wealthiest American households owned 77 percent of the country’s total wealth. The bottom 50 percent owned only 1 percent. Fully 10 percent of American households had negative net worth, meaning their total household debt outstripped their assets. Inequality and poverty touch all corners of America, from depopulating rural communities in the Great Plains, to postindustrial cities in the Northeast and Midwest, to neighborhoods in even some of our wealthiest cities like San Francisco and New York. But we can’t deny that certain communities have borne the brunt of these inequities more than others. It’s simply a fact that some of the underlying inequalities in our society deal with race. To cite just one example, as of 2016, the average family wealth of white families was nearly seven times greater than that of black families. The health crisis has only heightened these inequities. For one, the coronavirus itself is affecting some communities more than others. In Philadelphia, more than half of those who have died from COVID-19 have been African American, despite African Americans making up only about 40 percent of the city’s population. This is a trend that has been observable nationwide. And the economic costs of the health crisis have fallen on those least able to bear them as well. Our researchers at the Philadelphia Fed have been studying closely which neighborhoods and households have been most affected by the economic shutdown. They’ve found that those most likely to be at risk of losing employment were already disproportionately low income. In other words, both as a health and an economic crisis, COVID-19 has the cruel effect of hurting those who were already most vulnerable. American inequality is a moral and ethical challenge to our country’s founding creed. But research shows it’s also a growing economic problem. The International Monetary Fund has found that when an additional 1 percent of income goes to the top 20 percent of income earners, GDP falls. But when the same gains are made by the bottom 20 percent, GDP rises. That makes sense, of course: Those who earn less money are likely to spend it, whereas high earners save. That’s crucial because consumer spending accounts for about 70 percent of our country’s total GDP. Ensuring an equitable recovery from COVID-19 is critical in making sure the next expansion is not only fair but also strong and durable. 3 That’s why today’s discussion is so vitally important. Our role at the Fed is not to dictate fiscal policy but to use our academic and applied research, our outreach, and our convening powers to help policymakers all across the country better understand how to deal with these challenges. Here at the Philadelphia Fed, we’ve launched the Economic Growth & Mobility Project, a multilevel effort to bring entrepreneurial solutions to achieve inclusive economic growth and create pathways out of poverty through the pillars of creating job opportunities, improving human capital, and addressing housing and infrastructure needs. As this crisis continues, we must redouble our efforts to redress some of the great underlying challenges to our society. Thank you very much for being a part of this extremely important conversation.
