September 30, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the SIFMA Liquidity Forum, New York City As prepared for delivery The financial crisis and the ensuing recession exacted a high cost on the country. Real gross domestic product (GDP) declined by over a half of a trillion dollars. Total nonfarm payroll employment declined by 8.7 million jobs, and 5.8 million households lost their homes to foreclosure. Extraordinary fiscal and monetary policy efforts were required to prevent a collapse of the financial system and the onset of a world-wide economic depression. In the aftermath, new regulations, such as Basel III and the Dodd-Frank Act, were implemented to strengthen the financial system and to limit the risk of a future financial crisis. Some opponents of tougher bank regulation claim that the increased regulatory requirements, such as the higher capital requirements and new liquidity standards, that have been imposed on large financial institutions in the aftermath of the financial crisis have reduced these firms' market-making capacity. As a result, so the argument goes, this is leading to less liquidity for trading securities, and to more illiquidity events in which the prices of financial assets move sharply and become temporarily unmoored from their fundamental valuations. The contention is that higher liquidity costs and more frequent illiquidity events will, over time, drive up the borrowing costs of households, businesses and the U.S. government; and that this is a substantial, largely unintended cost imposed by tougher regulation. Thus, the argument concludes, the regulatory burden should be rolled back. This is a noteworthy assertion and would have significant implications for regulatory policy if it were correct. However, as I will lay out in my remarks, I don't think the hypothesis is well-supported by the available evidence. First, the evidence to date that liquidity has diminished markedly is, at best, mixed. Second, even if one were to interpret the evidence as indicating that liquidity has been reduced, it is not clear whether regulation is the primary driver, as other changes have played important roles as well. Moreover, even if higher capital and new liquidity requirements were found to result in greater transaction costs, these costs would need to be assessed against the benefits of having a more robust and resilient financial system and a reduced risk of financial crises in the future. That said, more work should be undertaken to fully assess this issue. There is much that is still unknown. The available market liquidity data primarily focus on the inter-dealer markets and thus do not shed light on possible liquidity changes between dealers and customers. In addition, the financial system is adjusting in complex ways in reaction to regulatory, technological and other changes. We need to better understand the degree to which any changes in the nature of liquidity reflect the evolving structure of financial markets, changes in regulatory policy or other factors. With respect to regulatory policy, an important objective should be to achieve the best balance between the benefits of increased safety and soundness versus any costs imposed by these regulatory changes on market function and liquidity. In my remarks today, I will focus on market liquidity rather than funding liquidity, although I recognize that the two are related in important ways. I will examine market liquidity in two important fixed-income markets—the U.S. Treasury market and the U.S. corporate bond market. The Treasury and corporate bond markets provide a useful contrast in evaluating liquidity conditions as they differ with respect to the homogeneity of their securities, how their securities are traded and how regulatory changes may have affected the incentives of dealers to make markets in these securities. The Treasury market is much more homogeneous and the average size of each issue is much larger. Trading volume and average trade sizes are much larger, and much of the trading activity for interdealer on-the-run securities is conducted electronically through the use of central limit order books (CLOB). In contrast, the corporate bond market is much more heterogeneous; there are many more distinct bonds available; and bond sizes are much smaller. As a result, corporate bond trading is fragmented across a large number of distinct outstanding bonds. Consequently, trading tends to occur infrequently and largely on a bilateral basis. Through the prism of these two asset classes, I hope to provide some preliminary answers to five key questions. First, what do we mean by liquidity and how can we measure it? Second, what does the available evidence show in terms of how liquidity has changed in recent years in the U.S. Treasury and corporate bond markets? Third, what factors could influence liquidity provision? Regulation might be one factor, but there also could be others. Fourth, what are the costs associated with shifts in liquidity and how do these costs compare to the benefits of a more resilient and robust financial system? Fifth, what future work is needed to better assess whether increased regulation has damaged liquidity provision and whether the resulting costs exceed the benefits of higher capital and liquidity standards in terms of financial stability? As always, what I have to say today represents my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 What do we mean by liquidity and how can we measure it? I would define liquidity as the cost—both in expense and in time—of buying or selling an asset for cash. This would incorporate any direct transaction expense, such as fees or brokerage costs, the price the transaction was executed at relative to the midpoint of bid-ask spreads, how much—if at all—the size of the transaction moved market prices, and the immediacy or speediness with which the transaction could be completed. How quickly prices revert back to earlier prices after a large trade also is relevant in assessing liquidity costs. The costs of liquidity would go up if the costs of execution rose, the bid-ask spread widened, if prices moved more in response to a given sized transaction or if it took a longer period of time to complete the transaction and receive cash. In assessing liquidity, we also need to distinguish between those liquidity conditions that generally prevail versus those that arise during periods of market stress when liquidity may become constrained. Liquidity risk is the risk that liquidity might be impaired in the future when one wants to buy or sell an asset. If liquidity risk is high, this means that there is a substantial risk that the price received could be at a greater concession to the prior trade than anticipated. Liquidity is dynamic, unobservable and multi-dimensional in nature, and, as such, can only be measured indirectly. We can measure liquidity using a number of metrics, including bid-ask spreads, market depth and price impact. Bid-ask spreads are a measure of the potential compensation for market makers for liquidity provision. Market depth measures how thick the central limit order book is at any point in time. If the CLOB is denser and thicker, then a large trade should result in a smaller price concession, everything else equal. Price impact measures how the price of a security changes in response to trades of a given size. To measure liquidity risk, we combine the various measures of liquidity discussed above into a single liquidity index. Large jumps in illiquidity are identified as days in which the liquidity index deteriorates by an unusually large amount. We benchmark this as moves of greater than two standard deviations. Liquidity risk is calculated as the number of such jumps in illiquidity over a two-year rolling window. Constructed in this manner, we are implicitly assuming that the risk of an illiquidity event in the future is correlated with the frequency of such illiquidity events in the recent past. What does the available evidence show in terms of how liquidity has changed in recent years in the U.S. Treasury and corporate bond markets? With respect to the U.S. Treasury market, we do not find much evidence based on available measures consistent with a significant deterioration in liquidity. For example, quoted bid-ask spreads, after widening sharply during the financial crisis, subsequently narrowed and have remained stable at pre-crisis levels since 2010. (Exhibit 1) Other measures paint a more mixed picture. While order book depth is appreciably lower now than in 2012 and 2013, it is much higher than during the financial crisis, and does not appear to be unusually low by historical standards. (Exhibit 2) Similarly, the price impact of trades appears to have risen a bit since the October 15 flash rally indicating some deterioration of liquidity, but is still not high relative to its longer-run experience. (Exhibit 3) Average trade sizes have followed a similar pattern to the order book depth and have recently declined somewhat. (Exhibit 4) Another way to assess liquidity conditions is through the potential impact on Treasury yields. If liquidity had deteriorated markedly, then we would expect to see larger deviations of actual yields compared to the yields predicted by an empirically fitted yield curve. If liquidity were more costly, the deviations of actual yields from fitted yields would increase because the costs of arbitrage to eliminate those divergences would be higher. During the financial crisis, for example, there was a sharp deterioration in liquidity, which was associated with a sharp rise in some measures of yield curve fitting errors to a peak of about 20 basis points. This compares to less than 2 basis points prior to the crisis. In contrast, yield curve fitting errors have been low and stable recently and not outside historical norms. (Exhibit 5) Of course, the Federal Reserve's large scale interventions in the Treasury market over this period may also have had an impact on this measure. Turning to corporate bonds, given their heterogeneous nature, liquidity in the corporate bond market depends on the ability and willingness of dealers to hold these securities on their balance sheets while they find buyers. Disaggregated data on dealer balance sheet holdings have only been published since April 2013. While limited in terms of its history, these data indicate no clear reduction in investment grade security holdings over time, but do show a significant reduction in high-yield security holdings since the end of the financial crisis. This might be indicative of deterioration in market liquidity in corporate bonds. To investigate corporate bond market liquidity in more detail, let's examine three liquidity measures: the average trade size, "effective" bid-ask spreads and price impact. The evidence on the average trade size for investment grade corporate bonds indicates a slight reduction from between $700,000 to $800,000 in the early 2000s to around $500,000 in the last few years. (Exhibit 6) However, price measures of corporate bond liquidity do not substantiate the trend in this quantity measure. The effective bid-ask spread has been trending down since the early 2000s, around the same time that TRACE reporting was introduced. The spread spiked during the financial crisis, but is now lower than its pre-crisis levels. (Exhibit 7) Similarly, price impact—the effect on price from a $1 million trade—has also been trending down since the early 2000s apart from the jump during the financial crisis. (Exhibit 8) Although liquidity in the Treasury and corporate bond markets does not appear to have changed much recently, liquidity risk may have risen. For the Treasury market, our liquidity risk measure increased sharply with the financial crisis, and declined from 2009 to 2013. However, over the last two years Treasury liquidity risk has moved higher and relative to the pre-crisis period is currently somewhat elevated. For the corporate bond market, liquidity risk also increased sharply during the financial crisis, and then quickly fell as the crisis passed. Corporate bond liquidity risk subsequently increased again in 2012 and early 2013, but is now back down close to its pre-crisis level. (Exhibit 9) In sum, there is limited evidence pointing to a reduction in the average levels of liquidity. However, there are reasons to think liquidity risk may have increased, and there are some data to support this conjecture. Two cautionary notes are warranted in evaluating the available evidence. First, the Treasury market evidence is based on the inter-dealer markets, and we do not have comparable evidence on liquidity conditions in the dealer-to-customer market. Second, it is important to note that the FOMC's unconventional monetary policy may have affected recent measures of liquidity in ways that could make it more difficult to clearly discern any potential changes. To the extent that this may be the case, then a clearer picture on liquidity conditions may only emerge as monetary policy is normalized. What factors could influence liquidity provision? Clearly many factors could affect liquidity provision. On the regulatory side, capital and liquidity requirements are probably the most important factors. Dealers have been an important provider of liquidity. Higher capital requirements reduce dealers' returns on equity for a given level of intermediation activity and margin. At the same time, liquidity requirements increase the cost of holding less liquid assets. To compensate for the higher capital and liquidity requirements, dealers can shrink their activity in lower margin businesses and raise the price for the liquidity services they provide. Presumably, both adjustments occur in most markets with the ease of entry, the degree of economies of scale, business model and overall client profitability influencing whether the adjustment occurs more through a resizing of the activity or a change in unit trading margins. For the U.S Treasury market, the most important change in regulatory requirements is probably the introduction of the supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) in the United States. The SLR limits how leveraged a dealer balance sheet can be. Because in the SLR all assets require regulatory capital, the SLR is much tougher on low risk assets compared to the risk-based capital measures it complements. Of note, the long-standing U.S. tier 1 leverage ratio also requires the same amount of regulatory capital for all assets, but the SLR has been more binding given its higher calibration and more expansive coverage of exposures. The SLR is currently the binding capital requirement for some dealers, and it has significantly increased the amount of capital that needs to be held against low-risk assets. This has resulted in significant adjustments in the composition of dealer balance sheets. For example, the imposition of the SLR has been cited as an important factor in the shrinkage of dealer repo financing activity. In contrast, the risk-based capital standards and new liquidity standards are unlikely to be important for Treasuries and repo backed by Treasuries because Treasuries are treated as posing less risk to the banks that hold them and count as high-quality liquid assets. For the corporate bond market, the most relevant factors are probably the increase in the Basel risk-weighted capital ratio, the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) stress tests—which subject the dealer trading book to additional global market shocks that include a sudden increase in general risk premiums and credit risk combined with significant market illiquidity—and the Volcker Rule, which prohibits proprietary trading for a number of asset classes including corporate bonds, but not U.S. Treasuries. However, for both markets, other non-regulatory factors are also important. Liquidity provision is affected by changes in market structure, how trades are executed and by competition from outside of the regulatory boundaries that have been established for systemically important financial institutions. The market structure for many asset classes has evolved from a bilateral OTC structure toward a more open, centralized structure through the adoption of electronic trading platforms, post-trade infrastructures and higher degrees of transparency. For example, in the U.S. Treasury market, firms specializing in high-frequency algorithmic trading have become much more important and now make up more than half the trading in the electronic, interdealer cash market. This change in market structure has reduced the cost of trading in the interdealer market, especially for small trade sizes. Electronic trading enables the use of automated trading strategies which tend to employ speed for executing small-size trades, and the liquidity on electronic trading platforms allows traders to get in and out of positions quickly. The growth in high-frequency trading likely accounts for the reduction in trade size discussed earlier rather than this reduction being indicative of less liquidity. The movement toward electronic trading has allowed a more diverse set of actors to participate in the market, thereby increasing competition and likely leading to improved market liquidity. These changes, though, may have reduced the profitability of providing liquidity for dealers engaged in trading activity in the Treasury market. 2 Liquidity risk in the Treasury market may also reflect the growth in high-frequency trading rather than the impact of regulation. Temporary illiquidity events may reflect unanticipated, complex and dynamic interactions among high-frequency trading strategies that can play out faster than the timeframe in which human intervention can occur. In addition, high-frequency trading activity, by undercutting the returns to providing liquidity services on a lower frequency and a higher trade size basis, may have both increased liquidity in the small—hence narrowing bid/offer spreads in normal trading conditions—but decreased it in the large—when selling or buying pressure on one side of the market predominates. For the corporate bond market, market structure has also changed in important ways. For example, bond mutual funds and exchange traded funds now hold a much higher proportion of corporate bonds than before the financial crisis. Presumably, this shift in the structure of the market has affected liquidity provision and liquidity risk in the corporate bond market through the redemption risk faced by these funds. Also, shifts in market structure and regulation have undoubtedly affected other markets related to the corporate bond market. For example, changes in capital requirements for single name credit default swaps have presumably—and appropriately from a supervisory perspective—increased hedging costs and affected dealer market-making appetites and capabilities. What are the costs associated with shifts in liquidity and how do these costs compare to the benefits of a more resilient and robust financial system? Even if one were to read the evidence as supporting the notion that liquidity has become somewhat more costly, this does not imply that we should simply unwind recent regulatory requirements. First, as I discussed, there are non-regulatory factors that could be more important factors. Second, even if a connection could be made to regulatory causes, the costs of any reduction in liquidity or increase in liquidity risk might be low relative to the benefits of the regulations. As I noted at the outset of my remarks, recent regulatory changes have been designed to produce a safer and sounder financial system. Higher capital and liquidity requirements have made major financial institutions less prone to failure. This can be seen in the sharp fall in credit default swap spreads for major dealers in recent years. Moreover, other steps have made the financial system more robust to the failure of a systemically important firm. For example, the shift to central clearing of over-the-counter derivatives through central counterparties (CCPs) has reduced bilateral risk exposures, and significant progress is being made on how to resolve the failure of a systemically important financial firm in a way that does not threaten the entire financial system. 3 As I see it, the prior regime did not sufficiently foster financial stability, a necessary condition for sustained economic growth. Most noteworthy to me is the fact that the regulatory regime that was in place in 2008 and 2009 was associated with an episode of the most illiquid market conditions since at least the Great Depression. A return to such a regime could lead to a higher cost for liquidity over the long-run. I think we are in a much better place today. We have a financial system that is much more resilient, and the available evidence suggests that this transformation has not resulted in any significant erosion in market liquidity. What future work is needed? There is a tendency to compress a complex world into a sound bite—such as, "tougher regulation is increasing the cost of liquidity and driving up liquidity risk." Policy needs to be based on evidence and the available evidence supporting this claim is mixed, at best. Most importantly, I think it ignores the complex nature of the changes underway in financial markets. The methods of intermediation are changing and will likely continue to evolve. There are new players with different objectives and goals, and technology is evolving rapidly. These factors strike me as just as important as the increase in regulatory requirements for the large dealers. The recent work analyzing the October 15 Treasury market flash rally illuminates the complexity of today's market structure. After a careful examination of the evidence, the authors of the October 15 flash rally report conclude that "the events of October 15 underscore the importance of efforts by the official and private sectors to understand more fully the implications of the evolving Treasury market structure for liquidity, trading and risk management practices, data access, and monitoring and surveillance." The report goes on to suggest "further study of the evolution of the U.S. Treasury market and the implications for market structure and liquidity;" "continue monitoring of trading and risk management practices across the U.S. Treasury market;" "an assessment of the data available to the public and to official sectors on U.S. Treasury cash securities;" and "continued efforts to strengthen monitoring and surveillance and to promote interagency coordination related to trading across the U.S. Treasury market." 4 I concur with all these recommendations. There is much more work to do—not just with respect to the U.S. Treasury market, of course, but also on the broader issue of how changes in regulation and market structure influence liquidity conditions across the different financial markets. For example, electronic trading was introduced to the foreign exchange market well before recent regulatory changes. Consequently, a study of the foreign exchange market may shed some additional light on the role of electronic trading on liquidity risk in an environment prior to recent regulatory changes. Only through much more careful study and data analysis can we thoughtfully address the two most important questions—not whether regulation should be rolled back in order to return to the liquidity conditions prior to the financial crisis, but instead: whether there is a diminution of liquidity and/or an increase in liquidity risk that is costly or poses risks to financial stability or macroeconomic performance; and, if this this is the case, whether financial market regulation could be altered in a way that improves the balance between the benefits of tougher regulation in terms of enhanced financial stability versus the costs of such regulation, including any adverse impacts on market liquidity provision. In addition, whether microstructure reforms aimed at improving the functioning of markets could be promising in that respect. We certainly don't want to undermine the progress we have made in making the financial system more robust and resilient. But if there are adjustments to regulation that could improve liquidity provision without increasing financial stability risks, we should be open to considering such changes. I suspect, however, making this determination will require considerably more data, research and reflection before we reach any definitive conclusions. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. Charts _________________________________________________ 1 Tobias Adrian, Dianne Dobbeck, James Egelhof, Michael Fleming, Joshua Frost, Lorie Logan, Michael McMorrow, Matthew Raskin, Ernst Schaumburg, Katherine Tilghman-Hill, Joseph Tracy and Nathaniel Wuerffel assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 The Federal Reserve's large scale asset purchases presumably have also played a role by removing a large volume of Treasury securities from the marketplace. 3 This includes requirements for total loss-absorbing capital (TLAC), Title I resolution plan requirements and the option of Title II single point of entry resolution 4 See Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 , pp 6-7. Related New York Fed Content Charts By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

October 3, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Panel remarks at the Macroprudential Monetary Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to be here today and to have the opportunity to talk about the potential use of macroprudential tools in the United States. Before I respond to Adam Posen, I’d like to make a few general comments on macroprudential tools. I am interested in such tools both as a U.S. policymaker and in my role as chair of the Committee on the Global Financial System of the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), a body that has done considerable work in this area in recent years. What I have to say today represents my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System. 1 The use of macroprudential tools has gotten considerable attention for several reasons. Some countries have implemented macroprudential measures with respect to the housing market that may have limited the extent of home price appreciation and made their financial systems more resilient when the boom unwound. Other countries have implemented countercyclical capital requirements that have made their banking systems more resilient. Thus, the hope is that U.S. policymakers can learn from these international experiences and incorporate effective macroprudential tools into our toolkit that could be used to limit financial stability risks. Support for using macroprudential tools in the United States has also been bolstered by our experience during the financial crisis. The U.S. housing boom and subsequent bust might have been less severe had a set of macroprudential measures been in place at the time to limit the degree of leverage and speculative activity in the housing sector. The housing boom was fueled by optimistic expectations for house price appreciation, combined with lax underwriting standards embodied in such practices as no-doc mortgages and widespread speculative activity by investors. I remember, for example, the website, Condoflip.com, which says it all in terms of the degree of speculative fervor that was evident at the time. If underwriting practices had been held to high standards (e.g., strict mortgage service-to-income ratio limits had been honored) and speculative activity had been constrained (e.g., by lower loan-to-value ceilings for investors with multiple mortgage liens outstanding), this might have limited the size of the boom and subsequent bust. My own view is that while the use of macroprudential tools holds promise, we are a long way from being able to successfully use such tools in the United States. There are two major sets of difficulties. First, unlike monetary policy and microprudential regulation, there is not a well-defined framework for identifying emerging imbalances and applying macroprudential tools in response. A recent tabletop exercise conducted by a number of Federal Reserve Bank presidents, which I will discuss a bit later, indicates some of the difficulties here. A workshop held by the Committee on the Global Financial System earlier this year in Hong Kong also noted this difficulty. Appropriate calibration of macroprudential tools is difficult because of the lack of data and information about how the transmission process works―that is, what impact the tool will have on the targeted sector. Even assessing the impact ex post is challenging because it is difficult to predict how the macroeconomy and financial system would have evolved if the macroprudential tool had not been in place. Second, in the U.S., even if such a framework existed, there would still be a problem in terms of timely implementation. The U.S. regulatory structure is fragmented, so that in most cases, no single regulator is able to implement macroprudential tools in a comprehensive manner. As a result, imposing macroprudential tools in the United States would almost certainly leave significant gaps in coverage. Such coverage gaps would likely lead to distortions within the financial sector, as the tool would have differential impacts across financial intermediaries inside versus outside a particular regulatory boundary. Also, activity would migrate toward those areas outside the scope of the macroprudential tools that had been implemented. It is important to note the regulatory mandates of the numerous federal and state regulatory authorities differ considerably. Some simply may not view financial stability as an important part of their mandate. As a result, I suspect it would be difficult to get all the relevant regulators on board in a timely way to implement macroprudential tools successfully. In principle, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) might be well placed to coordinate a response across different regulatory jurisdictions. But, I believe this is likely to prove difficult to do in practice. Each of the regulatory agencies guards its own authority and prerogatives, and may not always be responsive to pressure from other regulators or the U.S. Treasury. There is also the problem of responding to an emerging financial stability risk in a timely manner. First, the emerging problem needs to be identified. Then alternative policy responses need to be analyzed and debated. And, there is an understandable bias to start small and to escalate only as needed given the lack of understanding about how big an impact a particular tool may have on the economy. So, even if the FSOC could be effective in developing a consensus among the regulators, I wonder whether it could do this in a timely way. The housing boom in the U.S. that culminated in the financial crisis began in 2002 and 2003. By the time that it was broadly identified as an issue in 2005 and 2006, it might have been too late to do much to temper its effects, even with a sound macroprudential response by the regulatory community. In the remainder of my time, I will discuss two topics in more detail. First, I will discuss briefly what we learned at tabletop exercise with a number of Federal Reserve Bank presidents concerning the potential use of macroprudential tools in response to sectoral imbalances. I think the tabletop exercise underscores the difficulty of using macroprudential tools in practice in the United States. Second, I will discuss the issue that Adam Posen has raised—whether we should focus on the use of rules that are hardwired into the financial system ex ante or instead favor using macroprudential tools in a more discretionary, ex post basis, once particular problems have been identified. In the tabletop exercise, the five Federal Reserve Bank presidents who are members of the Subcommittee on Financial Stability of the Conference of Presidents discussed the best way to respond to a scenario in which the commercial real estate market was overheating. 2 The scenario was much more detailed than that, but the commercial real estate sector was the major problem with respect to financial stability. The stated goal of the exercise was to reduce the risk posed by the commercial real estate boom to financial stability and, by extension, to the Federal Reserve’s ability to achieve its macroeconomic objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. Prudential tools under consideration included: Capital requirement tools, including changes in leverage ratio requirements, imposition of a countercyclical capital buffer, and higher differential capital requirements for commercial real estate exposures; Liquidity tools, such as changes in the liquidity coverage ratio and net stable funding ratio; Credit-based tools, such as limits on loan to value ratios; Supervisory guidance; and Stress testing. Monetary policy was also considered as a tool—either as a complement or as a substitute. It was noteworthy that in the discussion there was no agreement as to what instruments should be emphasized and the ordering in which they should be used relative to monetary policy. Among the available macroprudential tools, stress testing, raising margins on repo funding, and supervisory guidance garnered greater support compared to capital, liquidity, or credit-based tools. In general, the exercise identified several issues with respect to the use of macroprudential tools. One issue was the perceived difficulty of coordinating among different regulators. Another was the fact that many of the tools have implementation lags. The challenge of timely implementation steered some members back to using monetary policy, or toward those macroprudential tools—such as stress tests—that might be able to be implemented more quickly. The exercise underscored that much more development work in the area of macroprudential regulation is needed. Let me now turn to the issue of ex ante, hardwired macroprudential standards that Adam has discussed. In general, I see some advantages with having rules that are hardwired in place so that adjustment of the parameters of the tool—say, limits on the loan-to-value ratio—happen automatically in response to sectoral developments. Automatic rules that are always in place have several advantages over discretionary measures that are implemented, ex post, only after some potential source of financial stability risk has been identified. First, they are transparent and will work more quickly. Second, they avoid some of the problems associated with announcing that a new measure is going to be put in place. When implementing a new measure there will always be some reluctance to overcome in terms of deciding whether it is necessary. Also, there may be political opposition to imposing a new measure. For example, during the housing boom, limits on subprime lending would undoubtedly have provoked the objection that the regulators’ actions would limit home ownership for low-and moderate-income families. Imposing automatic, countercyclical standards also has this difficulty to some degree. But I think it is much less severe because at the time such standards are put in place, they generally will not be binding and it will be unclear whether they will necessarily become either more stringent or more binding in the future. In other words, the rule’s potential impact will be highly speculative and uncertain at the time of implementation. This may lessen the political opposition to putting such a rule in place. In the same vein, automatic rules that are imposed ex ante might also be less risky in terms of potential unintended consequences. When new rules are implemented it is always hard to gauge what the impact will be because imposition of the rule not only changes the economics of borrowing and investing in a particular sector, but also changes expectations about what might happen in the future. When the rule is viewed as likely to be binding in the future—this seems more likely in the case of the ex post measures—it will be very hard to judge how economic agents will respond to a new measure. In this regard, I think back to the Carter administration and the imposition of credit controls to restrain inflation in 1980. Even though the credit controls were not expected to bind right away, the economy began to contract almost immediately as households and businesses rapidly adjusted their behavior to preserve some credit capacity. The response was a much more powerful downturn in economic activity than had been anticipated, which forced the Carter administration to scrap the credit controls because they worked too well in restraining economic activity. So I see some potential advantages of hardwired rules. But, I think this advantage needs to be set against the practical difficulty of figuring out what rules would need to be in place now to deal with all the potential financial stability excesses that could occur in the future. That seems a very difficult task to work out in my opinion. It implies that such rules would need to be designed to treat broad issues, such as increases in financial system leverage or aggregate credit growth, rather than more limited sectoral issues. This may work well in some circumstances in which the financial excess is occurring broadly, but might not be very effective when the problem, while extreme, may be more narrowly based. Historical experience suggests that past bubbles in the United States that have threatened financial stability have taken many different forms and affected many different sectors of the economy. Often, the bubbles have occurred in response to some important innovation in the economy or the development of instruments that facilitated real estate lending to lower-quality borrowers. Examples of these include the development of the internet in the technology stock boom of the late 1990s, and subprime lending and mortgage securitization innovations prior to the financial crisis. These innovations, in turn, sparked changes in belief systems that turned out to be false—such as, the rise in home prices reinforced the view that housing is an excellent investment and that national home prices can never decline. When the assumption that widely supports a boom is revealed as false, the consequence is often a sharp reversal in behavior and prices as the boom deflates quickly. I think it is very hard to anticipate these episodes and put rules in place that would limit such excesses. My concern is that we could over-engineer the financial system, building in complexity in response to potential risks that might, or might not, manifest themselves in the future. The complexity might not gain us much in terms of greater financial stability, either because the problem that ultimately manifested itself was different than we planned for, or because people found a way around the constraint that we had imposed on the system. There are also the challenges of appropriate calibration and timing. How much restraint should the rule exert as home prices rise or aggregate credit growth picks up? Without historical experience and with an underdeveloped macroprudential framework, getting the calibration right is a difficult issue at this point. Also, how quickly should the tool be unwound once it has done its work? The tool needs to work in a countercyclical way, but turning points are difficult to anticipate and which makes it challenging to get the leads and lags right. We have a very complex financial system in the United States. I think we need to do much more work in developing a coherent macroprudential framework before we start contemplating putting a number of countercyclical measures in place. Such a framework needs to take into consideration how it interacts with other policies, such as microprudential policies—to ensure the safety and soundness of individual institutions and monetary policy—designed to help ensure a stable macroeconomy. When are these policies substitutes? When are they complements? How will they interact? How will the governance work in coordinating across these three realms? In the meantime, while we work to sort all this out, we should take considerable solace from the fact that we have made the financial system more resilient to shocks. We may not be able to anticipate the next area of excess. But with higher capital and liquidity requirements and the use of stress tests to assess emerging vulnerabilities, I think we are much better placed than we have been in the past. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Tobias Adrian, Meg McConnell and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See Macroprudential Policy: Case Study from a Tabletop Exercise , Tobias Adrian, Patrick de Foutnouvelle, Emily Yang, and Andrei Zlate, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 742, September 2015. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

October 15, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at The Fed at a crossroads: Where to go next?, Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. As prepared for delivery It is a great pleasure to be here today to participate in this panel with John Taylor. I am going to take today’s topic―“Where to go next?”―to address the issue of how monetary policy should be conducted. This is an issue that is getting considerable attention among policymakers here in Washington, D.C. To put succinctly the question I wish to tackle: Is it better for policymakers to start with a formal rule as the default position, or for policymakers to have a more flexible approach that considers a broader set of factors in setting the monetary policy stance? As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 To get right to the punch line, I favor a more flexible approach that incorporates a broader set of factors into the monetary policy decision-making process. The world is complex and ever-changing. There are many factors that can affect the economic outlook and the attainment of the Federal Reserve’s mandated objectives and, thereby, the appropriate stance of monetary policy. At the same time, I do not favor total discretion in which the monetary policy strategy is determined in an ad hoc fashion as we go along. For monetary policy to be most effective, market participants, households and businesses need to be able to anticipate how the Federal Reserve is likely to respond to evolving conditions. That is because the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy depends not only on what policymakers decide to do today, but also on what the public anticipates that the FOMC is likely to do in the future as the economic outlook changes and evolves. Our experience at the zero lower bound in recent years underscores how important expectations are in influencing the effectiveness of monetary policy. Policymakers thus need to act in a systematic and consistent manner so that expectations are formed accurately and economic behavior can respond consistently with those expectations. In my view, this consideration rules out a totally discretionary monetary policy. Before I critique the use of prescriptive rules in monetary policy-making, I’d like to make it clear at the start that the Taylor Rule (by which I mean the formulation based on John’s 1993 and 1999 papers) has a number of positive attributes that make it a useful reference for policymakers. First, it has two parameters—the long-term inflation objective and the level of potential output—that map directly to the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate objectives. Second, the Rule has the desirable feature that when economic shocks push the economy away from the central bank’s objectives, the Taylor Rule prescribes a policy response that can help push the economy back toward the central bank’s goals. Third, a number of studies have shown that Taylor Rules are robust in the sense that they generally perform quite well across a range of different assumptions about how the economy is structured and operates. Despite these attractive features, I don’t believe that any prescriptive rule, including the Taylor Rule, can take the place of a monetary policy framework that incorporates the FOMC’s collective assessment of the large number of factors that impact the economic outlook. As I see it, the Taylor Rule has several significant shortcomings that can be detrimental to the attainment of the Federal Reserve’s mandated objectives. These shortcomings are not just theoretical; they have been very relevant to monetary policy in recent years. First, the Taylor Rule is not forward-looking. Its policy prescription is based on the current size of the output gap and the deviation of current inflation from the Fed’s objective, not on how these variables are likely to evolve in the future. So, in a rapidly changing environment, the Taylor Rule and other similar prescriptive rules will wind up being “behind the curve.” For example, in the fall of 2008, Taylor Rule prescriptions were well above the level of rates that was appropriate given the sharp and persistent deterioration in the economic outlook and the sharp tightening in financial conditions that occurred during that period. Of course, many economists at that time recognized that such prescriptions would have been inappropriate and suggested various ad hoc modifications to the prescriptions—in fact, John himself suggested that modifications to his rule were appropriate at that time. 2 Nonetheless, there was no consensus about the “right” modification to the rules at that time, in part, because the circumstances were unprecedented and the outlook so uncertain. If the FOMC had been required to justify to Congress deviations from a reference rule at that time, I believe that this would have slowed down how we responded to the crisis and would have resulted in a monetary policy that was not sufficiently accommodative. The consequence could have been a longer financial crisis and a deeper recession. Second, the Taylor Rule, as typically used, assumes that a 2 percent real short-term interest rate is consistent with a neutral monetary policy. However, a large literature concludes that the equilibrium real short-term rate is very unlikely to be constant, with its value affected by many factors, including the pace of technological change, fiscal policy and the evolution of financial conditions. 3 Sometimes it can be much higher than 2 percent. Presumably, this was the case during the late 1990s as rapid technological change lifted productivity growth. Sometimes it can be well below 2 percent. For example, when credit availability dried up during the financial crisis in late 2008, this drove down the equilibrium real rate far below 2 percent. More recently, the slow growth rate of the economy and the low rate of inflation are evidence that the equilibrium real short-term rate today is well below the 2 percent rate assumed in the Taylor Rule. If 2 percent really was consistent with a neutral monetary policy, then the very low real rates of recent years—buttressed by our large-scale asset purchases—should have been extraordinarily accommodative. As a result, we should have grown much faster than the 2½ percent pace evident over the past couple of years and seen an inflation rate much higher than what we experienced. This conclusion is supported by a number of more formal models. For example, the Laubach-Williams model currently estimates that the equilibrium real short-term rate is around zero percent. 4 Third, the Taylor Rule ―and more broadly, any prescriptive rule for the systematic quantitative adjustment of the policy rate to changes in intermediate policy inputs such as real GDP or inflation―is incomplete because it does not fully account for factors that are crucial to how monetary policy impulses are transmitted to the real economy. Monetary policy affects economic activity through its impact on financial conditions—including the level of equity prices, bond yields, the foreign exchange value of the dollar and credit conditions. If the relationship between the federal funds rate and other indicators of financial conditions were stable, then one could just focus on the level of short-term rates. 5 But, because financial conditions vary considerably relative to short-term rates, as we have seen in the financial crisis and its aftermath, one needs to consider developments in financial conditions more broadly in setting monetary policy. In fact, at times, when short-term rates have been pinned at the zero lower bound, the Federal Reserve has taken actions that eased financial conditions without changing short-term interest rates. Such actions have included forward guidance that the FOMC was likely to keep short-term rates low for a long time and large-scale asset purchases that led to lower bond term premia. Now, as I said at the start, just because I don’t want to follow a rule mechanically does not mean that I favor the polar opposite—that is, a fully discretionary monetary policy in which market participants, households and businesses cannot anticipate how monetary policy is likely to evolve as economic and financial market conditions and the economic outlook change. If households and businesses do not have a good notion of how the Federal Reserve will respond to changing economic and financial market conditions, then this would loosen the linkage between short-term rates and financial conditions. This would also likely lead to greater uncertainty about the outlook and higher risk premia, and it would make it more difficult for policymakers to attain their objectives. Instead, what I favor is a careful elucidation of those factors that influence the economic outlook and how monetary policy is likely to respond to changes in the outlook. This includes fiscal policy, productivity growth, the international outlook and financial conditions, as well as how much employment and inflation deviate from the Fed’s objectives. By conducting policy in a transparent way and communicating what is important in determining the central bank’s reaction function, I think policymakers can strike the best balance between a monetary policy that fully incorporates the complexity of the world as it is, while, at the same time, retaining considerable clarity about how the FOMC is likely to respond to changing circumstances. A formal policy rule such as the Taylor Rule misses this balance by going too far in one direction. What is important for attaining the Federal Reserve’s mandated objectives is not that monetary policy is described in terms of a formal prescriptive rule, but rather that the FOMC’s intentions and strategy are well understood by the public. This argues for clear communication through the FOMC meeting statements and minutes, the FOMC’s statement concerning its longer-term goals and monetary policy strategy, the Chair’s FOMC press conferences and testimonies before Congress, and speeches by the Chair and other FOMC participants. But it also is important that the strategy be the “right” reaction function. This means a policy approach that responds appropriately to important factors beyond the two parameters of the Taylor Rule—the output gap estimate and the rate of inflation. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti, Argia Sbordone and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 For example, John suggested in February 2008 to lower the standard Taylor Rule prescription by 50 basis points to take into account the increase in the LIBOR-OIS spread at that time. See Monetary Policy and the State of the Economy , Testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, February 26, 2008. 3 See James D. Hamilton, Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015), The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future , working paper for U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, August. 4 See Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest”, Review of Economics and Statistics, November 2003, Vol 85, No. 4, pp 1063-1070. Updated estimates available from the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 5 An analogy can be made to the applicability of a Friedman k-percent monetary aggregate rule. Just as a k-percent rule requires a stable relationship between a monetary aggregate and nominal GDP (i.e., stable money velocity), a Taylor Rule needs a stable relationship between the policy rate and financial conditions. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Welcoming Remarks at The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market Conference - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Welcoming Remarks at The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market Conference October 20, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery It is my pleasure to welcome you to this conference on the evolving structure of the U.S. Treasury market. 1 As you all know, the Treasury market plays a unique and crucial role in our economy, and in global financial markets more broadly. Treasury securities serve as a liquid investment and hedging vehicle for global investors, a ready source of collateral for many financial transactions and serve as a risk-free benchmark for other financial instruments. The Treasury market is important for the Federal Reserve’s implementation of monetary policy and also is a focus here at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in our statutory role as the Treasury’s fiscal agent. The Treasury market also helps to underpin the U.S. dollar’s status as the global reserve currency. And, of course, it is the primary means for borrowing to finance the U.S. federal government. 2 In recent years, the structure of the Treasury market has changed significantly. Trading has become increasingly electronic, and, in many cases, highly automated. Less traditional firms, often with a primary focus on automated, low-latency trading strategies, have entered the arena and helped to transform the landscape. In addition to adapting to these changes, traditional broker-dealers are complying with a more rigorous regulatory framework and are also expanding their use of automated trading technologies. These developments raise a number of important questions. They include: Who are these new entrants and what are their motivations? Has the changing composition of firms affected the nature of market making and liquidity provision? How have traditional liquidity providers responded to the expanded use of new technology? Has the changing structure introduced operational risks in the clearing and settlement infrastructure? How has the evolution of the repo market affected the secondary market for Treasury securities? Are the regulatory requirements imposed upon the Treasury market sufficient in today’s world? And finally, are there any changes―regulatory or otherwise―that could improve the functioning, efficiency and/or integrity of the Treasury market? As I noted in my recent remarks on market liquidity, many open questions remain on the subject of Treasury market liquidity. 3 At the same time, the agenda for this conference makes it clear that there are many other important questions beyond market liquidity worthy of consideration and debate. The breadth and expertise of the attendees at this conference make this forum an excellent opportunity to advance our collective thinking on this range of important subjects. While the recent joint staff report on the events of October 15 certainly revealed that much has changed, it is also important to recognize that both private and official sector efforts to ensure a healthy and efficient Treasury market have been ongoing for some time. 4 One obvious example is the Treasury Market Practices Group, or the TMPG. Set up in February 2007, the TMPG is a group of market professionals committed to supporting the integrity and efficiency of the Treasury market. 5 A core purpose of the TMPG is to develop and update a set of best practices related to trading, settlement and risk management, thereby establishing a set of behavioral norms to which market participants are expected to adhere. Most recently, the TMPG updated its best practice guidance to address automated trading, and published a companion white paper on the subject. And no discussion of the TMPG can go without mention of the “fails charge.” Instituted in May 2009, this practice provides a standard procedure for market participants to assess―or pay―a fee for settlement failures, and this has proven to be a highly effective remedy for curbing the volume of fails in the Treasury market. 6 I want to thank the entire TMPG for their leadership in supporting the efficiency and integrity of the Treasury market. I’d like to single out Tom Wipf with a personal thank you. Tom has served with distinction as the TMPG’s chair since its inception, providing credible, balanced and independent leadership to the Group. I would be remiss if I did not also mention the ongoing work of the Inter-Agency Working Group on Treasury Market Surveillance, or the IAWG. After the Salomon auction bidding scandal in January 1992, the official sector established the IAWG. Since that time, it has been a useful forum for the official sector to coordinate and communicate on the various issues that have arisen in the Treasury market. Indeed, over the years there have been numerous examples of questionable behavior that has come to the attention of the IAWG, and these have been channeled onwards to the appropriate authorities. The IAWG continues to meet biweekly, as it has since its inception. As you all know, the Joint Staff Report concluded that further work is necessary in light of the evolving structure of the Treasury market, and it also highlighted a series of additional steps that the official sector will take to evaluate its approach to this market. I remain very supportive of these efforts. In fact, this conference is among the first of those next steps, and presents a perfect opportunity to have a rich debate on the market's evolving structure and the actions that may be appropriate in response. Thank you once again for coming here today. I look forward to our engagement and discussion. 1 Frank Keane, Michael McMorrow, Joseph Tracy and Nate Wuerffel assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 What I have to say today represents my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 3 See Regulation and Liquidity Provision , remarks at the SIFMA Liquidity Forum, September 30, 2015. 4 Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market On October 15, 2014 5 The TMPG has since expanded its mandate to include the agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) markets. 6 A more recent and equally successful practice has also been instituted for the MBS market. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 4, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Good afternoon and welcome once again to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s Economic Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak with you. Today I want to focus on how economic outcomes often differ substantially across different segments of the population. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The Federal Reserve has a dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. While these mandates are expressed at an aggregate national level, it is important for policymakers to understand how they impact different groups of individuals across the country. Consequently, in addition to monitoring macroeconomic conditions closely on a day-to-day basis, economists at the New York Fed have been doing a substantial amount of work to understand how economic experiences differ across individuals and regions. As highlighted by the Nobel Prize Committee’s recent recognition of Professor Angus Deaton’s work, analyzing individual outcomes is vital to fully understanding the workings of the macroeconomy. With that in mind, I want to talk about two important areas that impact household well-being: labor income and housing opportunities. Let me start with labor income, which for most households is the dominant source of household income. As one would expect, differences in labor income across individuals of a given age tend to increase as people get older. Some of this is due to education and occupation choices—and how they impact income growth―and some is due to various events that individuals face in their working lives. Unemployment risk is an example of an adverse development that can substantially affect people’s careers and labor income during their lifetime. Over the period from 1976 to 2015, the overall unemployment rate averaged around 6.5 percent, but unemployment varied substantially across regions and across worker backgrounds. Unemployment was especially high for workers with lower earnings, a group that tends to have little savings to draw upon. Looking across demographic groups, younger workers, less-educated workers and those in manual occupations, as well as workers who identify as Black or Hispanic, experienced significantly higher average unemployment rates when compared to older and college-educated workers. These stark differences across demographic groups in terms of levels of unemployment are also evident in terms of how unemployment changed over business cycles, including the Great Recession. While the overall unemployment rate increased from 5 percent in December 2007 to 10 percent in October 2009, it increased substantially more for workers with lower earnings. In other words, looking at the national unemployment rate tells only part of the story of the labor market experiences for different groups of individuals. Understanding this diversity is critical to better understanding the health of the labor market and the overall economy, and is important for informing policy. Now let’s turn to housing. Macroeconomists focus on aggregate residential construction as a measure of how the housing sector is contributing to overall economic growth. It is important to note, however, that housing market experiences vary substantially across individuals in ways not reflected in the aggregate construction data. For example, the type of housing units typically occupied by low-income households saw higher-than-average rent inflation from 2009 to 2011. Much of this difference appears to be due to contrasting ways that additions to the housing stock enter into different segments of the housing market. For households in the highest income quintile, new construction more than accounts for the net increase in housing units, which in turn tends to hold down rent increases for these households. However, as one moves down the income distribution, new construction represents a smaller share of the net increase in housing units. For households in the lowest income quintile, additions to rental supply come more from units that with age have depreciated and are no longer rented by higher income households. These supply additions tend to have higher rents than existing units rented by low-income households, thus putting upward pressure on rental costs. The diversity of experiences is also evident with respect to access to mortgage credit, both for households attempting to transition to homeownership and for homeowners who want to trade up. We have also been monitoring mortgage originations at the zip code level using the New York Fed’s Consumer Credit Panel. When we rank zip codes by their 2012 average adjusted gross income, we see mortgage origination volume in the lowest quintile locations was 38 percent of the volume for the highest quintile locations in 2007. By early 2015, this ratio had fallen to only 14 percent. As highlighted by these examples, and as you’ll hear during today’s presentation, data at the aggregate level and at a more micro-level illustrate different sides of the same picture. As such, both must be considered as we work toward fully understanding the economy. I will now ask Aysegul Sahin to provide a detailed account of how various economic outcomes vary across individuals, households and regions. 1 Aysegul Sahin and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Workshop on Progress and Challenges - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Workshop on Progress and Challenges November 5, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Workshop on Progress and Challenges, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Welcome to the New York Fed and to a discussion of how culture and conduct might be improved within the financial services industry. I am pleased to see all of you here today—there is tremendous breadth of experience and responsibility within this room. We need to take full advantage of this opportunity. I encourage all participants to be candid and on-point, because the task of reforming culture is formidable. 1 Untrustworthy behavior on the scale that we have witnessed in financial services does not arise in a vacuum. Social science research makes it clear that context largely drives conduct. 2 This is not a new insight. Adam Smith observed centuries ago that, independent of personal sentiment, we often behave according to what we “[see are] the established rules of behavior.” 3 We observe the activity around us, assess the norms of conduct and generally adapt to those norms in our own behaviors. Banking is not exempt from this universal propensity. Gerry Corrigan noted three decades ago that the “implicit codes of conduct” that govern banker behavior exist apart from “explicit regulations.” He posited that these implicit codes must align with the public good—an obligation that banks owe in exchange for the benefits “uniquely available to [that]particular class of institutions.” 4 This, in Corrigan’s view, was what made banks “special”—the reciprocal benefits and responsibilities that support and constrain an industry essential to public well-being. Corrigan’s premise is not an antique concept from a bygone era of banking. Then, as now, there are public purposes of banking—including financial intermediation, corporate valuation, facilitating investment opportunities, providing credit and creating market liquidity. These activities underpin the economy and financial stability. Reciprocity—in other words, the expectation of a quid pro quo in the relationship between society and the financial services industry—is the basis of public trust in financial institutions. There is, however, a widespread sense that this principle has been compromised. Industry Responsibility Two years ago, I noted that recent scandals in banking evidenced “deep-seated cultural and ethical failures.” 5 Many of the industry’s leaders now agree. According to the Federal Advisory Council of the Federal Reserve System, a group composed of senior representatives from the industry, “as often as not [...] the challenges faced in recent years have been behavioral and cultural; post-crisis episodes such as LIBOR and foreign exchange manipulation provide hard evidence that there remains work to be done.” 6 Last year I argued that “the solution [to cultural problems] needs to originate from within the firms, from their leaders.” 7 I view today’s workshop as a progress report on the industry’s efforts. This is an opportunity for us to discuss collectively what is working, what is not, and the next steps that are needed. We should take care, though, not to confuse cause and effect. The banking scandals that followed the financial crisis are evidence that something fundamental is wrong. I would encourage each of you to consider not just specific examples of misconduct, but the patterns within them that point to underlying causes. I suspect we will see a strong overlap with those factors that contributed to the financial crisis. I think your focus should be less on the search for bad apples and more on how to improve the apple barrels. Role of the Official Sector Dodd-Frank strengthened bank balance sheets, and banks have become more resilient to systemic shocks. This is a positive development. At the same time, it is also important to mitigate the sources of systemic shocks. Dodd-Frank apparently did little to curb misconduct—a possible source of systemic risk. If the people managing capital cushions and liquidity buffers view these tools as sufficient mitigants for the costs of misconduct, or if powerful incentives encourage workarounds of the new regulations, then the connection between post-crisis reforms and greater financial stability becomes threatened. In the last year, we have seen emerging approaches to supervision that aim to address culture, conduct and governance. These methods are being developed in a number of jurisdictions. 8 I am pleased to welcome representatives of 15 foreign supervisors and other official sector agencies who are joining the many representatives of U.S. supervisory and regulatory agencies here today. The topic of culture and conduct has truly become a global dialogue. We have a lot to learn from each other. One question on the minds of many in the official sector is, “what is the most effective way to promote reform?” Sharing ideas on leading practices, challenges and the opportunities for industry collaboration is a start—but it is not the end. Financial firms need to act on this information, and the official sector should hold institutions accountable for demonstrating sustained, observable progress. Overview of Agenda Let me now give a brief overview of today’s agenda. The first panel will present the Group of Thirty’s recent report on banking conduct and culture, which calls for fundamental and sustained change. As you all know, the Group of Thirty is a forum consisting of senior public officials and private sector bankers. Its purpose is to facilitate non-partisan discussion of issues that threaten global economic stability and economic progress. It speaks volumes that the Group has focused its work in recent years on effective governance, the role of supervision, and on conduct and culture. Each of the four remaining panels will address one aspect of the multidimensional nature of cultural change. In the first panel, we will hear about engagement with employees—especially those who are skeptical of the benefits or practicality of reform. In the second panel, we will discuss accountability—not only in the sense of being “held accountable,” but also in the broader sense of promoting responsibility and stewardship. I am particularly interested in designing incentives—both the carrot and the stick—that yield conduct aligned with the public purposes of banking. The third panel will focus on skill development—particularly on recruiting and training as levers for sustained cultural change. And the last panel will focus on leadership and industry collaboration. A prime element of leadership, within a firm and across the industry, is character—behavior anchored in values consistent with the public’s legitimate expectation of trustworthiness. Our keynote speaker today is Christine Lagarde, the managing director of the International Monetary Fund. Christine Lagarde has been outspoken in her view that “financial leaders [must] take values as seriously as valuation, culture as seriously as capital.” 9 This makes abundant sense to me—culture and capital each promote financial stability. Thank you for joining us. I am also grateful to Stanley Fischer, the vice chairman of the Board of Governors, who will speak with Christine Lagarde following her remarks. Please join me in welcoming Christine Lagarde. 1 What I have to say today represents my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Thomas Noone and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See Malcolm Gladwell, The Tipping Point (2002), 133-168 (collecting sources). For additional information on the famous Stanford Prison Experiment, see www.prisonexp.org . 3 Adam Smith, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (11th ed. 1812), 276. 4 E. Gerald Corrigan, Are Banks Special? , Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Annual Report, January 1983. Cf. Joseph Story, Commentaries on the Law of Bailments § 464 (1832). (“The soundness of the public policy of subjecting particular classes of persons to extraordinary responsibility, in cases where an extraordinary confidence is necessarily reposed in them, and there is an extraordinary temptation to fraud, or danger of plunder, can hardly admit of question; and has been recognized in the jurisprudence of many countries.”). 5 William C. Dudley, Ending Too Big to Fail , Remarks at the Global Economic Policy Forum, November 7, 2013. 6 Federal Advisory Council and Board of Governors, Record of Meeting , May 8, 2015. 7 William C. Dudley, Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services Industry , Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry, October 20, 2014. 8 See, e.g., Mirea Raaijmakers, ed., Supervision of Behavior and Culture: Foundations, Practice & Future Developments, De Nederlandsche Bank (2015). 9 Christine Lagarde, Economic Inclusion and Financial Integrity , Address to the Conference on Inclusive Capitalism, May 27, 2014. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 12, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Economic Club of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have an opportunity to speak here at the Economic Club of New York. As the current chair of the Club, I’m admittedly biased, but this is a great venue to have the opportunity to share my thoughts about the U.S. economic outlook and the implications for monetary policy. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Before I start, I want to be clear about one specific issue I will not address today—that is, whether or not I expect the monetary policy normalization process to commence at the next FOMC meeting in December. Let me just say that my view will depend on how incoming data, broadly defined, influences my assessment of the prospects for further improvement in the U.S. labor market and my confidence that inflation will return to the FOMC’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. With that caveat out of the way, how do I assess the U.S. economic outlook? On balance, I believe we have been making progress toward our goals, recognizing that a few issues still cloud the outlook. Most noteworthy is the fact that inflation continues to run well below our 2 percent objective. With respect to the economic growth outlook, the softness in third-quarter real GDP—which according to its initial estimate rose at only a 1.5 percent annualized pace—and the weakness of the manufacturing sector have raised concerns that the U.S. economy may be losing some forward momentum. Sharp reductions in oil and gas drilling activity and a loss of international competitiveness associated with the dollar’s appreciation over the past year have restrained factory output. Judging from historical experience, the impact of the dollar’s recent strength has the potential to be protracted, so that the trade sector probably will continue to be a drag on growth in 2016. Thus, the manufacturing sector is likely to continue to lag behind the rest of economy. But these negatives need to be set against the many positive aspects of the economic outlook. In particular, domestic demand continues to grow at a solid pace as increases in consumer spending, housing and business fixed investment all contributed to the third quarter’s 2.9 percent annualized gain in real domestic final sales. A large decline in the pace of inventory accumulation was the main reason why real GDP growth faltered in the third quarter. Because the contribution to growth from inventory investment can be quite volatile on a quarter-to-quarter basis, the growth in real final sales probably provides a better sense of the state of economic activity than does the GDP figure. Moreover, when one digs deeper, the fundamentals supporting domestic demand look quite sturdy. For example, consumer spending has been well-supported by real income gains and rising household net worth. Household balance sheets do not appear over-extended. The household debt service burden is low, the household saving rate is not low relative to household net worth, and household credit growth has been slow. Housing fundamentals are solid as well. Decent payroll gains have supported household formation over the past year and mortgage rates remain low. Housing prices are rising and the constraint on growth in residential investment now appears to be more on the supply side, as building contractors struggle to mobilize the resources needed to construct more homes. The National Association of Home Builders’ index rose in October to the highest level since late 2005. While the housing indicators will likely continue to be volatile on a month-to-month basis, I expect the gradual improvement in the housing sector to continue. Also, the international outlook appears less problematic than it did just a few months ago. Although substantial questions remain about the Chinese growth outlook and the consequences of lower commodity prices for major commodity-exporting countries, we have seen two important positive developments. First, the Chinese transition to a more balanced growth path appears to be underway—with stronger consumption and less emphasis on investment. And the Chinese authorities have a range of tools available to support their economy during this transition. Second, despite the intense strain placed on many emerging market economies by the substantial deterioration in recent years in their terms of trade, this stress does not yet appear to have led to the type of financial system breakage that might lead to widespread contagion and large capital flow reversals. In fact, in recent weeks, emerging market equity markets have recovered substantial ground and many countries’ currencies have stabilized. It is also important that the forward momentum in the jobs market persists. The August and September employment reports raised some concerns that the U.S. labor market might be faltering. Those concerns should be at least partially put to rest given the strength of the October employment report, recognizing that the employment news can be volatile on a month-to-month basis. Most noteworthy to me are the strong payroll employment gains in October and the solid 0.3 percent rise in aggregate hours worked. Over the past three months, payroll gains have averaged 187,000 per month, not much below the average payroll growth of 213,000 per month during the first half of 2015. We are now much closer to our goal of maximum sustainable employment than at the start of the year. The civilian unemployment rate is 5 percent, not much above the level generally viewed as consistent with full employment. For example, in the September FOMC Summary of Economic Projections, the median estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate was 4.9 percent. And, broader measures of unemployment―such as indicators that include people that are working part-time for economic reasons and discouraged workers who have left the labor market but still want a job—have also shown substantial improvement over the past year. Discerning the degree of slack remaining in the labor market becomes more difficult as the margin of unused and underused labor resources shrinks. My own assessment is that some margin still remains. I reach that conclusion for two reasons. First, broader measures of unemployment are still high relative to where you would expect them to be given a 5 percent civilian unemployment rate. Part-time workers and discouraged workers remain a potential source of additional labor, and the labor market participation rate seems low even when adjusting for demographic factors. If the normal historical relationship between the broader U6 measure of unemployment—which includes part-time workers that want a full-time job and discouraged workers—and the narrower U3 measure of unemployment—which excludes these workers—were to reassert itself, this would imply about an additional ¼ to ½ percentage point of labor market slack in my assessment. Second, we have still not seen compelling evidence that a tightening labor market is leading to more rapid labor compensation gains. Although average hourly earnings rose more quickly in October―pushing the year-over-year pace up to 2.5 percent―this indicator can be volatile on a month-to-month basis, and it has not been borne out by some other important measures of labor compensation. For example, over the past year, the Employment Cost Index for private sector worker compensation has risen 1.9 percent, remaining within the narrow range of recent years. This is important because my assessment of what constitutes maximum sustainable or full employment depends in large part on how a tighter labor market translates into compensation gains. At the same time, one needs to be cautious about interpreting compensation trends in the current environment. It is possible that factors such as very low headline inflation and weak productivity growth are holding down what workers receive in compensation. Therefore, because of such factors, compensation growth may not provide a reliable signal about whether we are approaching full employment. To sum up on the growth side, the economy looks to be in decent shape and is likely to continue to grow at a slightly above-trend pace. Spare labor resources are shrinking. But there still is some risk that the growth pace could slow as the trade sector acts as a drag on aggregate economic activity. On the inflation side of the ledger, I have greater concerns because we continue to fall substantially short of our inflation objective of 2 percent for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. Over the past year, the PCE deflator has risen only 0.2 percent—held down by lower import prices and falling energy prices—and the core PCE deflator, which excludes the more volatile food and energy components, has risen 1.3 percent. There is also some evidence that suggests that inflation expectations are under downward pressure. In particular, some survey measures of long-term inflation expectations are at the low end of the ranges that have prevailed in recent years. For example, the University of Michigan median measure of inflation expectations at a five-to-ten year horizon fell last month to 2.5 percent, the lowest level since September 2002. Similarly, the New York Fed’s three-year median inflation expectations measure from our Survey of Consumer Expectations is currently at 2.8 percent, down from 3 percent a year ago. The good news, however, is that these declines are very modest in magnitude. Thus, I would still judge that inflation expectations remain well-anchored based upon these survey measures. Similarly, measures of inflation compensation based on the interest rate spread between nominal Treasury securities and Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS) have fallen sharply over the past year. For example, the Board of Governors’ 5-year, 5-year forward measure—in other words, what inflation compensation would be for the period five-to-ten years from now—currently stands at around 1.8 percent, down about 40 basis points from a year ago. However, I put even less weight on this development than on the survey evidence for two reasons. First, the decline in these forward inflation compensation measures has been highly correlated with the fall in oil prices—a pattern that is hard to explain. Second, a careful analysis of the factors behind the decline in inflation compensation suggests that changes in liquidity risk premia and what investors are willing to pay for inflation protection account for most of the decline, rather than the decline reflecting a change in inflation expectations. Still, we need to continue to monitor inflation compensation closely, while recognizing that sorting out the allocation of the decline in inflation compensation across the three factors—liquidity risk premia, the price for inflation protection and inflation expectations—is admittedly difficult. And also, the conclusions reached in such models are sensitive to these models’ assumptions and structures. Regardless of how much signal one takes from these recent data, a decline in inflation expectations below levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective would be problematic because inflation expectations are an important influence on actual inflation. Businesses, for example, make decisions about the size of annual wage increases based, in part, on their expectations of future inflation. And, households base their spending decisions, in part, on how fast they expect their incomes to rise, and inflation expectations play a role in that process. Lower inflation expectations also raise the level of real interest rates, all else equal, which can undercut the power of monetary policy to support economic activity. This is particularly relevant at the zero lower bound for interest rates. If the economy continues to grow at an above-trend pace, then I think worries about inflation remaining too low should begin to recede. After all, headline inflation on a year-over-year basis is likely to rise early next year as much of the past year’s decline in energy prices falls out of the year-over-year inflation rate calculations. Also, some of the factors holding down headline and core inflation are likely to be transitory. Energy prices will not go down forever and, as the dollar stabilizes, import prices will likely stop falling. In addition, despite these factors that are weighing on core inflation, the recent trend of core inflation has been very steady, with the 12-month change in the core PCE deflator in a tight range of 1.2 to 1.7 percent since the beginning of 2013. This suggests that core inflation should rise once these transitory factors dissipate. Finally, I take some signal from the fact that the spread between the core services inflation rate and core goods inflation rate is wider than normal. Core services likely better reflect the underlying trend, while core goods prices are more sensitive to external factors such as the drop in commodity prices and import prices. So what does this imply for monetary policy and the likely timing and pace of interest rate normalization? As you may be able to infer from my earlier remarks, I think it is quite possible that the conditions the Committee has established to begin to normalize monetary policy could soon be satisfied. In particular, I will be evaluating the incoming information to see if it confirms my expectation that growth will be sufficient to further tighten the U.S. labor market. After lift-off commences, I expect that the pace of tightening will be quite gradual. In part, that is because monetary policy is not as stimulative as the low level of the federal funds rate might suggest. There is strong evidence that the short-term neutral real interest rate—let’s call that r*—is currently quite low, certainly below the level that historically has applied on a longer-term basis. 2 A wide range of models suggest that the short-run real r* is currently around 0 percent, far below its historical longer-run level that is estimated to be about 2 percent. 3 This benchmark “neutral” rate needs to be compared to the actual real federal funds rate. If we measure the latter by subtracting the core PCE inflation rate from the nominal federal funds rate, the actual real federal funds rate is slightly below -1 percent. Thus, current short-term real interest rates are not far below their neutral counterparts, suggesting that the current monetary policy stance is not exceptionally stimulative. The notion that r* is currently very low is also evident by more casual empiricism. Simply ask the following question: If r* were close to its long-run historical value of 2 percent, would we expect to see the economy growing at only slightly above its potential growth rate? The fact that the economy is growing quite slowly despite a low federal funds rate and a very large Federal Reserve balance sheet suggests that monetary policy currently is not providing that much stimulus to the economy. In other words, the gap between r* and the federal funds rate is relatively narrow. Why is r* depressed and how is it likely to evolve over time? In my view, several short-term factors are restraining r*. First, the short-run r* is low because the foreign exchange value of the dollar has risen, reflecting both the fact that foreign economies are growing slowly and as well as an expectation that the monetary policies of the U.S. and other major economies will continue to diverge for some time. If foreign demand picks up and the dollar weakens, then r* would likely rise over time as the persistent drag from the trade sector lessens. Second, short-run r* is low because of the hangover of the financial crisis. For example, mortgage credit availability for households with low FICO scores is still very limited compared to pre-housing boom standards. This is constraining their ability to purchase housing, which holds back the pace of residential investment. Also, because the searing experience of the Great Recession has likely caused households and businesses to be more cautious in terms of their saving and investment decisions, this has also pulled down the short-run value of r*. Some of these factors should fade over time, gradually pushing up short-run r* toward its long-run value. At the same time, there are some longer-term factors that are likely to keep r* below its long-run historical average far into the future. In particular, potential real GDP growth in the U.S. appears to have declined in recent years—held down by slower productivity growth and demographic factors that are causing the workforce to grow more slowly. This is the main reason why I have cut my estimate of the longer-run federal funds rate in recent years. And I’m not alone. In the FOMC’s September Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection for the long-run federal funds rate was 3 ½ percent, 50 basis points below the level of two years earlier. My discussion about short-run r* and long-run r* has implications for how I think about monetary policy. The likelihood that we face a situation where the short-run r* is depressed, the economy is growing only slightly at an above-trend pace and inflation is too low relative to our objectives, suggests that we need to think carefully whether the time is right to begin to normalize monetary policy. Additionally, the likelihood that long-run r* is lower than it has been historically, suggests that after lift-off the upward trajectory of the short-term rates is likely to be quite shallow. Another factor that weighs on the timing and pace of normalization is risk management. What are the relative costs of going too early versus too late? As I see it, there are risks on both sides, and I think this explains why reasonable people can differ as to the appropriate path for the policy rate. Consider the two main risks of normalizing too quickly. First, we could just be too optimistic about our growth and inflation forecasts. Second, we could be right about our forecasts, but the rise in short-term rates could provoke an outsized tightening of financial conditions that might cause the economy’s forward momentum to slow more than we anticipate. In either case, the economy would not be growing fast enough to put increased pressure on resources. In such circumstances, underlying inflation might not rise and inflation expectations could become unanchored to the downside. Consequently, not only might the FOMC be forced to reverse course and ease monetary policy, but the efficacy of additional stimulus measures could be attenuated by the fall in inflation expectations. Avoiding a Japan-like experience in which inflation expectations have become unanchored to the downside should be an important consideration in the conduct of monetary policy. On the other side, there are several risks of delaying the start of lift-off and normalizing more slowly. The first one is that the unemployment rate could fall to an unsustainably low level that is not consistent with our long-run price stability objectives. Monetary policy works with long and variable lags, so overheating is a risk. If overheating did occur, the FOMC might need to tighten monetary policy more aggressively in order to keep inflation from significantly overshooting its 2 percent objective. In such circumstances, the risk of a recession would probably climb significantly. In the past, it has been very difficult for the Federal Reserve to engineer a soft landing for the economy when it had to tighten policy aggressively in order to keep inflation in check. Historically, once the unemployment rate rises above a small threshold of 0.3 to 0.4 percentage points, the next stop has always been a full-blown recession. I very much would want to avoid such an outcome. A long-lived economic expansion is always desirable, but especially so in the aftermath of the financial crisis and Great Recession. The second risk of delaying lift-off and normalizing more slowly is that the low level of the federal funds rate may be distorting financial markets and increasing financial stability risks. I don’t think this has yet occurred to any significant degree, but it is a real risk that we should continue to monitor closely. I see the risks right now of moving too quickly versus moving too slowly as nearly balanced. The weight that one puts on each undoubtedly influences one’s views on when the time will be right to begin to normalize monetary policy and the appropriate short-term rate trajectory thereafter. Finally, in conclusion, a few words about the importance of financial conditions in thinking about the future path of short-term interest rates. Monetary policy does not work directly on the economy, but instead works through its effect on financial conditions. By financial conditions, I mean all those financial factors that weigh on spending, saving and borrowing decisions. Financial conditions include the level of the stock prices, the level of short- and long-term interest rates, the size of credit spreads, the foreign exchange value of the dollar and factors that weigh on the availability of credit. If the linkage between financial conditions and the short-term interest rate controlled by the Federal Reserve were stable and predictable, then there would be no need to also monitor financial conditions. But the linkage is not stable and predictable. Sometimes financial conditions loosen or tighten in response to economic developments independent of our monetary policy decisions. At other times, the response of financial conditions can be much larger or smaller than anticipated for a given change in interest rates. Several examples will help me make these points. During 2004 to 2007, the FOMC raised the federal funds rate target 17 meetings in a row, lifting the federal funds to 5.25 percent from 1.0 percent. Yet, during this period, financial conditions eased, as evidenced by the fact that the stock market rose, bond yields fell and credit availability—especially to housing—eased substantially. In hindsight, perhaps monetary policy should have been tightened more aggressively. In contrast, during the Fall of 2008, financial conditions tightened substantially even as the FOMC was cutting short-term rates. Again, in hindsight, perhaps monetary policy should have been eased more aggressively. How financial conditions evolve and how markets respond to our actions are important in influencing the economic outlook, and we need to take that into consideration in our monetary policy decision-making. When we begin to normalize monetary policy, will we provoke another “taper tantrum,” or will market participants be relaxed as was the case when we actually tapered the rate of our asset purchases in 2014? If financial conditions were to tighten more than expected when we began to normalize monetary policy, then I suspect we would go more slowly. In contrast, if financial conditions did not respond at all, or eased, then I suspect we would go more quickly, all else equal. Also, I don’t think there is a particular set of financial conditions that we should target. After all, the linkage between financial conditions and the economy is variable and the economic outlook is influenced by much more than financial conditions. Thus, I have no target in mind for the U.S. equity market or other indicators of financial conditions. But I do care about how financial conditions evolve when the changes are sufficiently large or persistent enough so they are likely to influence the economic outlook. In that case, financial conditions need to be taken into consideration in the design and conduct of monetary policy. It has been a pleasure to speak here today. I hope my comments have made it clear that the monetary policy decision-making process is difficult when the margins of excess capacity narrow, but inflation remains below our objectives. The world is highly complex and there is much we don’t know about how the economy will evolve in the future. As a Fed policymaker, I strive to be clear in my communications. But I can’t tell you today precisely what I’d favor doing in the future, because that future remains uncertain. Thank you very much for your kind attention. 1 Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 This is also a reason to not rely on mechanical monetary policy rules that assume that short-run r* is constant over time. The widely-cited Taylor rule, for example, typically utilizes an r* of 2 percent. For my thoughts on the… shortcomings of using monetary policy rules versus an approach that considers a broader range of factors, see Panel Remarks at the Brookings Institute , October 15, 2015. 3 The Laubach-Williams model constructed to estimate the short-run level of r* estimates that r* is currently about -0.1 percent. Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models, which take a very different approach to estimating r*, typically generate similar results. For example, the New York Fed’s DSGE model currently puts the short-run r* at between -0.1 and 0.1 percent. See Marco Del Negro, Marc Giannoni, Matthew Cocci, Sara Shahanaghi, and Micah Smith, Why Are Interest Rates So Low? , Liberty Street Economics, May 20, 2015. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Panel Remarks at The Clearing House Annual Conference - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Panel Remarks at The Clearing House Annual Conference November 18, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at The Clearing House Annual Conference, New York City As prepared for delivery It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today alongside my fellow Reserve Bank presidents, Loretta Mester and Dennis Lockhart. Today’s event comes almost exactly two years since I delivered a set of remarks at NYU School of Law that covered various aspects of what we know as the “too big to fail” problem. In view of some significant milestones that have occurred over the past two years, I would like today to briefly review my sense of the work that has been accomplished on this critical issue, and the work that still remains to be completed. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System. 1 Broadly speaking, the regulatory reforms that the U.S. has adopted since the crisis have been designed to address the risks posed by large financial institutions in two related ways. First, our reforms are designed to reduce the probability that large financial institutions will fail by requiring those institutions to be more resilient to stress. Second, a set of resolution-related reforms are intended to limit the consequences to the financial sector if a failure by such an institution still were to occur. Given the limited time on this panel, I will not review in detail the post-crisis comprehensive capital and liquidity framework that the Federal Reserve has put in place. However, from the perspective of addressing too big to fail, it is important to highlight the Federal Reserve rule finalized this year that imposes risk-based capital surcharges on the handful of U.S. global systemically important banking organizations (GSIBs). Under this framework, a GSIB’s risk-based capital surcharge will reflect the degree to which its failure would impact the financial system. In effect, the risk-based capital surcharge confronts each U.S. GSIB with the choice to either reduce its systemic footprint or instead to hold more capital. The policy approach to too big to fail recognizes, of course, that we can reduce but cannot completely eliminate the possibility of a large financial institution’s failure. Therefore, a second aim of our post-crisis reforms has been to limit the adverse consequences that would result if a large financial institution were to fail. That is, large financial firms need to be capable of being successfully resolved without creating unacceptable collateral damage to the rest of the financial system and to the economy. In my November 2013 speech, I noted that an important foundation for making the resolution of our largest banking firms feasible would be to require, at the holding company level, sufficient minimum amounts of long-term debt that could be used to absorb losses in a single point of entry resolution. Important progress has been made on this front, both in the form of the Federal Reserve’s recent issuance of a proposed rule to establish long-term debt and total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirements for U.S. GSIBs and the announcement last week by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) of an agreed upon international minimum TLAC standard. It is notable that in several important respects the proposed U.S. rules are stronger than the FSB standard. With these new proposed requirements, if losses were to wipe out a firm’s capital and push a firm into resolution, a sufficient amount of long-term unsecured debt would be available to absorb additional losses through a “bail in” process, recapitalizing the firm with no taxpayer bailout and without generating systemic financial contagion. These proposed requirements should also improve market discipline by ensuring that each GSIB has a class of creditors who are clearly “at risk,” and therefore have an incentive to monitor the firm’s risk-taking. In my 2013 speech, I also called for further work to address the challenges in a resolution scenario posed by potentially disruptive close-out of cross-border derivatives contracts. Here too, important progress has been achieved over the past two years. Thanks to productive collective action by the private sector in dialogue with U.S. and international authorities, an initial set of 18 GSIBs and other large dealer banks have adhered to the 2014 International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) resolution stay protocol covering OTC bilateral derivatives in connection with last year’s G-20 summit. Under the protocol, counterparties agreed to the cross-border enforceability of existing statutory stays on resolution-related early termination and other default rights in OTC bilateral derivatives contracts. With support from the U.S. and other key jurisdictions, the FSB subsequently called on all GSIBs and other firms with significant derivatives exposures to adhere to the protocol by the end of 2015. In addition, the FSB requested that such contractual terms be incorporated into other financial contracts with resolution-related termination features−such as contracts relating to repo and securities lending arrangements. This goal has been accomplished this past week, and represents another positive milestone in improving cross-border resolvability. Importantly, both the proposed U.S. long-term debt requirement and provisions in the resolution stay protocol support resolution under both Title I and Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act. While we should recognize the extent of progress that has been made to set the basic foundations for the cross-border resolution of a GSIB, it is equally important in my view to recognize the significant challenges that still remain, and the important work that still needs to be carried out by both firms and authorities. Both within the official sector and within the largest banking firms, important work remains to be done to advance the capacity to effectively operationalize a GSIB resolution. Examples include: establishing a more rational and less complex legal entity structure that takes into account the best alignment of legal entities and business lines to improve the firm’s resolvability; ensuring the continuity of shared services that support critical operations and core business lines throughout the resolution process; and improved arrangements to enable appropriate access by the firm in resolution to Financial Market Infrastructures (FMIs), in a manner that is consistent with the need to ensure the safe and sound operation of FMIs. This ongoing work is being pursued through a variety of channels, including through the joint Federal Reserve / FDIC review of Title I resolution plans, the Federal Reserve’s horizontal supervisory review of recovery and resolution preparedness, and in the international work of the FSB. In addition, while Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act establishes the FDIC Orderly Liquidation Fund as a source of backstop liquidity provision for a firm undergoing a Title II resolution, no equivalent official sector liquidity backstop is available under the bankruptcy regime. Since it is the bankruptcy regime that is relevant for the purposes of resolution planning under Title I, this is a challenge that firms need to address under that framework. Further work remains as well with respect to the derivatives close-out issue in resolution. A key next step will be for the U.S. and other major jurisdictions to put in place regulations and supervisory measures that will require non-bank counterparties of GSIBs to trade with the GSIBs on terms equivalent to those found in the ISDA resolution stay protocol. This further step is needed in order to limit the potential for arbitrage within the market and to promote greater stability in the event of a necessary resolution. As we move this work forward, we should acknowledge and take stock of the significant advances achieved over the past few years, while at the same time remain focused on our responsibility to address the challenges that remain. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Dianne Dobbeck, Robert Fitchette, Charles Gray, Joyce Hansen, HaeRan Kim, Kristin Malcarney and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
