Governor Lael Brainard At the Institute of International Finance Blockchain Roundtable, Washington, D.C. Share Innovation in digital finance, loosely referred to as fintech, is capturing imaginations from Silicon Valley to Chicago to Wall Street. We're seeing a steady stream of announcements of new startups and partnerships, and consumers are downloading fintech apps at an even faster pace. Financial products, services, and transactions lend themselves to successive waves of technological disruption because they can readily be represented as streams of numerical information ripe for digitization. However, as technological tools used by the industry change over time, it is important to keep sight of their impact on the public, whether it be on families seeking to own their own home, seniors seeking financial security, young adults seeking to invest in education and training, or small businesses attempting to smooth through volatile revenues and expenses. Current developments in the digitization of finance are important and deserving of serious and sustained engagement on the part of policymakers and regulators. The Federal Reserve Board has established a multi-disciplinary working group that is engaged in a 360-degree analysis of fintech innovation. We are bringing together the best thinking across the Federal Reserve System, spanning key areas of responsibility, from supervision to community development, from financial stability to payments. As policymakers, we want to facilitate innovation where it has the potential to yield public benefit, while ensuring that risks are thoroughly understood and managed. That orientation may have different implications in the arena of consumer and small business finance, for instance, as compared with payment, clearing, and settlement in the wholesale financial markets. Technological and Organizational Changes in Payment, Clearing, and Settlement Today, I will focus on newly emerging distributed ledger technologies and related protocols, which were inspired originally by Bitcoin, and their potentially important applications to payment, clearing, and settlement in the wholesale markets. Successive waves of technological advance have swept through payment, clearing, and settlement over the past two centuries. In the 19th century, railroads and the telegraph helped improve speed and logistics. In the second half of the 20th century, computers were introduced to deal with the clearing of overwhelming volumes of paper checks and stock certificates stimulated by post-war growth. Starting at about the same time and continuing through today, new electronic networks have been established to allow high-speed computerized financial communication. As automation has evolved, payment, clearing, and settlement systems have been developed for conducting and processing transactions within and between firms. However, many of these systems have historically operated in silos, which can be hard to streamline or replace. In some areas, business processes may still rely heavily on manual or semi-automated procedures. Over time, banks and other firms have organized various types of clearinghouses to coordinate clearing and settlement activities in order to reduce costs and risks. The adoption of multilateral clearing in the United States was a key organizational innovation that began with the founding of the New York Clearing House in the 1850s. This led to notable efficiencies and risk reduction in the clearing of checks. Multilateral clearing was also used early on to improve clearing in the securities and derivatives markets. By the 1970s, the United States turned to technologies based on the centralized custody and clearing of book-entry securities in order to respond to the paperwork crisis in the equities markets. Following the recent financial crisis, the United States--along with many other countries--expanded the scope of central clearing to help address problems in the bilateral clearing of derivatives contracts. Today, the possible development and application of distributed ledger technology has raised questions about potentially far reaching changes to multilateral clearinghouses and the roles of financial institutions as intermediaries in trading, clearing, and settlement for their clients. In the extreme, distributed ledger technologies are seen as enabling a much larger universe of financial actors to transact directly with other financial actors and to exchange assets versus funds (that is, to "clear" and settle the underlying transactions) virtually instantaneously without the help of intermediaries both within and across borders. This dramatic reduction in frictions would be facilitated by distributed ledgers shared across various networks of financial actors that would keep a complete and accurate record of all transactions, and meet appropriate goals for transparency, privacy, and security. At this stage, such a sea-change may sound like a remote possibility, particularly for the high volume and highly regulated clearing and settlement functions of the wholesale financial markets. But profound disruptions are not unprecedented in this arena. In the early 1960s, the use of computerized book-entry securities systems to streamline custody, clearing, and settlement in the securities markets may have seemed like a technologist's pipe dream. But these technologies became an important part of industry-wide changes in the 1970s. Today we rely on these types of systems for the daily operation of the markets. Given this backdrop, it is important to give promising technologies the serious consideration they merit, seek to understand their opportunities and risks, and actively engage in dialogue about their potential uses and evolution. At the Federal Reserve, we approach these issues from the perspective of policymakers safeguarding the public interest in safe and sound core banking institutions, financial stability, particularly as it pertains to the wholesale financial markets, and the security and efficiency of the payment system. Distributed ledger technology was introduced for the transfer and record-keeping of Bitcoin and other digital currencies. The essential advantage of the technology is that it provides a credible way to transfer an asset without the need for trust in intermediaries or counterparties, much like a physical cash transaction. To do that, a transfer process must be able to credibly confirm that a sender of an asset is the owner and has enough of the asset to make the transfer to the receiver. This requires a secure system or protocol to transfer assets (the rails), protection against assets being transferred twice (the so-called double spend problem), and an immutable record of asset ownership that can be automatically and securely updated (the ledger). The tokenization of digital assets can facilitate the transfer process. The genuinely innovative aspect of the technology combines a number of different core elements that support the transfer process and recordkeeping: Peer-to-peer networking and distributed data storage provide multiple copies of a single ledger across participants in the system so that all participants have a shared history of all transactions in the system. Cryptography , in the form of hashes and digital signatures, provides a secure way to initiate a transaction that helps verify ownership and the availability of the asset for transfer. Consensus algorithms provide a process for transactions to be confirmed and added to the single ledger. While Bitcoin was originally associated with the concept of a universally available, publicly shared digital ledger technology without any central authority, many of the use cases that are currently under development and discussion rely on "permissioned" ledgers in which only permitted, known participants can validate transactions. These in turn can be either public or private in terms of access to the ledger. The resulting Internet of Value holds out the promise of addressing important frictions and reducing intermediation steps in the clearing and settlement process. For example, in cross-border payments, faster processing and reduced costs relative to current correspondent banking are cited as specific potential benefits. Reducing intermediation steps in cross-border payments may help reduce costs and counterparty risks and may additionally improve financial transparency. In securities clearing and settlement, the potential shift to one master record shared among participants has some appeal. Having one immutable record may have the potential to reduce or even eliminate the need for reconciliation by avoiding duplicative records that have different details related to a transaction that is being cleared and settled. This also can lead to greater transparency, reduced costs, and faster securities settlement. Likewise, digital ledgers may improve collateral management by improving the tracking of ownership and transactions. For derivatives, there is interest in the potential for digital ledger protocols to enable self-execution and possibly self-enforcement of contractual clauses, in the context of "smart contracts." As we engage with industry and stakeholders to assess the potential applications of digital ledger and related technologies in the payment, clearing, and settlement arena, we will be guided by the principles of efficiency, safety and integrity, and financial stability. Efficiency Many are excited about the potential for these new technologies to reduce costs and frictions, such as those associated with collateral management and custodial services, reduce settlement risk, enhance security, increase transparency, and offer new services. But there are also concerns about the costs and risks from the early adoption of rapidly evolving and uncertain technologies and technological hurdles in integrating new technologies into legacy systems and achieving interoperability across different ledgers and networks. There are questions about the need for substantial new investments to obtain capabilities like real-time processing where these capabilities already exist at some of the industry's core infrastructures. There are also cautions that realizing the full potential of distributed ledger technologies could take many years. Much of the case for adopting distributed ledger technologies revolves around achieving greater efficiency and reducing time and risks to post-trade clearing and settlement. But first, important technological challenges will need to be addressed to permit widespread adoption and migration away from legacy systems and networks. These include the need for standardization, the development of protocols that will permit interoperability between other ledgers and networks, and the reduction of computational intensity and costs. Moreover, distributed ledgers will have to compete with other options and priorities of financial firms and clearinghouses in a highly regulated financial ecosystem. Thus, a major threshold question for the adoption of distributed ledger technology within and between groups of firms engaging in particular types of transactions is whether the advantages outweigh the costs of replacing legacy systems. In some cases, where distributed ledger technology can be employed internally within a firm to automate and speed up business processes, traditional business case analysis would presumably lead to efficient technology choices. By contrast, where coordinated industry-level decisions would be needed to develop distributed ledgers shared by multiple firms, the case must be compelling for entire networks of market participants that will need to make the investments, as well as for the broader public interest. This set of competing considerations suggests there are likely to be a spectrum of cases. At one end are the high-volume, heavily regulated markets that have made large investments in central clearing to provide safe and efficient clearing and settlement for the industry and the public. These markets must always actively consider technological and other enhancements to strengthen efficiency and safety. But as a practical matter, the large-scale adoption of wholly new clearing technologies to replace existing legacy technologies for major markets may face a significant hurdle initially, such that incremental change or delayed adoption until the technology has achieved greater maturity and standardization may be more likely. At the other end of the spectrum, there appear to be some markets or segments where clearing practices are relatively cumbersome and outmoded, and the network hurdles to the adoption of new technologies are lower. Improvements in smaller markets would also provide an opportunity for market participants to gain operational and business experience with distributed ledger technologies that could help inform and strengthen the case for broader applications over time. A middle case would involve the application of distributed ledger technologies to bilateral clearing even where improvements have already been made since the financial crisis. A threshold issue will be the design and safety of new technologies and whether firms will want to share a distributed ledger to manage transactions with their different counterparties and customers. No doubt much will depend not only on cost but also on a host of business, technical, security, and other issues. Even so, change might hold promise for improving bilateral clearing, and might also help us think about the long-run trade-offs between bilateral and central clearing. An assessment of the longer-term potential for deployment of distributed ledger technology naturally raises questions about whether it might ultimately impact the organizational structure for clearing and settlement. As multilateral clearing organizations have strengthened and spread across many of the major asset classes traded in the markets, they have enabled coordinated action on governance, rules, technology, and risk management. It is possible that new technologies could substantially change the way these functions are pursued, but it would be surprising if they would obviate the need for multilateral clearing in the major markets. Governance, in particular, is a core function that is inescapably necessary if multilateral activity, even activity dealing with distributed ledgers, is to operate effectively. Indeed, if new technologies could lower the costs of multilateral clearing relative to bilateral clearing in new market segments, multilateral clearing could even grow. Today's clearing houses will likely continue to play a central role in highly regulated markets and be well positioned to evaluate and implement new clearing technologies, while continuing to provide core governance functions in the market. Nonetheless, it is also possible that if distributed ledgers ultimately cross asset classes and even industries, traditional clearinghouses serving specific market segments might have to evolve or new organizations might develop to provide an optimal approach to implementation. Moreover, in principle, the use of distributed ledgers in new market segments may call for new clearing arrangements more in tune with new technologies. Similarly, organizations that can provide governance or other coordinating functions in bilaterally cleared markets may also require organizational structures somewhat different from traditional clearinghouses. We will be following these issues with interest. Safety, Integrity, and Financial Stability Safety and integrity in clearing and settlement is a critical, long-standing public policy objective of the Federal Reserve, and is critical for broader financial stability. Regardless of the technologies employed, if risks to clearing and settlement are not identified and addressed, then banks, dealers, and other firms will not be able to manage their obligations and market functioning may be impaired. This is a key reason why major clearing and settlement systems are highly regulated. Hence, the fundamental threshold test for new technologies will be whether they can be deployed and operated safely, with the requisite high degree of operational and financial integrity, security, and resilience across a wide range of adverse scenarios. Regulators and the public need to know that if adverse scenarios do occur, there will be robust management and governance to respond effectively. Digital ledger technologies will need to be able to address the range of issues revolving around the confidentiality and security of firm and client records and data on the one hand, as well as law enforcement requirements and issues on the other. New technologies must be robust in practice, not just in theory, to attacks on security, and must be able to maintain appropriate confidentiality for records and data. In addition, it will be important that digital ledger technologies can meet the requirements of law enforcement and other regulators to address money laundering, terrorist financing, and other key law enforcement concerns. Indeed, there is some potential that the new technologies could enable improved authorized access to certain data records in a much more efficient and comprehensive manner than has previously been possible, thereby potentially reducing costs associated with complying with the Bank Secrecy Act. Overall we should be optimistic that a range of new technologies hold the promise of providing more robust security, resilience, and information. We cannot afford to assume that change necessarily equals greater risk. Of course, much will depend on the technology itself, its scalability, its level of maturity, the controls and environment surrounding it, the standardization and accessibility of transactions data, the quality of management and governance, and the policy environment in which it is deployed. Key Challenges Going Forward Today, many industry participants are experimenting with distributed ledger technology in controlled, permissioned environments. If some of these experiments bear fruit, it will be important to address the challenge of how they would scale and achieve diffusion. In addition, determining exactly how the different distributed ledger technologies interoperate with each other, and legacy systems, will be critical. New and highly fragmented "shared systems" may create unintended consequences even as they aim to address problems created by today's siloed operations. Since distributed ledgers often involve shared databases, it will also be important to effectively manage access rights as information flows back and forth through shared systems. There may well be a tradeoff between the privacy of trading partners and competitors on the one hand, and the ability to leverage shared transactions records for faster and cheaper settlement on the other hand. And of course, development of sound risk-management, resiliency, and recovery procedures will be necessary to address operational risks. The Federal Reserve will continue to engage actively with the industry, stakeholders, and our regulatory colleagues as the industry works through these challenges and the technology evolves. I want to close by remembering a simple point that central bankers and markets have learned through hard lessons over many years. The daily operation of markets and their clearing and settlement functions are built on trust and confidence. Market participants trust that clearing and settlement functions and institutions will work properly every day. Confidence has built over time that when market participants trade, accurate and timely clearing and settlement will follow. Any disruption to this confidence comes at great cost to market integrity and financial stability. This is a matter of fundamental public interest. In safeguarding the public interest, the first line of inquiry and protection will always rest with those closest to the technology innovations and to the organizations that consider adopting the technology. But regulators also should seek to analyze the implications of technology developments through constructive and timely engagement. We should be attentive to the potential benefits of these new technologies, and prepared to make the necessary regulatory adjustments if their safety and integrity is proven and their potential benefits found to be in the public interest. I am grateful to Andrew Figura, Jeff Marquardt, and David Mills for their assistance in preparing this text. Last Update: April 14, 2016 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Council on Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C. Share In recent months, financial conditions have eased, and there are encouraging signs that consumption has regained momentum. On the other hand, there are tentative signs of slowing in the labor market and risks remain. 1 We cannot take the resilience of our recovery for granted. Recent Developments As we consider the appropriate posture of policy going forward, the most immediate question is whether the data provide confidence that domestic economic activity has strengthened notably following two disappointing quarters. This is critical for making progress on the Committee's dual mandate objectives of full employment and 2 percent inflation. The data in today's labor market report on balance suggest that the labor market has slowed. Nonfarm payroll employment increased at an average monthly pace of 116,000 over the last three months--well below the 220,000 per month average pace over the preceding twelve months. The unemployment rate moved lower, reaching 4.7 percent, a new low in the current recovery, but involuntary part-time employment increased and the labor force participation rate declined. Even so, there are reasons to expect that the labor supply still has room to respond if labor demand increases. Importantly, the employment to population ratio for prime-age workers still remains 1-3/4 percentage points below pre-crisis levels. The recent data on wage inflation suggest a similar conclusion. Although there have been some signs of increasing wage growth recently, the step-up has been modest, and growth in the broad measures of wages remains quite low. For example, the average change over the past year across the three most commonly cited wage measures was about 2-1/2 percent, compared with an average change from the end of 2009 to the end of 2014 of 2 percent. 2 The recent news on inflation--the second leg of our dual mandate--has also been mixed. The price of oil has rebounded significantly from the lows reached earlier in the year on expectations that supply and demand are likely to come into better alignment. Over the same period, the dollar has receded a bit, on net, from its peak in January, though it is still about 15 percent above the level in mid-2014 in inflation-adjusted trade-weighted terms. As a result, non-oil import prices look likely to stabilize this quarter after a year and a half of declines. Still, it should be noted that these developments coincided with the easing in financial conditions since mid-February and are likely due, at least in part, to expectations of more gradual U.S. monetary policy tightening. If those expectations were to shift materially, the conditions supporting higher inflation could diminish. While there are thus signs that inflation will move higher over the medium term, measures of core inflation have yet to convincingly exceed the low levels that have prevailed over much of the recovery. The 12-month change in core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) prices, a reasonable proxy for the underlying trend in inflation, was only 1.6 percent in April. This is still noticeably below our target and is roughly equal to the average change in core and total PCE inflation from the end of 2009 to the end of 2014. We cannot rule out that stubbornly low inflation may be having an effect on inflation expectations. Market-based measures of inflation compensation--which reflect inflation risk and liquidity premiums, as well as inflation expectations--remain extremely low. For example, inflation compensation at the five-year, five-year-ahead horizon is currently around 1.5 percent, 1-1/4 percentage points below levels prevailing prior to mid-2014. Some survey-based measures of inflation expectations are also somewhat below historical norms. Median 5- to 10-year inflation expectations in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, for example, over the past year have been on average about 1/4 percentage point below the average over the 10 years from 2005 to 2014. Thus, although some signs point to a firming of inflation going forward, I view the persistently low level of inflation during the recovery together with some signs of a deterioration in inflation expectations as suggesting that the risks to the return of inflation to our 2 percent target over the medium term are weighted to the downside. Progress toward our goals of full employment and 2 percent inflation will depend importantly on solid growth in aggregate demand. Following disappointing gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the fourth quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year that averaged only 1.1 percent, I have been very attentive to incoming data, especially on consumption, which point to a pick-up in growth this quarter. 3 In particular, consumer expenditures rose a strong 0.6 percent in April, and auto sales edged higher in May. These are encouraging signs, but the data relevant for second-quarter growth are still relatively sparse. In general, demand growth in recent quarters has benefited from a relatively strong household sector--buoyed by a recovering labor market, reduced oil prices, and low interest rates--and has been pulled down by weak business investment and net exports. Indeed, consumption and housing investment can more than account for the 2 percent increase in GDP over the past four quarters. By contrast, business investment and net exports together subtracted 1/4 percentage point. The rise in the dollar and decline in foreign growth reduced demand for American exports, as well as profits and investment at U.S. firms, which were also adversely affected by declines in the price of oil. Over the twelve months ending in April, manufacturing output increased only 0.4 percent, while total industrial production, which also includes the drilling for, and extraction of, oil and gas, fell 1.1 percent. Although the most recent indicators suggest that weakness in investment and net exports has persisted into the current quarter, if the easing in financial conditions since mid-February and the recent firmness in oil prices were to continue, along with stabilization of the dollar, business investment and exporters would benefit. Risks to the Outlook Of course, there are risks to the projection that future GDP growth will be strong enough to deliver progress on inflation and employment. Most immediately, there is important uncertainty surrounding the United Kingdom's June 23 "Brexit" referendum on whether to leave the European Union (EU). The International Monetary Fund has noted that a vote in favor of Brexit could unsettle financial markets and create a period of uncertainty while the relationship between the United Kingdom and the EU is renegotiated. Although the economic effects of this uncertainty and the costs of adjusting to altered trade and financial ties are difficult to quantify, we cannot rule out a significant adverse reaction to such an outcome in the near term, such as a substantial jump in financial risk premiums. Because international financial markets are tightly linked, an adverse reaction in European financial markets could affect U.S. financial markets, and, through them, real activity in the United States. In addition, we should not dismiss the possible reemergence of risks surrounding China and emerging market economies (EMEs) more broadly. In recent months, capital outflows in China have moderated as pressures on the exchange rate have eased. Should exchange rate pressures reemerge, we cannot rule out a recurrence of financial stress, which would affect not only China but also other emerging markets that are linked to China via supply chains or commodity exports and, ultimately, conditions here. China is making a challenging transition from export- to domestic demand-led growth, and the cost of reallocating resources from excess capacity sectors to more dynamic sectors could further impair growth in the near term. While China has taken policy steps to limit the extent of the slowdown, there is an evident tension in policy between reform and stimulus, and the effect of the stimulus may already be waning. Vulnerabilities--such as excess capacity, elevated corporate debt, and risks in the shadow banking sector--appear to be building, and could pose continued risks over the medium term. The fragility of the global economic environment is unlikely to resolve any time soon. Growth in the advanced economies remains dependent on extraordinary unconventional monetary policy accommodation, while conventional policy continues to be constrained by the zero lower bound. Conventional policy, whose efficacy is more tested and better understood than unconventional policies, can respond readily to upside surprises to demand, but presently would be constrained in adjusting to downside surprises. This asymmetry in the capability of policy effectively skews risks to the outlook to the downside. It also may amplify the sensitivity of exchange rates. Indeed, the evidence suggests that over the past year, dollar exchange rate movements have become considerably greater in response to U.S. monetary policy surprises than previously. 4 The evidence that the sensitivity of exchange rate movements has been elevated lately is consistent with recent research suggesting that cross border financial transmission is likely to be amplified at near-zero interest rates where the ability to provide additional support through domestic channels in response to negative shocks may be viewed as limited. 5 In this environment, markets have become quite sensitive to the possibility of a prolonged period of low growth, low inflation, and economic underperformance. One possible example of this sensitivity is the current negative term premium for 10-year Treasury notes, or the difference between the yield on the 10-year Treasury and expected risk-free short rates over the next 10 years. Prior to the Great Recession, the term premium was positive, as bond investors seem to have been most concerned about the risk that inflation would be higher than expected. But since the Great Recession, the term premium has been persistently negative, suggesting that investors have instead been focused on the risk of prolonged lower-than-expected inflation in the context of low growth and underperformance. 6 Thus, while the easing in financial conditions since mid-February is very welcome, it is important to recognize that some of the conditions underlying recent bouts of turmoil largely remain in place, and an important reason for the fading of this turbulence was the expectation of more gradual U.S. monetary policy tightening. 7 Should an event trigger renewed fears about global growth or a reassessment of the policy reaction function in the United States, turbulence could well return. Policy Implications On balance, recent developments have signaled continued progress toward our goals. While signs of weakness in business investment and global demand remain, consumption and residential investment have held firm, and the labor market has moved closer to full employment. At the same time, the relative stabilization in the dollar and oil prices in recent months has boosted somewhat the likelihood of a return to 2 percent inflation over the medium term. However, the data on progress toward our inflation objective are equivocal. Measures of underlying inflation have yet to convincingly signal a move back to 2 percent, and inflation expectations appear low, as I noted earlier. I want to emphasize that monetary policy is data dependent and is not on a preset course. In this regard, I look forward to hearing the deliberations of the Committee. Recognizing the data we have on hand for the second quarter is quite mixed and still limited, and there is important near-term uncertainty, there would appear to be an advantage to waiting until developments provide greater confidence. Prudent risk-management would suggest the risks from waiting until the totality of the data provides greater confidence in a rebound in domestic activity, and there is greater certainty regarding the "Brexit" vote, seem lower than the risks associated with moving ahead of these developments. This is especially true since the feedback loop through exchange rate and financial market channels appears to be elevated. In light of this amplified feedback loop, when conditions are appropriate for a policy move, it will be important that it be understood that any subsequent moves would be conditioned on further evidence confirming continued progress toward our objectives and not as inevitable steps on a preset course. Indeed, several factors suggest that the appropriate path to return monetary policy to a neutral stance could turn out to be quite shallow and gradual in the medium term. In particular, it appears likely that the medium-term neutral rate, or the real federal funds rate consistent with the economy remaining at full employment and 2 percent inflation, may be quite low. With productivity running very low, substantial overcapacity and disinflationary pressures abroad, and less favorable demographics, the neutral rate may be lower and today's federal funds rate closer to neutral than previously anticipated. Although we cannot observe the neutral rate directly, a variety of models suggests that it is currently very low relative to historical norms. Earlier in the recovery it seemed likely that the low level of the neutral rate was largely due to temporary factors, such as tight credit, weak consumer confidence, and the loss in household wealth following the crisis. However, with the recovery well into its seventh full year, credit in many markets is widely available, while consumer confidence and household net worth are at high levels. As a result, it appears more likely that much of the decline in the neutral rate is likely to prove persistent, consistent with a variety of estimates. 8 One likely explanation for this persistence is the sharp drop-off in potential output growth since the Great Recession. From 1953 to 2003, potential output growth varied between 3 and 4-1/2 percent, with one brief exception, according to the Congressional Budget Office. Over the recovery, it has averaged only 1-1/4 percent. One contributor to this decline has been a reduction in the labor force participation rate due to population aging. Another has been a marked slowing in productivity growth. Over the six years from the end of 2009 to the end of 2015, productivity grew only a little over 1/2 percent per year, compared with average growth of 2-1/4 percent over the 50 years prior to the Great Recession. 9 The reasons for such a dramatic slowing in productivity growth are not clear. Possible explanations include the fading of a one-time boost to productivity from information technology in the late 1990s and early 2000s; the reduced movement of resources from the least productive to the most productive firms, including new businesses, perhaps due to greater financial constraints for new and small businesses; and a delay between the introduction of new technologies, such as robotics, genetic sequencing, and artificial intelligence, and their effect on new production processes and products. 10 To conclude, recent economic developments have been mixed, and important downside risks remain. In this environment, prudent risk management implies there is a benefit to waiting for additional data to provide confidence that domestic activity has rebounded strongly and reassurance that near-term international events will not derail progress toward our goals. In addition, because the depressed level of the neutral rate of interest reflects forces that are likely to persist, the appropriate path of policy is likely to remain shallow for several years. References Baily, Martin Neil, James Manyika, and Shalabh Gupta (2013). "U.S. Productivity Growth: An Optimistic Perspective," International Productivity Monitor, no. 25, pp. 3-12. Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf (2016). " Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem? (PDF) " Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, BPEA Conference Draft, March 10-11. Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2015). "Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB," NBER Working Paper Series 21670. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Chen, Andrew, Eric Engstrom, and Olesya Grishchenko (2016). " Has the Inflation Risk Premium Fallen? Is It Now Negative? " FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 4. Decker, Ryan A., John Haltiwanger, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2016). " The Decline of High-Growth Entrepreneurship ," VoxEU.org. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research, March 19. -------- (2014). "The Role of Entrepreneurship in U.S. Job Creation and Economic Dynamism," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 28 (Summer), pp. 3-24. Del Negro, Marco, Marc Giannoni, and Micah Smith (2016). " The Macro Effects of the Recent Swing in Financial Conditions ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), May 25. Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Markets Group (2016). Responses to Survey of Market Participants, April (PDF) . Fernald, John (2014). "Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," NBER Working Paper Series 20248. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Johannsen, Benjamin K., and Elmar Mertens (2016). " The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2015). " Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 2015-16. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, October. Syverson, Chad (2016). " Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the U.S. Productivity Slowdown ," NBER Working Paper Series 21974. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Yellen, Janet (2015). " The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Economic Club of Washington, Washington, December 2. Zarutskie, Rebecca, and Tiantian Yang (forthcoming). "How Did Young Firms Fare during the Great Recession? Evidence from the Kauffman Firm Survey," in John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar, eds., Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges. NBER Book Series Studies in Income and Wealth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. I am grateful to Andrew Figura for his assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. The three commonly cited measures of wages are the private-industry employment cost index, compensation per hour in the business sector, and average hourly earnings. Return to text 3. Growth in gross domestic income (GDI) has not slowed as much as GDP growth recently. However, the average of GDP and GDI growth has still slowed recently from an average annual rate of 2-1/2 percent from the third quarter of 2013 to the third quarter of 2015 to an average of 1-1/2 percent in the past two quarters. Return to text 4. Recent research by Federal Reserve staff suggests that over the past year, a surprise of 25 basis points in the Federal Funds rate following FOMC announcements has triggered dollar appreciation of over 5 percent, although the confidence interval is extremely large, and the coefficient has varied substantially over time, including intervals when the relationship has been negative. Return to text 5. See Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2015). Return to text 6. See Chen, Engstrom, Grishchenko (2016). Another factor affecting the term premium is Federal Reserve asset purchases. In addition, some have suggested the low term premium could reflect an "insurance" value that investors attach to Treasury securities because the price of Treasuries would be expected to rise if there are adverse shocks to the global economy. Return to text 7. For an estimate of the role of U.S. monetary policy in offsetting the recent tightening in financial conditions, see Del Negro, Giannoni, and Smith (2016). Return to text 8. See, for example, Laubach and Williams (2015); the estimates from the dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models cited in Yellen (2015); the median estimated neutral rate from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's most recent Survey of Market Participants (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 2016); and Johannsen and Mertens (2016). Return to text 9. Since the end of 2007, the average annual gain in productivity has been 1.1 percent. Return to text 10. For more on the recent slowing in productivity growth and its possible causes, see Fernald (2014), Decker and others (2014, 2016), and Zarutskie and Yang (forthcoming). For an investigation into whether mismeasurement may be responsible for some of the slowing in productivity growth, see Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016) and Syverson (2016). For an optimistic outlook on future productivity growth, see Baily, Manyika, and Gupta (2013). Return to text Last Update: June 03, 2016 Back to Top
