Guiding Principles for Financial Regulation Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Panel Remarks at “The Future of Global Finance: Populism, Technology, and Regulation” Conference Columbia University New York, NY October 20, 2017 1 Introduction I thank the Brevan Howard Centre for Financial Analysis at Imperial College London and the Initiative on Central Banking and Financial Policy at Columbia University, and in particular Franklin Allen and Trish Mosser, for inviting me to speak on this panel. The views I’ll provide today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Some of you may be too young to remember the original Star Trek – the one with William Shatner playing Captain Kirk. But in a famous episode, Kirk, Spock, and McCoy find themselves on a planet whose society is modeled on gangsters from Prohibition-era Chicago.1 At one point, Kirk creates a diversion by engaging the gangsters in a card game called “fizzbin,” making up the rules as he goes along. Each player gets six cards, except for the dealer and the player to his right, who each get a seventh card. The second card is turned up, except on Tuesday. If you get two Jacks, you have a half fizzbin, which is good, but if you get a third Jack, you have a shronk, which is bad. A King and a two are good, except at night, when you want to get a Queen and a four instead. The aim of the game is to get a royal fizzbin, but the odds are astronomically against that. I think you get the idea. At times, the regulatory framework that has arisen since the global financial crisis can seem like the game of fizzbin – very complicated, seemingly without rationale, and constantly changing. In such an environment, sometimes it helps to take a step back and focus on some underlying principles that should serve as a foundation for any financial regulatory framework, and that can help guide any potential changes to strengthen the framework and promote cross-country harmonization. 2 1 The Star Trek episode was “A Piece of the Action,” season 2, episode 17, January 12, 1968. 2 A similar tack was taken in the U.S. Treasury’s recent report outlining proposed changes to financial regulations to promote the Administration’s core principles for the financial system. However, the principles I discuss are somewhat different. (See U.S. Department of Treasury, “A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities: 2 My first principle, similar to Star Trek’s prime directive, is that financial system regulation should be tailored to the risks imposed on the system, thereby fostering systemic resiliency. By resiliency I mean a system in which financial institutions remain strong enough to continue to lend and offer other valuable financial services throughout the ups and downs of the business cycle. The corollary is that if current regulations are not furthering this principle, they should be rethought. Similarly, if a portion of the financial system is prone to systemic problems but doesn’t have adequate oversight, this situation should be rethought, too. This principle recognizes that financial services firms provide value. Indeed, the fact that the crisis and its aftermath were very dark times for households, businesses, banks, and policymakers and that the financial system was at the heart of the crisis attests to the vital role a sound financial system plays in supporting a vibrant economy. This principle also recognizes that bank regulation and supervision should concern itself not only with the safety and soundness of individual institutions but also with the risk of the system overall. The absence of such a focus prior to the financial crisis contributed to a buildup in financial imbalances and systemic risk. The post-crisis changes made to the regulatory framework aim to strengthen resiliency by lowering the probability of another financial crisis, and by reducing the costs imposed on the rest of the economy when a large shock hits the financial system. Important components include capital requirements, liquidity requirements, stress tests, living will resolution plans, and resolution methods that allow systemically important institutions to fail without causing problems for the entire financial system. As a result of the financial crisis and these regulatory changes, banks themselves have also altered how they monitor risks and run their businesses. Banks and Credit Unions,” June 2017 (https://www.treasury.gov/press-center/press- releases/Documents/A%20Financial%20System.pdf).) 3 Focusing on risk management makes it clear that institutions posing the most systemic risk should face enhanced prudential standards and supervisory attention, while institutions not imposing costs on the rest of the financial system or creating the kinds of contagion that can put the entire financial system at risk should face a different type of oversight. Institutions should not be burdened by rules that make it more costly for them to serve their customers but do little to further the goal of a healthy and resilient financial system. For large banks, the combination of risk-based capital requirements, a leverage ratio requirement as a backstop, liquidity requirements, and annual stress testing is appropriate. But there is now some recognition that there may be opportunities to reduce regulatory burden without increasing systemic risk. In the U.S., some increase in the thresholds at which some of the enhanced requirements kick in would be reasonable, as would a reduction in the regulatory burden that has been placed on community banks.3 Some steps are already being taken. For example, in late September, the federal banking agencies issued for public comment proposed changes to the capital rules for community banks intended to simplify and reduce the burden of rules imposed by Dodd-Frank. 4 At the same time, it’s important not to throw the baby out with the bathwater. We learned during the financial crisis that bank capital standards were too low, that some forms of capital considered to be Tier 1 by the regulators did not protect the banks when there was a severe shock, and that neither the market nor central bank lender-of-last-resort functions were adequate to address severe liquidity problems when collateral values could not be determined. Any changes to the regulatory framework will need to heed the 3 Dodd-Frank requires that banks with assets between $10 billion and $50 billion be subject to company -run stress tests and that banks with assets of $50 billion or more be subject to annual supervisor -administered stress tests, capital planning, living will, and other enhanced prudential requirements. The Fed has already exempted nonsystemic banks with less than $250 billion in assets and less than $75 billion in nonbank activities from the qualitative capital planning part of the stress-testing process. See “Federal Reserve Board Announces Finalized Stress Testing Rules Removing Noncomplex Firms from Qualitative Aspect of CCAR Effective for 2017,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System press release, January 30, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20170130a.htm). 4 See “Agencies Propose Simplifying Regulatory Capital Rules,” joint press release of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, September 27, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20170927a.htm). 4 first principle and preserve the strength and resiliency of the financial system, which benefit the economy. It will be an ongoing challenge to strike the right balance between enhanced financial system resiliency and maintaining the system’s ability to deliver economic value by innovating and taking on risk. My second principle is that the regulatory framework must recognize that it creates incentives for financial institutions, their customers, and the regulators themselves and that market forces are always at work. A corollary is that regulations that align incentives with financial stability and that work with market forces rather than against them will likely be more effective than those that don’t. Unless the incentive effects are taken into account, even well-intentioned regulations can create unintended consequences. For example, before the crisis, some part of the strong growth in financial intermediation that occurred outside of the regulated banking system was driven by the desire to avoid regulation. Regulatory requirements that differ across sectors can create distortions and undesirable outcomes, especially when activity can easily be shifted from a sector that is monitored to a sector that is difficult to monitor. Even within a regulated sector, distortions can creep in. The asset thresholds that trigger increased regulatory requirements create incentives to remain below the thresholds. To the extent that these thresholds are a good measure of systemic risk, creating such incentives can be productive. For example, some banks have taken steps to decrease the complexity of their organizations. However, if the thresholds are only loosely connected to risk, efforts to remain slightly below the thresholds and regulatory attention on these triggers are not useful. Regulatory requirements that differ across countries are perhaps even more problematic, as they can result in cross-country regulatory arbitrage and put institutions in some countries at a competitive disadvantage. For example, a growing body of research has documented that there are significant scale economies in 5 banking that are driven by technological advantages and not by safety-net subsidies.5 Suppose policymakers in one country decide to put a limit on firm size because they believe that the potential costs of systemic risk posed by large institutions outweigh the efficiency gains. This would put the country’s large banks at a competitive disadvantage in global markets unless other countries implemented similar constraints. Because the restrictions would be working against market forces given the scale economies, it is unlikely that size restrictions would be effective in the country imposing them. They would create great incentives for firms to try to evade them by moving activities outside of the more regulated sector but they would not necessarily reduce systemic risk. Risk would migrate but not be eliminated. There would need to be more intensive monitoring of both the regulated and the less-regulated sectors. This example suggests that it is desirable to have international agreements on capital and liquidity requirements for systemically important institutions, and coordination when a cross-border institution gets into trouble. The Basel III rules have taken some aspects of capital regimes that were used only in a subset of countries and have applied them more broadly. For example, the rules include a leverage requirement, which was used in the U.S. but not in Europe prior to the crisis, and they include a liquidity requirement, which was used in a few but not many countries prior to the crisis. The hope is that international coordination leads to more effective regulatory regimes rather than forces movement to the lowest common denominator. The example also suggests that if regulation could benefit from understanding market forces, there may also be benefits from harnessing market discipline to promote financial stability. A prerequisite for this would be increased disclosure from financial firms so that their creditors and other market participants are in a position to exert such discipline. 5 For a discussion of this research and the policy implications, see Joseph P. Hughes and Loretta J. Mester, “The Future of Large, Internationally Active Banks: Does Scale Define the Winners?” Chapter 6 in The Future of Large, Internationally Active Banks, World Scientific, Hackensack, NJ, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Douglas D. Evanoff, and George G., Kaufman, eds., 2017, pp. 77-96. 6 Perhaps most important to remember is that regulators also face incentives. During the financial crisis, regulators and policymakers faced significant time-inconsistency problems when confronting systemically important financial institutions on the brink of failure. They faced a classic dilemma: either rescue the insolvent firm and create future moral hazard problems or let the firm fail and risk causing a cascade of other failures. As Ben Bernanke reportedly said: “There are no atheists in foxholes or ideologues in financial crises.”6 Without a credible resolution method, it is reasonable to expect that well-intentioned policymakers will be biased toward bailouts. Said simply, policymakers and regulators are people, too. Recognizing regulatory incentives should guide the design of the regulatory regime. This underscores the need for credible methods of resolving insolvent firms and of well-designed lender- of-last-resort functions that reduce perceived stigma. My final principle is that the regulatory framework needs to be designed so that institutions, regulators, and policymakers can be held accountable for the responsibilities assigned to them. There has been a rise in skepticism about institutions since the financial crisis. This is understandable given the depth and breadth of the crisis and its aftermath, but it also suggests there is some urgency to considering how to increase accountability in productive ways. A framework that encourages regulators to be more systematic and less discretionary in how they implement regulations can help, as it sets up appropriate expectations. In addition, while the regulatory framework needs to acknowledge that the financial structure is complex, the framework itself should only be as complex as necessary to be effective. 7 The notion that 6 See Peter Baker, “A Professor and a Banker Bury Old Dogma on Markets,” New York Times, September 20, 2008 (http://www.nytimes.com/2008/09/21/business/21paulson.html). 7 Haldane and Madouros (2012) discuss the benefits of a less complex financial regulatory structure and argue that the complexity of the financial landscape does not call for a complex financial regulatory structure, but just the opposite (see Andrew G. Haldane and Vasileios Madouros, “The Dog and the Frisbee,” speech at the Federal 7 “everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler” is often (perhaps erroneously) attributed to Albert Einstein. But it applies to regulatory regimes. A sometimes overlooked lesson from the crisis is that regulatory complexity can complicate supervision, risk monitoring, compliance, and enforcement. Too much complexity can make it harder for regulators to assess compliance and identify risk-shifting behavior, which means it is difficult to impose consequences for firms that fail to meet the standards. Equally important, complexity also makes it difficult to monitor the regulators and align their incentives to carry out effective supervision and regulation. We should always be assessing whether we would be better off with a simpler regulatory structure that is easier to implement and govern, and that is approximately right across various states of the world, even if it is never optimal in any particular state or in any particular model of the economy. If the system is too complex to evaluate, it will be difficult for the public and their representatives to hold regulators accountable. Either there will be no accountability or the regulators and policymakers will be held accountable for every bad outcome, regardless of whether the outcome stems from poor performance on their part or not. A simpler system allows for more effective accountability. Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Economic Policy Symposium, “The Changing Policy Landscape,” Jackson Hole, WY, August 31, 2012 (https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/Haldane_final.pdf). 8 At the same time, we should not be seduced by regulations that appear to be simple but would, in fact, be ineffective and result in unintended consequences. Because the financial system is complex and ever- changing, there will need to be some complexity in the regulatory framework. As I mentioned earlier, proposals to break up the banks or set a size limit might seem appealing as a solution to the too-big-to-fail problem, but I think this would cause unintended and counterproductive consequences. Speaking of simplicity, the three guiding principles I have discussed – aligning regulations with systemic risk, paying attention to incentives and market forces, and increasing accountability – sound simple but are, in fact, difficult to pull off. Still, I think they deserve attention as we strive for a regulatory framework that is more effective and better able to deliver the benefits of a well-functioning financial system to the public.

Demographics and Their Implications for the Economy and Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Cato Institute’s 35th Annual Monetary Conference: The Future of Monetary Policy Washington, DC November 16, 2017 1 Introduction I thank the organizers for inviting me to speak at the Cato Institute’s 35th annual monetary conference. To some of us, 35 seems relatively young, but for a conference series, it is a ripe old age. The series’ longevity underscores the important contributions it has made over the years to the public discourse on monetary economics and policy. Whether you interpret 35 as young or old depends on the context, which brings me to my topic today: demographics and their implications for the economy and policy. This might seem like an unusual topic for a Cato conference, but demographics have been on my mind, and not just because I had a birthday last month. The word “demographics” comes from the Ancient Greek: “demo” meaning people and “graphics” meaning measurement. There is a strong tradition of studying demography as part of economics. Malthus’s writings on population growth are a part of many history-of-thought courses in economics. More recently, as the economy has moved from financial crisis and the Great Recession to sustainable expansion, attention has shifted from cyclical aspects of the economy to structural factors. In addition, as policy has begun to normalize, the question has been raised: “what is normal?” To answer such a question, we need to understand how the underlying fundamentals of the economy are evolving. A critical factor is demographics. Demographic change can influence the underlying growth rate of the economy, structural productivity growth, living standards, savings rates, consumption, and investment; it can influence the long-run unemployment rate and equilibrium interest rate, housing market trends, and the demand for financial assets. Moreover, differences in demographic trends across countries can be expected to influence current account balances and exchange rates. So to understand the global economy, it helps to understand changing demographics and the challenges they pose for monetary and fiscal policymakers. Today I will talk about some of these demographic trends and their policy implications. Of course, the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 2 Demographic Trends Until the early 18th century, world population grew little because high mortality rates offset high fertility rates.1 But increased knowledge and technological change in the form of advances in medicine, public health, and nutrition began to lower mortality rates. Fertility rates also began to decline. In the U.S. there were shifting preferences for smaller families because of the rising opportunity costs of having children and the higher costs of raising and educating them. The shift in population from rural to urban areas reduced the need for large families to run farms. There were changes in social norms regarding the use and availability of birth control. The baby boom in the U.S. after World War II, and the subsequent echo when the baby boom generation began having their own children, were exceptions to a generally downward trend in the birth rate. Today, the fertility rate in the U.S. is 1.88 births per woman.2 This is less than the United Nations’ estimated 2.1 replacement rate needed to keep the population stable, and it is considerably less than the fertility rate in 1900, which was over 3.3 As these demographic changes have played out, the average life expectancy in the U.S. has risen and the population has aged. Average life expectancy at birth is now nearly 80 years old, 30 years higher than it was in 1900.4 The median age of the U.S. population is approaching 38 years old, nearly 10 years older than in 1970.5 By 2050, the U.N. projects that the median age in the U.S. will be 42 years old and that the number of people age 65 or older per 100 of working-age people, those age 15 to 64, will be more than double what it was in 1970.6 1 Two useful survey articles on the demographic change are Lee (2003) and Bloom and Canning (2004). 2 See United Nations (2017, p. 807). 3 For the replacement rate, see United Nations (2017), p. xxvii. Note, however, that Espenshade, et al. (2003) point out that there is considerable variation in replacement rates across countries. Haines (1998, Table 7-2) reports that, in 1900, the fertility rate was 3.56 for whites and 5.61 for black and other populations. 4 Life expectancy at birth in the U.S. over 2010-2015 was 78.9 (United Nations (2017, p. 805)). The life expectancy at birth in the U.S. in 1900 was 47.3 (National Research Council (2012, p. 32)). 5 According to the United Nations (2017, p. 807), the median age in the U.S. was 28.4 in 1970, 37.6 in 2015, and it is estimated to be 38.3 in 2020. 6 According to the United Nations (2017, p. 807), this old-age dependency ratio was 16.3 in 1970, 22.1 in 2015, and is expected to rise to 36.4 by 2050. 3 Reflecting projections of relatively stable fertility rates and continued aging of the population, world population growth is expected to slow.7 It averaged around 2 percent per year in the latter half of the 1960s and slowed to 1.2 percent per year over 2010-2015.8 U.S. population growth, including net international migration, is expected to slow from about 0.8 percent in recent years to under 0.5 percent in 2050, with nearly two-thirds of that growth coming from net migration.9 A number of advanced economies are further along in this demographic transition than the U.S. is, and the process of population aging is accelerating worldwide.10 In Japan, the population has been shrinking over the past five years, the ratio of older people to working-age people is the highest in the world, and the median age is almost 47 years old.11 Across Europe, fertility rates have been below the replacement level for some time.12 In China, the growth rate of the working-age population has slowed since the late 1980s, and partly because of its previous one-child policy, China’s population is also rapidly aging.13 The median age in China has increased from around 19 years in 1970 to 37 years in 2015. On the other hand, many low- and middle-income countries are at a considerably earlier phase in the demographic transition, with young and faster growing populations, and rising labor force participation rates. In India, the median age is around 27 years and the annualized growth rate of the population from 2010 to 2015 has been 1.2 percent.14 The U.N. projects that, in seven years, the population of India will surpass that of China, currently, the most populous country, and that India’s population will continue to 7 The United Nations (2017, p. 807) projects that the U.S. fertility rate will vary between 1.88 and 1.92 between 2015 and 2100. The CBO (March 2017, p. 30) projects that the U.S. fertility rate will be 1.9 children per woman over 2017-2047. 8 See United Nations (2017, p. 3). 9 For population growth projections, including projections for natural increases and net international migration, see U.S. Census Bureau (2014). Also see population growth projections in United Nations (2017, p. 807) and CBO (March 2017, p. 30). 10 See Bloom and Canning (2004, p. 18). 11 See United Nations (2017, p. 415). The United Nations defines this potential support ratio as the number of persons age 20 to 64 divided by the number age 65 or over (see United Nations (2017, p. xxxiii)). 12 See United Nations (2017, p. xxvii). 13 See United Nations (2017, p. 191) and Peng (2011). 14 See United Nations (2017, p. 383). 4 grow through 2050. Much of the increase in world population between now and 2050 is projected to be in Africa, where fertility rates remain high. The implications of these global demographic patterns for the future of the U.S. economy are worth considering because they pose some challenges for policymakers. Indeed, the magnitude of the effects will depend on policy responses. The remainder of my talk will discuss some of the ways these changing demographics could influence the U.S. economy, in particular, labor markets and economic growth. Then I will turn to considerations for monetary, fiscal, and other government policies. Demographic Implications for Labor Markets Demographics influence the supply of labor. Typically, as mortality rates decline and people live longer, the supply of labor increases. We saw this pattern begin in the U.S. in the late 1960s and the 1970s, especially as women and the baby boomers began entering the workforce. The result was an increase in the available supply of prime-age workers, both females and males, and potential growth rates in the 3 to 4 percent range.15 Even though increased life expectancy means individuals will need to work longer in order to save more for retirement, usually, population aging eventually leads to a downward trend in labor force participation in the aggregate.16 This is already happening in the U.S. Labor force participation peaked at 67.3 percent in early 2000 and fell to 66.0 percent in December 2007, as the Great Recession was beginning. Since then, it has fallen further, to 62.7 percent as of October. While some of the decline represents cyclical 15 See CBO (June 2017). 16 Note that, so far, we have not seen much shift in the retirement age in the U.S. In fact, since the 1970s, the average retirement age has been little changed even as life expectancies have continued to rise . This means people are spending more time in retirement and a smaller share of their lives working, which will put pressure on pension plans and savings. (According to OECD estimates, the average retirement age for men in the U.S. was 66.1 between 1980 and 1984 and 65.4 between 2010 and 2014. Life expectancy at age 65 has increased from 14.8 years in 1970 to 19.4 years in 2015 (United Nations (2017, p. 807)). Data from Social Security (2016) indicate that the average age of claims for retired workers has been little changed since 1970.) 5 factors, research suggests that most of the fall in the overall participation rate can be attributed to demographics: the combination of an aging population and reduced participation rates at older ages.17 As a result of lower population growth and labor force participation, the growth of the U.S. labor force has slowed considerably, from 2.5 percent per year, on average, in the 1970s, to around 0.5 percent per year over 2010-2016. It is expected to remain near that level over the next decade.18 The changing age distribution of workers can affect not only labor force growth and participation but also the longer-run natural rate of unemployment. Older workers typically have lower unemployment rates than other age groups, and they tend to change jobs less frequently.19 Young people now make up a smaller share of the labor force. All else equal, the combination of lower quit rates for older workers and lower numbers of younger workers should imply a lower natural rate of unemployment compared to the 1990s.20 Of course, the timing and magnitude of this demographic effect are not certain because there are some counterbalancing factors, including the fact that, so far, contrary to expectations, the retirement age for older workers hasn’t changed much, the productivity of a worker varies with age, and policies such as unemployment and retirement benefits can affect labor market choices. Demographic Implications for Economic Growth The expected slowdown in population growth and labor force participation rates will have implications for long-run economic growth and the composition of growth. The key determinants of the economy’s longer-run growth rate are labor force growth and structural productivity growth – how effectively the economy combines its labor and capital inputs to create output. Demographics suggest that labor force 17 See Aaronson, et al. (2006) and Aaronson, et al. (2014). 18 According to the latest available projections, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that annual growth in the labor force over 2016-2026 will average 0.6 percent (U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2017, p 2.). 19 See Bean (2004) and Cairó and Cajner (forthcoming). Tasci (2012) documents that the job separation rate was rising through the early 1980s and then declining thereafter, likely due to demographic changes. 20 Estimates of the natural rate of unemployment vary depending on what one assumes about the labor force participation rate. The FOMC participants’ projections of the longer-run unemployment rate range from 4.4 to 5.0 percent (see FOMC, September 2017). Aaronson, et al. (2015) estimate that changes in the age and gender composition of the labor force will mean that the natural rate of unemployment will be two -tenths of a percentage point lower by 2020, with a similar-size decline attributed to higher educational attainment. 6 growth will be considerably slower than it has been in recent decades, and this will weigh on long-run economic growth. In addition, in theory, the aging of the population may also have a negative effect on structural productivity growth. Over the past five years, labor productivity, measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector, has grown at an annual rate of only about a half of a percent; over the entire expansion, it has averaged 1 percent. While some part of the slowdown is likely cyclical, reflecting persistent effects of the Great Recession on investment spending, structural factors are also weighing on productivity growth. Older workers tend to stay longer in their jobs than younger workers, who are more likely to change jobs and employers. This allows older workers to gain deeper experience, which can be positive for productivity growth. At the same time, lower labor mobility means workers may remain in jobs that are not the best match to their skill sets. This would be a negative for productivity growth. Indeed, one study finds that both short tenures and long tenures adversely affect productivity growth.21 And historical evidence suggests a hump-shaped relationship between age and productivity, with productivity increasing when a person enters the workforce, stabilizing, and then declining toward the end of a person’s work life. 22 Research also indicates that an individual’s innovative activity and scientific output peaks between the ages of 30 and 40, although that age profile has been shifting older over time.23 Labor mobility and business dynamism, including the number of start-ups in key innovative sectors like high-tech, have been declining for some time.24 Whether dynamism will remain low is an open question, but the aging of the population is here to stay. So far, the magnitude of the negative effect of the aging workforce on productivity growth appears to be quite small.25 Even so, the demographics-induced slower 21 See Auer, et al. (2005). 22 See Skirbekk (2008) and National Research Council (2012, Chapter 6). 23 One study showed that the median age of Nobel prize winners in physics, chemistry, and medicine has increase d about two years per century and the mean age has risen by eight years (see National Research Council (2012, Chapter 6)). 24 See Haltiwanger (2015). 25 For example, the National Research Council’s (2012, Chapter 6) review of the literature showed that a changing age distribution had little effect on the distribution of earnings, a proxy for productivity. Their estimation of the effect for OECD countries indicates that productivity increases and then decreases with age, with a maximum 7 growth of the labor force and the possible dampening effect on productivity growth suggest that longer- run output growth will likely remain below the 3 to 3.5 percent rate seen over the 1980s and 1990s, unless there is some effective countervailing policy response.26 In addition to affecting the economy’s trend growth rate, demographics will likely affect the composition of growth by shaping aggregate consumption, saving, and investment decisions. Increased longevity means that people will need to save more over their working life to fund a longer retirement period. This is especially true given the degree of underfunding of public pension plans at the state and federal levels. Demand for healthcare will continue to rise, and an aging population will place different demands on the housing sector than a younger population, affecting the demand for single- versus multi-family properties, for owning versus renting, and for residential improvements that allow older adults to age in place.27 By affecting the composition of output, changes in the age distribution have the potential to affect the business cycle. Because of its cyclical and structural implications, demographic change also has implications for monetary policy. Let me talk about three. Demographic Implications for Monetary Policy First, although monetary policy cannot affect the growth rate of potential output or the long-run natural rate of unemployment, it needs to take these into account as part of the economic environment, and to consider the downward pressure demographics put on both relative to their historical levels. Second, changes in demographics could also affect the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to the economy, in particular, the strength of wealth effects versus income effects. Older people tend to hold reached at about 40 years. Based on projections of the age distribution and their preferred quadratic specification, they estimate that changes in the age distribution will subtract only about 0.1 percentage point per year from aggregate productivity growth over the next 20 years (see National Research Cou ncil (2012, Chapter 6, Table 6-2, p. 119)). Note that Feyrer (2007) finds that differences in demographics could explain as much as a quarter of the gap in productivity between OECD countries and low-income countries. However, the National Research Council suggests that sampling error may explain the large magnitude of that finding. 26 The Congressional Budget Office currently estimates that potential GDP growth averaged 3.4 percent per year over 1982-1990 and 3.3 percent per year over 1991-2001; it projects that potential growth will average 1.8 percent per year over 2017-2027. See CBO (June 2017). 27 See Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University (2014). 8 more assets than the young and tend to be creditors while drawing down their assets to fund their consumption during retirement. Younger people tend to be borrowers but face tighter credit constraints than the old because they hold fewer assets. As the share of the population shifts from young to old, the propagation of an interest rate change through the economy is likely to change. There will be a smaller share of young borrowers able to take advantage of a decrease in interest rates but a larger share of older people who benefit from higher asset prices; similar reasoning applies for an increase in interest rates. Demographic change may mean that wealth effects become a more important channel through which monetary policy affects the economy.28 A third important implication of demographic change for monetary policy is through its effect on the equilibrium long-term interest rate. FOMC participants have been lowering their estimates of the fed funds rate that will be consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run. The median estimate has decreased from 4 percent in March 2014 to 2.8 percent today. And empirical estimates of the equilibrium real fed funds rate, so-called r-star, while highly uncertain, are lower than in the past.29 Demographic change may be a factor in this decline to the extent that it results in a lower long-run growth rate of consumption and, therefore, of output, which is a key determinant of the longer-run equilibrium interest rate. The magnitude of any effect is difficult to determine because complicated dynamics are at work. Static analysis might suggest that as longevity increases, people will want to accumulate more assets to fund their retirements and this would put upward pressure on asset prices and, therefore, downward pressure on returns. Moreover, because people prefer to reduce their exposure to risk as they age, we might expect to see a shift toward assets with fixed returns, putting upward pressure on risk premia and downward pressure on risk-free rates.30 However, older people also tend to save less because once people reach retirement age, they need to draw down their savings and perhaps sell assets to fund 28 See Bean (2004) and Imam (2013). 29 For FOMC projections, see FOMC (March 2014) and FOMC (September 2017). For a review of the literature on the equilibrium interest rate, see Hamilton, et al. (2015). 30 Bernanke (2005) discusses how a global savings glut could push down longer-term interest rates. 9 their retirement. This countervailing effect from dissaving, as well as public spending on retiree benefits, would tend to put upward pressure on interest rates.31 Thus, the magnitude and even the sign of the effect of demographic change on interest rates are empirical questions. So far, there is little evidence that demographic trends are driving large-scale shifts into fixed-income investments that would depress returns; indeed, the evidence suggests that people are under-saving for retirement.32 Historically, there appears to be only a weak correlation between age structure in the U.S. and asset returns.33 Ultimately, how demographics affect economic outcomes will also depend on how governments respond, so in the remainder of my time, let me discuss the implications of demographic change for fiscal and other government policies. Demographic Implications for Fiscal and Other Government Policies The rising share of older people will put significant pressure on Social Security and Medicare in the U.S., which are structured as pay-as-you-go programs, with current workers providing support for current retirees. Other developed countries’ government pension and healthcare funds will also be stressed. Projected longer-run fiscal imbalances are unlikely to be sustainable, and it seems likely that governments will need to respond with some combination of increased borrowing, reduced benefits, increased taxes, program restructuring, and policies intended to stem the growth rate of healthcare costs.34 Longer-run fiscal sustainability will depend on what combination is used, and how effective the actions are. 31 The simulation results in Fehr, et al. (2008) show an increase in interest rates along the baseline path of demographic change projected for the U.S., the European Union, and Japan. Goodhart and Pradhan (2017) argue that demographic change will lead to increases in the equilibrium interest rate. 32 See National Research Council (2012, chapter 7). 33 Poterba (2004) finds only a weak correlation between the age structure in the U.S. over the past 70 years and asset returns on stocks, bonds, and Treasury bills. 34 Auerbach (2016) points out that rising healthcare costs, and not aging alone, explain some of the difference in projected fiscal gaps across countries. 10 According to CBO projections, under current policy, the federal deficit as a share of GDP will more than triple over the next 30 years, from 2.9 percent in 2017 to 9.8 percent in 2047.35 During this time period, outlays for Social Security and Medicare are projected to rise from 8 percent to 12.4 percent of GDP. As a result, the federal debt-to-GDP ratio rises dramatically, from 77 percent in 2017 to 150 percent in 2047. This increase dwarfs the run-up in debt to fund World War II. The extent to which such an increase, per se, will crowd-out productive investments and lower economic growth is debatable.36 But the sovereign debt crisis in Europe over 2009-2012 shows that high debt levels can pose severe problems if investors lose faith in the ability of governments to service their debts, generating spikes in what had previously been viewed as risk-free rates. If financing the funding shortfall through increased government borrowing is undesirable, raising taxes and reducing benefits or other expenditures are not very appealing either. Depending on how such policies are implemented, they could ultimately hurt the economy’s longer-run growth prospects, leaving the fiscal outlook even worse. Moreover, in a world where countercyclical fiscal policy is constrained, business cycle volatility could rise, and monetary policy could find itself near the zero lower bound more often, potentially requiring the use of nontraditional policy tools such as asset purchases and forward guidance in order to meet monetary policymakers’ economic objectives.37 More effective policies to overcome the effects of the aging population on fiscal imbalances would focus on reducing the rising costs of healthcare, not just on health insurance. In addition, policies that increase the growth and productivity of the workforce would address not only fiscal imbalances but the downward pressure on longer-run growth from demographics or other sources. Policies that increase immigration, not reduce it, that support continuing education, that encourage R&D and innovation, and that provide incentives so people work longer should receive attention. 35 See CBO (March 2017). 36 For discussions, see Cecchetti, et al. (2011), Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2017), and Reinhart and Rogoff (2010). 37 See Kiley and Roberts (2017). 11 Summary In summary, demographic change will result in a slower-growing and older population. This transition will likely put downward pressure on the growth rate of potential output, the natural rate of unemployment, and the long-term equilibrium interest rate. The magnitude of these effects and the timing are uncertain because they depend on complicated dynamics and the behavior of consumers and businesses. Demographic change may also affect the business cycle and the monetary policy transmission mechanism. Monetary policymakers will need to continually evaluate these structural and cyclical effects in determining appropriate policy. Demographic trends present challenges for fiscal policymakers as well. Rising fiscal imbalances are projected to lead to higher government debt-to-GDP levels, potentially putting upward pressure on interest rates, and crowding out productive investment. But steps can be taken to offset some of the negative consequences of demographic change for the economy. These include policies that focus on increasing productivity and labor force growth and that address growing fiscal imbalances. 12 References Aaronson, Daniel, Luojia Hu, Arian Seifoddini, and Daniel G. Sullivan. “Changing Labor Force Composition and the Natural Rate of Unemployment,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago Fed Letter, Number 338, 2015. (https://www.chicagofed.org/~/media/publications/chicago-fed-letter/2015/cfl338-pdf.pdf) Aaronson, Stephanie, Bruce Fallick, Andrew Figura, Jonathan Pingle, and William Wascher. “The Recent Decline in the Labor Force Participation Rate and Its Implications for Potential Labor Supply,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2006. (https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2006/03/2006a_bpea_aaronson.pdf) Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2014. (https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Fall2014BPEA_Aaronson_et_al.pdf) Auer, Peter, Janine Berg, and Ibrahim Coulibaly. “Is a Stable Workforce Good for Productivity?” International Labour Review 144, 2005, pp 319-343. (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1564-913X.2005.tb00571.x/full) Auerbach, Alan J. “Long-Term Fiscal Sustainability in Advanced Economies,” Asia and the Pacific Policy Studies 3, 2016, pp. 142-154. (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/app5.131/full) Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. “Fiscal Stimulus and Fiscal Sustainability,” paper prepared for and presented at a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 2017. (https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/sympos/2017/auerbach-gorodnichenko- paper.pdf?la=en) Bean, Charles R. “Overview,” Proceedings of a Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 2004, pp. 447-454. (https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2004/pdf/Bean2004.pdf) Bernanke, Ben S. “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit,” remarks at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, Virginia, March 10, 2005. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/200503102/) Bloom, David E., and David Canning. “Global Demographic Change: Dimensions and Economic Significance,” Proceedings of a Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 2004, pp. 9-56. (https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2004/pdf/BloomCanning2004.pdf) Cairó, Isabel, and Tomaz Cajner. “Human Capital and Unemployment Dynamics: Why More Educated Workers Enjoy Greater Employment Stability,” Economic Journal, forthcoming, and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper 2014-09. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2014/201409/201409pap.pdf) CBO. The 2017 Long-Term Budget Outlook, Congressional Budget Office, Congress of the United States, March 2017. (https://www.cbo.gov/publication/52480) CBO. Supplemental Data on Potential GDP and Underlying Inputs for An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2017 to 2027, Congressional Budget Office, Congress of the United States, June 2017. 13 (www.cbo.gov/publication/52801) Cecchetti, Stephen G., M.S. Mohanty, and Fabrizio Zampolli. “Achieving Growth Amid Fiscal Imbalances: The Real Effects of Debt,” Proceedings of a Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 2011, pp. 145-196. (https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2011/Cecchetti_final.pdf) Espenshade, Thomas J., Juan Carlos Guzman, and Charles F. Westoff. “The Surprising Global Variation in Replacement Fertility,” Population Research and Policy Review 22, 2003, pp. 575-83. (https://link.springer.com/article/10.1023%2FB%3APOPU.0000020882.29684.8e) Fehr, Hans, Sabine Jokisch, and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. “Fertility, Mortality and the Developed World’s Demographic Transition,” Journal of Policy Modeling 30, 2008, pp. 455-473. (https://www.kotlikoff.net/sites/default/files/Fertility,%20Mortality%20and%20the%20Developed%20W orld%20Demographic%20Transition_1.pdf) Feyrer, James. “Demographics and Productivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics 89, 2007, pp. 100- 109. (http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/rest.89.1.100). FOMC. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 18-19, 2014,” March 2014. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20140319.pdf) FOMC. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 19-20, 2017,” September 2017. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20170920.pdf) Goodhart, Charles, and Manoj Pradhan. “Demographics Will Reverse Three Multi-Decade Global Trends,” BIS Working Paper no. 656, August 2017. (https://www.bis.org/publ/work656.htm) Haines, Michael R., “The Relationship Between Infant and Child Mortality and Fertility: Some Historical and Contemporary Evidence for the United States,” in Mark R. Montgomery and Barney Cohen, eds., From Death to Birth: Mortality Decline and Reproductive Change (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 1998), pp. 227-253. (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK233807/) Haltiwanger, John. “Top Ten Signs of Declining Business Dynamism and Entrepreneurship in the U.S.,” paper written for the Kauffman Foundation New Entrepreneurial Growth Conference, August 2015. (http://econweb.umd.edu/~haltiwan/Haltiwanger_Kauffman_Conference_August_1_2015.pdf) Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West. “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future,” NBER Working Paper Series 21476, August 2015. (http://www.nber.org/papers/w21476) Imam, Patrick. “Shock from Graying: Is the Demographic Shift Weakening Monetary Policy Effectiveness,” IMF Working Paper 13-191, 2013. (https://www.imf.org/~/media/Websites/IMF/imported-full-text- pdf/external/pubs/ft/wp/2013/_wp13191.ashx) Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University. “Housing America’s Older Adults: Meeting the Needs of an Aging Population,” 2014. (http://www.jchs.harvard.edu/sites/jchs.harvard.edu/files/jchs-housing_americas_older_adults_2014.pdf) Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts. “Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2017. (https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/03/5_kileyroberts.pdf) 14 Lee, Ronald. “The Demographic Transition: Three Centuries of Fundamental Change,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(4), 2003, pp. 167-190. (https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/089533003772034943) National Research Council. Aging and the Macroeconomy: Long-Term Implications of an Older Population, Committee on the Long-Run Macroeconomic Effects of the Aging U.S. Population, Board on Mathematical Sciences and Their Applications, Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, and Committee on Population, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2012. (https://www.nap.edu/catalog/13465/aging-and-the-macroeconomy-long-term-implications-of-an-older) OECD. Ageing and Employment Policies – Statistics on average effective age of retirement, Average effective age of retirement in 1970-2014 in OECD countries. (http://www.oecd.org/employment/ageingandemploymentpolicies.htm and http://www.oecd.org/els/emp/Summary_1970%20values.xls) Peng, Xizhe. “China’s Demographic History and Future Challenges,” Science 333, 2011, pp. 581-587. (https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Xizhe_Peng/publication/51530365_China%27s_Demographic_Hist ory_and_Future_Challenges/links/559f59c208aeffab5687e54f.pdf) Poterba, James M. “The Impact of Population Aging on Financial Markets,” Proceedings of a Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 2004, pp. 163-216. (https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2004/pdf/Poterba2004.pdf) Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. “Growth in a Time of Debt,” American Economic Review 100, 2010, pp. 573-578. (https://dash.harvard.edu/bitstream/handle/1/11129154/Reinhart_Rogoff_Growth_in_a_Time_of_Debt_2 010.pdf?sequence=1) Skirbekk, Vegard. “Age and Productivity Capacity: Descriptions, Causes and Policy Options,” Ageing Horizons 8, 2008, pp. 4-12. (http://pure.iiasa.ac.at/8588/1/ageing_horizons_8_skirbekk_ll.pdf) Social Security Administration. Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security Bulletin, 2016. Table 6.B OASDI Benefits Awarded: Retired Workers, Table 6.B5 – Number, average age, and percentage distribution, by sex and age, selected years 1940-2015. (https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2016/ and https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2016/6b.pdf) Tasci, Murat. “The Ins and Outs of Unemployment in the Long Run: Unemployment Flows and the Natural Rate,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 12-24, 2012. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom%20and%20events/publications/working%20papers/2012%20w orking%20papers/wp%201224%20the%20ins%20and%20outs%20of%20unemployment%20in%20the% 20long%20run%20unemployment%20flows%20and%20the%20natural%20rate) United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. World Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, Volume II: Demographic Profiles, ST/ESA/SER.A/400, 2017. (https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Publications/Files/WPP2017_Volume-II-Demographic-Profiles.pdf and https://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/) U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Economic Projections – 2016-26,” October 24, 2017. (https://www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/ecopro.pdf) 15 U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division. “Table 1. Projections of the Population and Components of Change for the United States: 2015 to 2060 (NP2014-T1),” December 2014. (https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/popproj/tables/2014/2014-summary-tables/np2014-t1.xls)
