WSJ: Computer Can’t Do the Fed’s Job Mechanically following the Taylor rule would limit the central bank’s policy tools and harm the economy. December 19, 2016 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO WSJ: Computer Can’t Do the Fed’s Job Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Article: Op-Ed Excerpt After extraordinary actions by the Federal Reserve during and following the Great Recession, including quantitative easing programs and record low interest rates, some economists are calling for the Federal Open Market Committee to mechanically follow a simple rule in conducting monetary policy. As a regional Fed bank president and member of the FOMC, I believe this would unduly limit the Fed’s policy tools and ultimately harm the economy and in turn employment. Read the rest of Neel Kashkari's Op-Ed for the Wall Street Journal. More On Technology & Innovation Monetary Policy Policy More On Technology & Innovation Monetary Policy Policy Related Content Preparing workers for an uncertain AI future Article How is AI influencing interest rates? Investment, productivity, prices, and more Article AI adoption in business grows steadily but unevenly Article Related Content Preparing workers for an uncertain AI future Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Taylor rule would have kept millions out of work January 5, 2017 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Taylor rule would have kept millions out of work Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This is also available on Medium . In December, I wrote an op-ed in the Wall Street Journal explaining that forcing the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to mechanically follow a rule, such as the Taylor rule, to set interest rates can cause tremendous harm to the economy and the American people. My staff at the Minneapolis Fed estimates that if the FOMC had followed the Taylor rule over the past five years, 2.5 million more Americans would be out of work today. That’s enough to fill the seats at all 31 NFL stadiums simultaneously, almost 6,000 more people out of work in every congressional district. (Click here for a visual depiction of what 2.5 million people looks like.) We acknowledge that no simulation of the economy is perfect; the model we used is one of the Federal Reserve’s primary tools for analyzing different policy options and provides an informed baseline estimate of these job losses. If people have comments or alternative techniques for estimating the Taylor rule’s effect on employment, we welcome receiving them at taylorrule@minneapolisfed.org . The 2.5 million figure was the outcome of several simulations of the FRB/US model. FRB/US is a large macroeconomic model developed by staff at the Federal Reserve Board of Governors for forecasting, simulating alternative scenarios, and evaluating policy options. (For an overview of the model, go to: https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/frbus/us-models-about.htm . A model package is available here: https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/frbus/us-models-package.htm .) The calculations were conducted using the model version and database dated Sept. 21, 2016. 1 This package includes all model equations and coefficients as well as a database with observations on all FRB/US variables starting in the first quarter of 1968 through the second quarter of 2016 and a projection that extends roughly 100 years. The first few years of the projection are designed to be roughly consistent with the Summary of Economic Projections from the September 2016 Federal Open Market Committee meeting. Beyond that, the projection converges to an illustrative, but arbitrary steady-state path. 2 FRB/US models economic expectations in two ways. One method, vector auto regression-based expectations, uses historical VARs to forecast future values of “relevant” variables. FRB/US is a large model with many variables; it is impractical to compute expectations for all variables. Under VAR-based expectations, participants in various sectors (households, firms, financial markets, etc.) focus on the variables most relevant for their decision making, replicating the structure used to estimate the model. The other treatment of expectations is referred to as “model consistent expectations.” This can be imposed sector by sector and endows participants in relevant sectors with full knowledge of the dynamics of the model (including “shocks” required to match the model to data). We ran simulations using both methods. 3 Neither of these methods qualifies as a “rational expectations” approach, but both allow agents in the model to be forward looking. VAR-based expectations are restricted by historical experience and may not allow for optimal behavioral responses to changes in policy rules. In this sense, agents have too little information. Model consistent expectations, on the other hand, essentially give agents perfect foresight about policy as well as the paths of shocks to the model equations. In this sense, agents have too much information. FRB/US has several built-in policy rules, including a few versions of the Taylor rule. The most basic Taylor rule in FRB/US (RFFTAY) is a function of the output gap between actual and potential economic output (as defined in FRB/US) and deviations of four-quarter core PCE inflation from the inflation target. The default coefficient on the output gap is 1.0, but we changed it to 0.5 to match the original Taylor (1993) output gap coefficient. In addition, there is a very general rule in FRB/US (RFFGEN). The default coefficients for this rule treat the Federal funds rate as a function of the output gap and total PCE inflation using the Taylor (1993) coefficients. We performed our simulations using both Taylor rules, RFFTAY and RFFGEN, and both expectations methods, VAR-based and model consistent. The simulations were conducted by setting the error terms on the policy rule equations (including upstream policy rule equations that RFFTAY and RFFGEN feed into) to zero and resolving the model under VAR-based and model consistent expectations. The funds rate evolved endogenously in each simulation, given the realizations for the output gap and the inflation in a particular simulation. The equilibrium real funds rate (sometimes referred to as r* ) for monetary policy rules is captured in the FRB/US variable RSTAR. It can be held constant (the default setting) or evolve as a function of the economy. We set the value of RSTAR to 2.0 percent to match the original Taylor (1993) specification. The database assumes a value of 0.98 percent. There are several measures of employment in FRB/US. We focused on two: employment in the business sector (LEP) and civilian employment (LEH). We chose the former because it is the head-count version of the labor input in the model’s production function and the latter because it corresponds to the broadest measure reported from the household survey. We conducted simulations using all four possible combinations of two expectations assumptions and two policy rules over a five-year period beginning with the fourth quarter of 2011, and we reported the employment decrease as an average of the LEP and LEH measures of employment. (The average job loss across the eight measures is actually 2.75 million; our 2.5 million figure therefore leans to an undercount of actual economic harm.) The accompanying charts show the actual and simulated paths for business sector employment and the federal funds rate when using total PCE inflation in the Taylor rule under VAR-based expectations. Endnotes 1 The last two quarters of 2016 are projections. 2 FRB/US does not have an analytical steady state. 3 We only imposed model consistent expectations for financial markets and wage-and-price setters. References Taylor, John B. 1993. Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39: 195-214. More On Monetary Policy Policy More On Monetary Policy Policy Related Content How is AI influencing interest rates? Investment, productivity, prices, and more Article Monetary Policy and Sovereign Risk in Emerging Economies (NK-Default) Research What drives consumer interest rates? Article Related Content How is AI influencing interest rates? Investment, productivity, prices, and more Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Introducing the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute President Kashkari's remarks at the introduction of the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Minneapolis Urban League Minneapolis , Minnesota Neel Kashkari President and CEO Introducing the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Your browser does not support the audio element. Full event ( video ) Media Q&A ( video ) Thank you, Steven, for that kind introduction. I appreciate you and the Minneapolis Urban League for hosting this event today, and I look forward to our discussion. Before I begin, I would like to remind everyone that my remarks today are my own and don’t necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee. One hundred four years ago, Congress created the Federal Reserve, our nation’s central bank, but they did something unique: They distributed the central bank across 12 regional, independent Federal Reserve Banks, rather than having it all housed at the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. Congress did this to ensure that different regions of the country were directly represented in economic policymaking and so that the many local varying conditions across the United States were appropriately considered. That’s literally why we have a Federal Reserve Bank in Minneapolis—to understand and represent the economic conditions in our region, which we call the Ninth Federal Reserve District. I have been president of the Minneapolis Fed for just over one year. Although I grew up in the Midwest, I am new to the Ninth District, so getting out across the district and getting to know our many communities, their strengths and their challenges is very important to me. In that regard, we’ve had a productive first year: I’ve traveled across the Ninth District, visiting many parts of Minnesota, but also North and South Dakota, Montana, Wisconsin and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. People have repeatedly asked me what has most surprised me about our region and, specifically, about Minnesota. Our region has many strengths: a diverse economy, with agriculture, manufacturing, natural resources, health care and technology sectors all represented. The business community here has an unusually strong, genuine interest in civic engagement and giving back to the community, complemented by strong nonprofit and philanthropic sectors. We also have an educated, high-performing workforce and, on average, low unemployment. That workforce is supported by an education system that consistently ranks near the top in national surveys. Minnesota ranks number three in the country according to test scores, with 45 percent of our students above the proficiency level. Our high school graduation rate is 92.4 percent, which is the second best in the country. Our labor force participation rate is seventh highest, and our poverty rate ties for the third lowest in the United States. Those are some of the positives—there is indeed much to be proud of. Yet I was surprised to learn with all that success, our region and Minnesota in particular have some of the worst racial and economic disparities in the country. Difference in median income between whites and African Americans is $30,000, giving us a rank of 41st across states. Moreover, we rank 40th in unemployment gap, 40th in test score gaps and 42nd in differences in high school graduation rates. I didn’t expect to find this, and I don’t understand why it is that way. So I began to ask questions of our research economists at the Minneapolis Fed. Why do we have these gaps? The truth is we don’t know for sure. I asked community leaders. I asked nonprofit leaders. I heard a variety of answers: education issues, lack of economic development, discrimination, among other explanations. But none of the answers seemed complete to me—nor did they seem complete to those offering the suggestions. I began looking around the country and asking researchers across the Federal Reserve System. For example, David Wilcox, the Director of Research and Statistics at the Federal Reserve’s Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and I discussed the fact that unemployment among African Americans is generally about twice the level for whites. If the economy is strong and white unemployment is 4 percent, African American unemployment will likely be around 8 percent. At the worst of the last recession, when white unemployment was around 8 percent, African American unemployment was around 16 percent. Even if you compare college graduates against college graduates, the relative position is similar. Why is that? What are the structural factors leading to those disparities? To be honest, we don’t really know. And we need to know the answers to these fundamental questions if we hope to develop effective solutions. But this isn’t just about racial disparities, though those are very important. Instead of having this discussion at the Urban League in North Minneapolis, we could be having a similar discussion on the Iron Range, one of the first regions I visited after joining the Bank, where many workers and families are struggling because of low iron ore prices and few mining jobs. We could be having this conversation about a lack of economic opportunity and inclusive growth in rural communities around the Ninth District that are struggling. We could be having this meeting in Wisconsin or Michigan, where some manufacturing plants have downsized or shut down altogether in recent decades. We could be having this conversation in almost any state in our nation. A lack of economic opportunity does not know racial or ethnic or even geographic boundaries. There are people in all communities who are struggling to get a fair chance at a good education and a good job. How do we create a robust, growing economy that includes all Americans in the context of globalization and ongoing technological change? How do we ensure that all Americans have genuine economic opportunity for themselves and their families? The American Dream is a central tenet of our society, yet, in the last 30 years the proportion of Americans who have stopped believing in it has tripled: from 10 percent to 30 percent. And quite aside from believing it, many no longer are seeing it: As Raj Chetty’s work has shown, a far smaller portion of people born in 1980 have achieved a higher standard of living than their parents, compared with what was true 25 or 50 years earlier. Earlier this week we celebrated the life and legacy of Martin Luther King, Jr., but we also remember the principles he committed his life to—justice, equality, the inherent human dignity of every man, woman and child. When we measure ourselves against these principles, we can acknowledge progress, but we must be honest in our assessment and continue with a renewed energy because there is much work yet to be done. Congress has given the Federal Reserve a dual mandate: stable prices and maximum employment. I translate stable prices as an economy that’s not overheating but also not limping along—steady growth. Maximum employment is conceptually clear, though difficult to measure: How do we have an economy that is growing at the highest sustainable level such that as many Americans who want to work are able to work? That’s the mandate that Congress has given us. Now the traditional view among central bankers is that there’s not much we can do about economic opportunity and inclusive growth. The reason is that monetary policy, our primary policy tool, is a blunt instrument. We have to set one interest rate for the whole nation, for all of our people and businesses. We can’t target it to certain sectors, industries, regions, communities or ethnic groups. So we have to look at the aggregate data on the national economy to see if we are achieving our dual mandate on average over time. But is it really true that we shouldn’t look underneath the averages to see what effect our national policies are having on different groups? I think we should be open to re-examining that assumption. For example, Minnesota is ranked number one in the country for home ownership at 74.7 percent of occupied houses. But if we look across different groups, we find that while 77.1 percent of whites in our state own their homes, only 27.6 percent of African Americans do so. And, perhaps most importantly, the Federal Reserve System employs some of the best researchers in the world, with hundreds of Ph.D. economists on staff around the country. Even if we conclude that monetary policy isn’t the best tool for addressing issues around economic opportunity and inclusive growth because it is too blunt, we still have an important role to play. If we can do the research to understand the root causes of the problems and identify potential fiscal policy solutions or other approaches, I believe it is appropriate for the Federal Reserve to do that research and inform the public about our findings. Achieving our maximum employment mandate might require a combination of traditional monetary policy tools as well as research into nonmonetary solutions for other policymakers to consider. I have discussed these issues at length with Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen, and she is in full agreement that the Federal Reserve has an important role to play in addressing these issues. So today I am announcing that we are establishing the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute (the Institute), which will be housed at the Minneapolis Fed. The mission of the Institute will be to conduct and promote research that will increase economic opportunity and inclusive growth for all Americans and help the Federal Reserve achieve its maximum employment mandate. Serious academic work on many of these issues is being done at universities across the country, and some is already being done across the Federal Reserve System. We don’t want to duplicate what researchers are already doing. We want to complement their work and bring the focused perspective of one of the most important economic policy institutions in our nation to these issues. Our Institute will adopt a multidisciplinary approach that includes the participation of leading academics from a variety of fields, including economics, education, law, public health, public policy and sociology. “The Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute is an important research initiative focusing on some of the most pressing economic issues we face as a nation. This work has the potential to help more Americans find real economic opportunity. I hope that scholars inside and outside the Federal Reserve System will contribute to this important work,” said Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen.‎ The Institute will have a number of important components to start. First, we have recruited a world-class Advisory Board to help us identify topics where the Federal Reserve System can make a significant contribution that complements work already being done elsewhere. Second, we are launching an annual Visiting Scholar program, which will invite scholars to pursue research while in residence at the Minneapolis Fed, working side by side with Federal Reserve researchers. If you are a scholar working on issues of economic opportunity and inclusive growth, we want you! Detailed information about how scholars can apply is on our website at minneapolisfed.org . Third, we are launching a conference series to bring together experts from within and from outside the Federal Reserve System to learn as much as we can from each other on these important issues. The first conference will be on May 22 of this year when we will explore where the Federal Reserve can best focus our talents and resources to make growth and opportunity more inclusive. Finally, we are creating a working paper series to showcase the research that people across the Federal Reserve System and affiliated experts are producing so that other researchers and practitioners can learn, comment and take it forward. Today is just the kickoff. The hard work is yet to come. In many cases, these issues are decades in the making. We aren’t going to find a silver bullet in six months or a year. But we need to ramp up our efforts, in partnership with leading researchers around the country. This is going to be a long-term, research-driven initiative focused on helping all Americans have real economic opportunity and participate in a growing economy. We know that these issues are not going to be solved by the Federal Reserve alone. But we are going to do our part. Researchers in universities around the country are already playing an important role, as are educators, community leaders and local, state and federal policymakers. The nonprofit and philanthropic communities are doing critically important work on the ground, putting theoretical ideas into action. The Institute will focus on world class research. But this is not an effort divorced from all of you. Ideas on where we should investigate, feedback on our efforts and work to turn the research into practical policy falls to all of us. We look forward to working with and learning from you. Thank you. I look forward to the discussion with Steven and then opening it to the audience. Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

WSJ Op-Ed: Make Big Banks Put 20% Down—Just Like Home Buyers Do Financial CEOs say capital requirements are already too high, but the facts suggest otherwise. February 14, 2017 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO WSJ Op-Ed: Make Big Banks Put 20% Down—Just Like Home Buyers Do Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter There's a straightforward way to help prevent the next financial crisis, fix the too-big-to-fail problem, and still relax regulations on community lenders: increase capital requirements for the largest banks. In November, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis , which I lead, announced a draft proposal to do precisely that. Our plan would increase capital requirements on the biggest banks—those with assets over $250 billion—to at least 23.5%. It would reduce the risk of a taxpayer bailout to less than 10% over the next century. Alarmingly, there has been recent public discussion of moving in the opposite direction. Several large-bank CEOs have suggested that their capital requirements are already too high and are holding back lending. As this newspaper reported , Bank of America CEO Brian Moynihan recently asked, "Do we have [to hold] an extra $20 billion in capital? Which doesn't sound like a lot, but that's $200 billion in loans we could make." It is true that some regulations implemented after the 2008 financial crisis are imposing undue burdens, especially on small banks, without actually making the financial system safer. But the assertion that capital requirements are holding back lending is demonstrably false. How can I prove it? Simple: Borrowing costs for homeowners and businesses are near record lows. If loans were scarce, borrowers would be competing for them, driving up costs. That isn't happening. Nor do other indicators suggest a lack of loans. Bank credit has grown 23% over the past three years, about twice as much as nominal gross domestic product. Only 4% of small businesses surveyed by the National Federation of Independent Business report not having their credit needs met. If capital standards are relaxed, banks will almost certainly use the newly freed money to buy back their stock and increase dividends. The goal for large banks won't be to increase lending, but to boost their stock prices. Let's not forget: That's the job of a bank CEO. It isn't to protect taxpayers. So if capital requirements aren't the problem, why does it feel so hard to get a loan today? I can speak from firsthand experience. Last year my wife and I decided to buy a house. We applied for a loan with a bank where I have been a customer for many years. I assumed that my long record with the bank and our good credit would make it easy. With the required 20% down payment, we were prequalified for a mortgage with a rate of 3.375% fixed for the first 10 years. That was an attractive rate, suggesting capital was not holding back lending. The prequalification was easy. Then the frustration began. The mortgage banker asked for myriad documents: bank statements, 401(k) statements, brokerage statements, tax returns, W-2s, insurance records and so on. That all seemed reasonable, but as the weeks rolled on, the requests for more documentation kept coming. After a month or so, I couldn't believe what I was being asked for. Despite having all the records of my on-time monthly rental payments in my checking account, the bank demanded a copy of my lease and to speak with my landlord. The banker called me to apologize, admitting that the requests were ridiculous but saying that there was no reasoning with the underwriting department. As we waited, we began to wonder if we wanted to buy the house at all. Wouldn't continuing to rent be so much easier? In the end, the bank funded the loan. I felt bad for the underwriters, who seemed unable to exercise judgment or use common sense. The impression I got was that people at the bank were simply paralyzed by fear—that they might make a mistake, that regulators would be breathing down their necks. I have spoken to many borrowers at other banks, and they tell me similar stories. It has become needlessly difficult for qualified borrowers to get loans. But again, the problem isn't the capital requirements—it's everything else. Capital is the best defense against bailouts. Although capital standards are higher than before the last crisis, they are not nearly high enough. The odds of a bailout in the next century are still nearly 70%. Large banks need to be able to withstand around a 20% loss on their assets to protect against taxpayer bailouts in a downturn like the Great Recession, according to a 2015 analysis by the Federal Reserve. Unfortunately, regulators have taken it easy on the large banks, which today have only about half of the equity they need. There is a simple and fair solution to the too-big-to-fail problem. Banks ask us to put 20% down when buying our homes to protect them in case we run into trouble. Similarly, taxpayers should make large banks put 20% down in the form of equity to prevent bailouts in case the financial system runs into trouble. Higher capital for large banks and streamlined regulation for small banks would minimize frustration for borrowers. If 20% down is reasonable to ask of us, it is reasonable to ask of the banks. Mr. Kashkari is president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and a participant in the Federal Open Market Committee. See Neel Kashkari's Op-Ed in the Wall Street Journal. More On Banks Monetary Policy Policy More On Banks Monetary Policy Policy Related Content Advisory councils share regional economic insights from first quarter 2026 Article Higher input costs pressure district farmers Article Modeling the forces behind convenience yields—a step toward smarter liquidity regulation Article Related Content Advisory councils share regional economic insights from first quarter 2026 Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
