Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the American Economic Association/American Finance Association Joint Luncheon, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Share I'm delighted to be speaking to this group; it's really an honor. Given the audience--and because I may never again have so many economists in front of me at one time--I thought that rather than giving a policy-oriented speech, I would test-drive a new research project. The project is ongoing joint work with Samuel Hanson and Andrei Shleifer of Harvard and with Robert Vishny of the University of Chicago. We haven't quite finished writing up the paper, but we have most of the raw material and a pretty good idea of where we are trying to go, so I figured I would give it a shot. 1 Our aim is primarily positive, as opposed to normative: We're interested in better understanding the economic role played by commercial banks, as well as the interplay between the traditional commercial banking sector and the so-called shadow-banking sector, which includes various non-bank intermediaries such as broker-dealers, money-market funds, and hedge funds. It would be an understatement to say that the literature on the role of banks is vast. Without attempting to do it justice, let me just note three prominent classes of theories. The first focuses on the liability side of banks' balance sheets--that is, their deposit-taking role. In this view, what is most important about banks is that they create safe claims which, precisely because of their safety and immunity from adverse-selection problems, are useful as a transactions medium. 2 In other words, banks are special because they are the institutions that create private, or "inside," money. Although it does not necessarily follow as a logical matter, this view has led some observers to advocate narrow-banking proposals, whereby bank-created money is backed by very safe liquid assets, such as Treasury bills. 3 A second class of theories emphasizes the asset side of banks' balance sheets and their role as delegated monitors in the lending process. 4 Here banks are seen as a mechanism for dealing with the information and incentive problems that would otherwise make it difficult for credit to be extended to opaque borrowers such as small businesses. Because this work is silent on the precise structure of the liability side, it does not draw much of a distinction between banks and other, nonbank lending intermediaries, such as finance companies. Finally, a third class of theories explicitly addresses the question of what ties together the asset and liability sides of banks' balance sheets--that is, why do the same institutions that create private money choose to back their safe claims by investing in loans and other relatively illiquid assets? 5 What is the nature of the synergy between the two activities? Our work fits into this third category, with two twists relative to previous research. First, we stress the fact that on the asset side, banks hold not only loans, but like their shadow-banking counterparts, they also hold securities, often in very substantial amounts. Moreover, these securities holdings have a particular pattern. Banks tend to stay away from the safest and most liquid securities, such as Treasury securities, and instead concentrate their holdings in securities that are less liquid and whose market prices are more volatile, including agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS), collateralized mortgage obligations (CMOs), asset-backed securities and corporate bonds. We argue that this pattern is an important clue to the business of banking more generally. Second, while we follow previous work in assuming that the safety of bank liabilities is an important part of what makes them special, we depart from much of the rest of the literature by downplaying the vulnerability of bank deposits to runs. Indeed, we emphasize precisely the opposite aspect of deposit finance: Relative to other forms of private-money creation that occur in the shadow-banking sector--notably, short-term collateralized claims such as broker-dealer repurchase agreements (repos)--bank deposits are noteworthy because, in the modern institutional environment, they are highly sticky and not prone to run at the first sign of trouble. In its simplest terms, our story is as follows: There are different private technologies for creating safe money-like claims. The "banking" technology involves meaningful amounts of capital as well as deposit insurance and thus leads to deposits that are both safe and relatively stable. The "shadow banking" technology uses less capital and manufactures safety by, instead, giving repo investors collateral and the right to seize the collateral on a moment's notice. So shadow banking money is much more run prone than bank money. Given its relatively stable nature, the banking model is better suited to investing in assets that are illiquid and subject to interim price volatility--that is, to fire-sale risk. These assets can be loans that involve significant amounts of monitoring, or they can be securities that require less monitoring. What is essential is the synergy between issuing stable types of money claims and investing in assets that have some degree of exposure to fire-sale risk. That synergy, in our view, is at the heart of the business of traditional banking. We have developed a simple theoretical model that captures the main ingredients of this story and makes some further testable predictions. It's probably ill-advised over lunch, but I will take a crack at sketching this model for you here. However, let me start with three stylized facts to motivate the theory. Stylized Facts The first fact, and the one that I suspect will surprise you the least, is the strong homogeneity of the liability side of banks' balance sheets: Banks are almost always and everywhere largely deposit financed. For example, in the cross section, and using year-end 2012 data, a bank at the 10th percentile of the distribution had a ratio of deposits to assets of 73.6 percent, while a bank at the 90th percentile had a ratio of 88.9 percent. 6 A similar homogeneity is apparent in the time series: Over the past 115 years, deposits have averaged 80 percent of bank assets, with a standard deviation of only 8 percent. These patterns are in sharp contrast to those for nonfinancial firms, for which capital structure tends to be much less determinate, both within an industry and over time. They suggest that for banks--unlike non-financials, and counter to the spirit of Modigliani and Miller (1958)--an important part of their economic value creation happens on the liability side of the balance sheet, via deposit-taking. The second fact, which is perhaps just a bit more surprising, is that the asset side of banks' balance sheets--and, in particular, their mix of loans versus securities--is considerably more heterogeneous. In the 2012 cross section, a bank at the 10th percentile of the distribution had a ratio of securities to assets of 6.9 percent, while, for a bank at the 90th percentile, the ratio was almost six times higher, at 40.7 percent. 7 One interpretation of this heterogeneity is as follows: While lending is obviously very important for a majority of banks, it need not be the case that a bank's scale is pinned down by the nature of its lending opportunities. Rather, at least in some cases, it seems that a bank's size is determined by its deposit franchise, and that, taking these deposits as given, its problem then becomes one of how best to invest them. Again, this liability-centric perspective is very different from how we are used to thinking about nonfinancial firms, whose scale is almost always presumed to be driven by its opportunities on the asset side of the balance sheet. The third stylized fact, illustrated in figure 1 , is the one that I found most eye- opening: While banks might be quite heterogeneous in their mix of loans and securities, within the category of securities, they appear to have well-defined preferences. As can be seen in the figure, banks hold very little in the way of Treasury securities and securities issued directly by the government-sponsored agencies: These two categories accounted for just 7.7 percent and 5.8 percent of total securities holdings, respectively, on a value-weighted basis in 2012. The large bulk of their holdings is in MBS guaranteed by the agencies and other types of mortgage-linked securities--such as CMOs and commercial mortgage-backed securities (CMBS)--which collectively accounted for 57.7 percent of securities holdings in 2012. Also important is the "Other" category, which includes corporate and municipal bonds, as well as asset-backed securities, and which accounted for 29.3 percent of holdings in 2012. This composition of banks' securities portfolio is not what you would expect if they were simply holding securities as a highly liquid buffer against, say, unexpected deposit outflows or commitment drawdowns. It also appears--superficially, at least--at odds with the narrow-banking premise that one can profitably exploit a deposit franchise simply by taking deposits and parking them in Treasury bills. Rather, it looks as if banks are purposefully taking on some mix of duration, credit, and prepayment exposure in order to earn a spread relative to Treasury bills. And indeed, over the period from 1984 to 2012, the average spread on banks' securities portfolio relative to bills was 1.73 percent. By contrast, over this same period, we estimate that if banks had raised deposits and invested them exclusively in three-month Treasury bills, they would have earned an average net return of only 0.06 percent of deposits. This figure is based on three components. First, the spread between the rate earned on bills and that paid on deposits averaged 0.87 percent over the sample period. Second, there was additional noninterest income on deposits (for example, overdraft fees) of 0.49 percent of deposits. Third, however, deposit-taking involves considerable bricks-and-mortar costs. Using Call Report data on banks' total costs, and a hedonic regression approach to infer the portion of cost that is due to deposit-taking, we estimate this piece to have averaged 1.30 percent of deposits over the sample period. Thus, the net profitability of narrow banking is given by 0.87 percent plus 0.49 percent minus 1.30 percent, which equals 0.06 percent. Overall, our synthesis of these stylized facts is that banks are in the business of taking deposits and investing these deposits in fixed-income assets that have certain well-defined risk and liquidity attributes but which can be either loans or securities. The information-intensive nature of traditional lending--in the delegated monitoring sense--while clearly important in many cases, may not be the defining feature of banking. Rather, the defining feature may be that, whether banks invest in information-intensive loans or relatively transparent securities, they invest in fixed-income assets that have some degree of price volatility and illiquidity and so offer a higher return than very liquid and safe Treasury securities. In this sense, small business loans and CMOs are on one side of the fence, and Treasury securities are on the other. Before proceeding, I should note a natural first reaction to these observations. You might say, "Of course banks prefer holding riskier securities to riskless ones, even if they create no monitoring value in either case. They are just taking advantage of the put option created by deposit insurance. In other words, the evidence on the patterns of banks' securities holdings just reflects a moral hazard problem and nothing more." Without intending to dismiss the importance of moral hazard generally, I don't think it can fully account for the data in figure 1. One way to make this point is to redraw the figure, restricting the sample only to those banks with the highest levels of capital at any point in time--those above the median of the distribution by the ratio of equity to assets--as is done in figure 2 . As can be seen, the basic patterns are very similar to those in figure 1. Given that these highly capitalized banks are less likely to impose losses on the Deposit Insurance Fund, I think there is something deeper here than can be explained by a simple appeal to deposit-insurance-induced moral hazard. So what, then, is the story? As I alluded to earlier, it begins with the observation that a deposit franchise has two important dimensions. First, it offers a bank a low-cost source of financing, given the premium that investors are willing to pay (that is, the lower yield they are willing to accept) for safe money-like claims. And, second, it offers funding stability, since with an adequate capital buffer and deposit insurance, it is rational for depositors to be "sleepy" and disregard moderate changes in the mark-to-market value of long-term fixed-income assets. Thus, a stable deposit franchise gives a bank the ability to ride out transitory valuation changes of the sort that might come from noise-trader shocks or fire sales, without being forced to liquidate assets at temporarily depressed prices. 8 As a result, traditional banks with stable funding have an advantage relative to their shadow banking counterparts in holding those assets where transitory repricing risk is high for a given level of underlying fundamental cash flow risk. Here's one way to put the broad theme of our work: We have learned from this year's Nobel laureates, Eugene Fama and Robert Shiller, that discount rate variation‑‑that is, transitory movements in asset prices not driven by changes in future expected cash flows‑‑is central to understanding asset pricing. Our basic message is that this same discount rate variation may also be central to thinking about financial intermediation and, in particular, the connection between the asset and liability sides of intermediary balance sheets. In a world with transitory pricing shocks, a stable funding structure can be an important source of comparative advantage for holding certain types of assets. The Model We have developed a simple model to try to make these ideas precise and to flesh out further empirical implications. I won't try to walk you through it in all of its detail, but I will try to give you a flavor for the basic structure and the main results. 9 The model has three dates--0, 1, and 2--with a timeline illustrated in figure 3 . There is a collection of different long-lived fixed-income assets indexed by i . The payoffs on these assets are all perfectly correlated. In particular, each asset i pays off R at time 2 if the aggregate state of the world is such that there has been no default, and it pays off a lower amount, z i , if there has been a default. At time 1, there is an interim news event. With probability p , the news is good, which means that all assets will definitely not default at time 2. And with probability (1 - p ), the news is bad, which means that there is a subsequent probability of default on all assets of (1 - q ) at time 2. Thus, in the bad-news state at time 1, the fundamental value of asset i is F i = qR + (1 - q ) z i . However, if there is bad news at time 1, the market value of asset i will be depressed by a temporary fire-sale effect and will be given by k i F i ≤F i . The value of k i is endogenous and asset specific in our model and depends on the equilibrium quantity of asset i that is liquidated at time 1; I will return to this feature momentarily. Household preferences are as follows: Households are risk neutral over fluctuations in their consumption. However, they derive additional utility--which can be thought of as transactions services--from holding completely safe claims, since these claims can be used in a money-like fashion. The upshot of these assumptions is that households require a fixed rate of return on any risky claims, no matter how risky, but a lower rate of return on claims that can be made completely safe. These latter safe claims can be interpreted as privately created money. Given these household preferences, the name of the game for financial intermediaries is to create as much in the way of safe money-like claims from each asset category i as possible. And given the structure of the model, there are two distinct technologies for creating safe claims. The first technology we label "traditional banking." A traditional bank is relatively conservative in issuing safe claims. In particular, for each dollar it holds of asset i , it issues z i of deposits and finances the rest with equity. Since asset i always pays off at least z i , even in the worst-case scenario, a depositor in a traditional bank can sleep through whatever news comes in at time 1 and still be assured of having a safe claim. In other words, a bank backs its deposits with enough capital so as to make these deposits safe over a two-period horizon and hence endogenously sticky; there is no reason for bank depositors ever to run at time 1. Alternatively, one can think of the bank as having acquired deposit insurance--which allows depositors to sleep through time 1--and the deposit insurer as having imposed a capital requirement of (1- z i ) on the bank so as to reduce its expected losses to zero. The second technology for creating safe claims we label "shadow banking." Shadow banks are more aggressive: They rely less on capital, and more on the exit option at time 1, to create safety for their investors. Specifically, a shadow bank issues k i F i of short-term collateralized claims for each dollar of asset i it holds, where k i F i > z i . The way these claims are kept safe is that if there is bad news at time 1, the investors seize the collateral and dump it at the fire-sale price, realizing k i F i . In other words, unlike bank investors, shadow bank investors cannot afford to sleep through time 1; their ability to pull the plug at this interim date is essential to keeping their claim safe. For any given asset i , the key question is, which type of intermediary‑‑traditional bank or shadow bank--will end up holding the asset in equilibrium, and in what relative proportions? The answer to this question turns on the following tradeoff. On the one hand, since banks finance themselves with more equity and less cheap "money" than shadow banks, their overall cost of financing is higher, which puts them at a disadvantage. On the other hand, their more conservative capital structure means that banks' deposits never run on them. Hence, unlike shadow banks, they are never forced to liquidate assets at temporarily low prices when there is bad news at time 1; they can simply ride out this bad news and hold on to their investments until prices recover at time 2. In other words, as compared with shadow banks, traditional banks pay more to have a stabler funding structure, which is especially helpful for investing in those assets for which fire-sale discounts are high. To close the model, we need to endogenize the fire-sale discount factor, k i . We assume that this fire-sale discount depends in part on the amount of liquidations at time 1, which is in turn related to the extent of ownership of asset i by the shadow banking sector--the more the shadow banking sector owns, the more gets dumped at time 1, and hence the lower is the fire-sale price. This assumption implies that the fire-sale discount plays an important equilibrating role in the model, and that we can have interior equilibria in which the ownership of a given asset i is divided across the traditional banking and shadow banking sectors; as ownership migrates to shadow banks, the fire-sale discount widens, which tends to reduce the relative advantage of shadow banks. Specifically, we adopt the following reduced form: k i = k ( μ i , φ i ), where μ i is the fraction of asset i held by the shadow banking sector and φ i is an index of asset illiquidity, with higher values of φ i corresponding to less-liquid assets. We assume that d k i /d μ i < 0, meaning that a greater shadow banking share results in a lower fire-sale price, and that d 2 k i /d μ i d φ i < 0, meaning that this adverse price-pressure effect is amplified in more-illiquid assets. With all of this machinery in place, I can now state our main results, which characterize how banks' equilibrium market shares depend on the two primitive asset-level parameters, φ i and z i . First, we have that dμ i / dφ i < 0, which means that banks have a bigger share relative to shadow banks in more-illiquid assets, all else being equal. Second, we have that dμ i / dz i < 0, which means that banks have a bigger share in assets that have less long-run solvency risk, all else being equal. Taken together, these two results suggest that banks have a comparative advantage in holding assets that can experience significant temporary price dislocations but, at the same time, have only modest fundamental risk. Agency MBS might be a leading example of such an asset, since they are insured against default risk but are less liquid than Treasury securities and, for a given duration, have more price volatility, as the MBS-Treasury spread varies significantly. The model also explains why, even absent any institutional or regulatory constraints, banks would endogenously choose to avoid equities--they simply have too much fundamental risk. Because their value can fall very far over an extended period of time--that is, because their z i is close to zero--equities cannot be efficiently used as backing to create safe two-period claims. So they are not good collateral for bank money. By contrast, to the extent that they are highly liquid, they do make suitable collateral for very short-term repo financing. In other words, equities can be used to back some amount of shadow bank money. It should be noted that the model admits either interior outcomes or corner solutions, depending on the asset-specific values of z i and φ i . So it is consistent with the possibility that some assets (say, highly illiquid loans) will be held only by banks, some (say, Treasury securities) will be owned predominantly but not exclusively by shadow banks, and some (say, agency MBS, CMBS, and CMOs) will be owned in significant quantities by each type of intermediary, with an equilibrium fire-sale discount that just balances the tradeoff between the two organizational forms. In this view of the world, loans are seen as being on a continuum with less-liquid securities, and they are held by banks because of their relative illiquidity and susceptibility to fire-sale discounts, not solely because of a need for monitoring. Further Evidence One way to draw out some further implications of the model is to focus on the key comparative static, dμ i / dφ i < 0--namely, that banks have a bigger market share in more-illiquid assets. Now, of course in the real world, there are many different kinds of financial intermediaries, not just two as in our simple model. But a rough generalization of our theory would be to say that across intermediary types, we should expect those with relatively more-stable liabilities to hold more-illiquid assets. To implement a test of this proposition, we use flow of funds data on eight classes of financial intermediaries: banks, broker-dealers, money market funds, real estate investment trusts, government-sponsored enterprises, property and casualty insurers, life insurers, and finance companies. 10 The flow of funds data include breakdowns of the different assets and liabilities of each of these intermediaries. Our test then requires us to measure the "illiquidity" of each category of asset and the "stickiness" of each category of liability, which we do using homemade indexes that vary from 0 to 1. Although there is inevitably some subjectivity involved in constructing these indexes, we try to minimize this subjectivity by relying as heavily as possible on the parameters in Basel III's Net Stable Funding Ratio and Liquidity Coverage Ratio. 11 With these indexes in hand, we can then aggregate up to create values for the asset illiquidity and liability stickiness of an entire intermediary sector. 12 Figure 4 plots the results of this exercise using data as of year-end 2012. As can be seen, there is a very tight cross-intermediary correlation between liability stickiness and asset illiquidity. At one end of the spectrum are money market funds and broker-dealers‑‑prototypical shadow-bank-type institutions--with very low values of both, and at the other end are banks and life insurance companies. While there are only eight data points, the close fit of the regression line is consistent with the broad thrust of our story. To further highlight the importance of stable bank liabilities, figure 5 takes an approach similar to that of figure 4 but plots asset illiquidity versus the contractual maturity of liabilities, rather than their effective stickiness. Now the banking sector appears as a huge outlier, since the contractual maturity of banks' liabilities is extremely short--indeed, shorter than that of broker-dealers--even while they hold highly illiquid assets. This observation underscores a key point: If one wants to understand the divergent asset-side behavior of banks and shadow banks, one has to look not to the literal contractual maturity of their liabilities, but rather to the differing incentives that their overall financial and institutional arrangements create for short-term claims to be stable in the face of bad news. Other Implications Our framework may also be helpful in understanding a couple of other aspects of the business of banking. The first is banks' accounting treatment of their "available for sale" securities, according to which ongoing mark-to-market gains and losses don't appear in net income. 13 This treatment implicitly presumes that these gains and losses are temporary and that banks can ride them out by not having to sell the security in question before it matures. While I would not want to go so far as to claim that our model justifies this accounting practice, it at least provides a starting point for thinking about it. 14 By contrast, the practice would be incomprehensible in a world in which changes in asset prices reflected changes in expected future cash flows. Second, our approach may help shed some light on the bricks-and-mortar costs associated with bank deposit-taking. As I mentioned earlier, we estimate these costs to be quite high, averaging on the order of 1.30 percent of deposits over the period from 1984 to 2012. And of course, these costs ultimately represent an endogenous decision--banks could always choose to offer their customers fewer and less attractive branch locations, fewer opportunities for interacting with a human teller, and so forth. One view is that these amenities are simply a separable flow of services to depositors, conceptually analogous to interest income. However, an interesting alternative is that they represent a deliberate effort to build loyalty--that is, to create a form of switching costs. To the extent that other elements of their business model are also devoted to creating and exploiting deposit stickiness, it may make more sense for banks to make complementary investments of this sort in enhancing customer loyalty. By contrast, a money market fund complex--which also takes deposits, but which invests exclusively in short-term assets--has less reason to spend as heavily on a branch network. Conclusion Let me summarize. The creation of private money--that is, safe claims that are useful for transactions purposes--is obviously central to what banks do. But safe claims can be manufactured from risky collateral in different ways, and banks are not the only type of intermediary that engages in this activity. What makes banks unique is that they use a particular combination of financial and institutional arrangements--including capital, deposit insurance, and access to a lender of last resort--as well as substantial investments in bricks and mortar, to create liabilities that are not only safe and money-like, but also relatively stable and thus unlikely to run at the first sign of trouble. This is in contrast to shadow banks, who create money-like claims more cheaply, by relying on an early exit option, and who are therefore more vulnerable to runs and the accompanying fire-sale risk. I have argued that there is a synergy between banks' stable funding model and their investing in assets that have modest fundamental risk but whose prices can fall significantly below fundamental values in a bad state of the world. This synergy helps explain both why deposit-taking banks might have a comparative advantage at making information-intensive loans and, at the same time, why they tend to hold the specific types of securities that they do. References Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010). Basel III: International Framework for Liquidity Risk Measurement, Standards, and Monitoring (PDF) . Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, December. ------ (2013). Basel III: The Liquidity Coverage Ratio and Liquidity Risk Monitoring Tools . (PDF) Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, January. Cochrane, John H. (2011). " Presidential Address: Discount Rates ," Journal of Finance , vol. 66 (August), pp. 1047-1108. DeLong, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann (1990). " Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets ," Journal of Political Economy , vol. 98 (August), pp. 703-38. Diamond, Douglas W. (1984). "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring ," Review of Economic Studies , vol. 51 (July), pp. 393-414. Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig (1983). " Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity ," Journal of Political Economy , vol. 91 (June), pp. 401-19. Diamond, Douglas W., and Raghuram G. Rajan (2001). " Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation, and Financial Fragility: A Theory of Banking ," Journal of Political Economy , vol. 109 (April), pp. 287-327. Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi (1990). " Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation ," Journal of Finance , vol. 45 (March), pp. 49-71. Kashyap, Anil K., Raghuram Rajan, and Jeremy C. Stein (2002). " Banks as Liquidity Providers: An Explanation for the Coexistence of Lending and Deposit-Taking ," Journal of Finance , vol. 57 (February), pp. 33-73. Modigliani, Franco, and Merton H. Miller (1958). " The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance, and the Theory of Investment," (PDF) American Economic Review , vol. 48 (June), pp. 261-97. Pennacchi, George (2012). " Narrow Banking ," Annual Review of Financial Economics , vol. 4 (October), pp. 141-59. Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny (1992). " Liquidation Values and Debt Capacity: A Market Equilibrium Approach ," Journal of Finance , vol. 47 (September), pp. 1343-66. ------ (1997). " The Limits of Arbitrage ," Journal of Finance , vol. 52 (March), pp. 35-55. Stein, Jeremy C. (2012). " Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation ," Quarterly Journal of Economics , vol. 127 (February), pp. 57-95. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) for an early articulation of the idea that bank liabilities are designed to minimize adverse-selection problems and hence facilitate exchange between uninformed parties. Return to text 3. See Pennacchi (2012) for a detailed discussion of narrow-banking proposals. Return to text 4. See Diamond (1984). Return to text 5. Diamond and Dybvig (1983) is the classic reference in this area. They argue that banks allow households that are unsure of the timing of their consumption needs to more efficiently invest in long-lived projects. Other papers include Diamond and Rajan (2001), who suggest that the fragility inherent in runnable deposit finance acts as a useful disciplinary device for bank management, and Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002), who emphasize the similarities between deposits and loan commitments, and the cost savings that accrue to an institution that offers both products. Return to text 6. In this calculation and those that follow, we eliminated from the sample the very smallest banks--those with less than $1 billion in assets. We did so because otherwise, these banks--which are extremely numerous but account for only a small fraction of total banking system assets--would dominate any statements we might make about percentiles of the population distribution. Return to text 7. These figures on securities holdings do not include banks' holdings of cash and reverse repos, which averaged 10.2 percent and 4.1 percent of assets, respectively, on a value-weighted basis in 2012. Return to text 8. On noise-trader shocks, see DeLong and others (1990). For models of fire sales, see Shleifer and Vishny (1992, 1997). Return to text 9. The basic structure of the model is very similar to that in Stein (2012). Return to text 10. The data are from the Federal Reserve Board's Statistical Release Z.1, "Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States" (in June 2013, the release was renamed "Financial Accounts of the United States"), www.federalreserve.gov/releases/z1. Return to text 11. See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010, 2013). Return to text 12. As an example, using this approach, we assigned values of the illiquidity index of 0 for Treasury securities, 0.15 for agency MBS, 0.5 for corporate equities, and 1.0 for unsecured commercial and industrial loans and commercial real estate loans. Similarly, we assigned values of the stickiness index of 0 for nondeposit short-term funding, 0.7 for wholesale bank deposits, 0.8 for retail time and savings deposits, and 0.9 for transactions deposits. Return to text 13. These "temporary impairments" flow through another liability account called "accumulated other comprehensive income" and affect earnings under generally accepted accounting principles only if the gains or losses are realized by selling a security. Return to text 14. See Cochrane (2011) for a similar argument. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible version Last Update: January 03, 2014 Back to Top

Governor Jeremy C. Stein At the 2014 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, New York Share I am delighted to have the opportunity to discuss the paper "Market Tantrums and Monetary Policy." It is timely, provocative, and extremely insightful. Let me start by summarizing what I take to be the paper's main messages. 1 First, the authors argue that policymakers should pay careful attention not just to measures of leverage in the banking and shadow banking sectors, but also to the financial stability risks that might arise from the behavior of unlevered asset managers, such as those running various types of bond funds. Notably, assets under management in fixed-income funds have grown dramatically in the years since the onset of the financial crisis, even while various measures of financial-sector leverage have either continued to decline or remained subdued. Second, the authors develop a model of agency problems in delegated asset management, according to which an environment of low short-term rates can encourage asset managers concerned with their relative performance rankings to "reach for yield," which in turn acts to compress risk premiums. Moreover, the model has the feature that this reach for yield can end badly, with a sudden and sharp correction in risk premiums that arises endogenously in response to a small tightening of monetary policy. The events of the spring and summer of 2013, when there was a rapid rise in bond market term premiums, are cited as a leading example of what the model sets out to capture. Third, the authors assert that the conventional regulatory toolkit, which is largely designed to contain intermediary leverage, is not well suited to dealing with the asset-management sector. Given this limitation of regulation, and because monetary policy has a direct influence on the behavior of asset managers, the financial stability risks that these managers create should be factored into the design and conduct of monetary policy. Presumably, this consideration would imply that monetary policy should be somewhat less easy in a weak economy, all else being equal, to reduce the probability of an undesirable upward spike in rates and credit spreads down the road. The authors are careful to note that "our analysis neither invalidates nor validates the course the Federal Reserve has actually taken." 2 Rather, they are highlighting a set of considerations that they believe should ultimately be incorporated into the design of a monetary policy framework. This is the spirit in which I will discuss the paper--not as a comment on the current stance of policy, but as an exploration of the factors that should be taken into account when thinking about the tradeoffs associated with monetary policy more generally. The model in the paper is a simple one, and it does a nice job of framing the issues. In particular, here is how I think about the value-added of the theory:On the one hand, an emerging body of empirical work documents that an easing of monetary policy--even via conventional policy tools in normal times--tends to reduce both the term premiums on long-term Treasury bonds and the credit spreads on corporate bonds. 3 That is, monetary policy tends to work in part through its effect on capital market risk premiums, perhaps through some sort of risk-taking or reaching-for-yield mechanism. On the other hand, while this empirical observation sheds some interesting light on how monetary policy influences the real economy, it does not by itself suggest that there is any financial stability dark side to the lowered risk premiums that go with monetary accommodation. For there to be any meaningful tradeoff, there would have to be some sort of asymmetry in the unwinding of these risk premiums, whereby the eventual reversal either happens more abruptly, or causes larger economic effects, than the initial compression. Said a little differently, if an easing of Federal Reserve policy puts downward pressure on term premiums and credit spreads, and if this downward pressure is only gradually reversed as policy begins to tighten, then what is the problem? The nice feature of the model is that it speaks to this asymmetry. That is, it features a gradual compression of risk spreads during a period of monetary ease, and then, when policy begins to tighten, it delivers a sharp and abrupt correction, driven by a particular form of market dynamics. Of course, this is just a theoretical prediction. One thing that the paper does not do, but which would be very helpful in assessing the real-world relevance of the model, would be to see if this sort of asymmetry in bond returns is present in the data. In particular, if I am interpreting the model correctly, it implies a specific form of conditional volatility and skewness in bond returns. For example, when term premiums are unusually low relative to historical norms, the model suggests an elevated probability of a sharp upward spike in rates. I don't know of any evidence that bears on this hypothesis in the bond market, though an analogous pattern does appear in stock market returns. 4 It is worth saying a little about the "musical chairs" mechanism that leads to the sharp spike in rates. The fund managers in the model care about their relative performance in that they are averse to posting lower returns than their peers, holding fixed absolute performance. These relative-performance concerns induce a form of strategic complementarity of fund manager actions. Specifically, as short-term rates begin to rise and fund manager i contemplates whether she should bail out of long-term bonds and move into short-term bills, she is more apt to do so if she thinks that some other manager, j, is also going to bail--because she is worried that otherwise, she may wind up underperforming manager j and finishing last in the relative-performance tournament. While appearing in a different guise here, this strategic-complementarity effect--the idea that any one agent is in more of a rush to get out when he or she thinks that others may also want to get out--is essentially the same mechanism that drives bank runs in the classic work of Diamond and Dybvig, and that, in one manifestation or another, creates financial fragility in many other settings. 5 However, one thing that is distinctive about the variant presented in the current paper is that there is a clear prediction of exactly what sets off the run for the exits on the part of money managers--namely, a small increase in short rates beyond a certain threshold level. 6 The model focuses on one particular source of run-like fragility that might emanate from the asset-management sector, but there are others. One that the paper briefly mentions, and that is worth a fuller treatment, has to do with the potential for outflows of assets under management (AUM) from open-end funds. Note that the model is effectively one of a closed-end fund, since the manager is assumed to have a fixed amount of AUM; the fragility, in this case, comes entirely from the manager's portfolio allocation decision and from the strategic interaction among fund managers . But another source of run-like risk comes from the strategic interaction among fund investors and the incentives that each of them may have to get out before others do when asset values are at risk of declining. These AUM-driven run dynamics are more likely to arise in those open-end funds that hold relatively illiquid assets. The key question in determining whether there is a strategic complementarity in the withdrawal decisions of fund investors is, When investor i exits on day t , does the net asset value (NAV) at the end of the day that defines investor i 's exit price fully reflect the ultimate price effect of the sales created by his exit? If not, those investors who stay behind are hurt, which is what creates run incentives. And, if the run incentives are strong enough, then a credit-oriented bond fund starts looking pretty bank-like. The fact that its liabilities are not technically debt claims is not all that helpful in this case--they are still demandable, and hence investors can pull out very rapidly if the terms of exit create a penalty for being last out the door. A fund's stated NAV is less likely to keep pace with the ultimate price impact of investor withdrawals if the underlying assets are illiquid, for two distinct reasons. First, some of the assets are likely to have stale prices--that is, not to have been recently marked to market. And, second, if most of a fund's assets are illiquid securities, its manager will be inclined to accommodate early exits by drawing down on the fund's cash reserve while planning to sell securities and replenish the cash stock later. Why, at the end of the day, should one care if run-like incentives come predominantly from the strategic behavior of fund investors, as opposed to that of fund managers? Isn't there the same worrisome fragility in either case? Perhaps, but the policy response may differ depending on the exact diagnosis. In the former case, when the primary worry is AUM runs on the part of investors, there is at least in principle a natural regulatory fix:One could impose exit fees on open-end funds that are related to the illiquidity of the funds' assets, in an effort to make departing investors more fully internalize the costs that they impose on those who stay behind. In the latter case, when the problem is driven more by the portfolio choices of fund managers, it is harder for me to see an obvious regulatory response, so I am more inclined to share the authors' view that if there is, indeed, a significant financial stability problem, monetary policy would be left to take up some of the slack. To be clear, I am not advocating for exit fees of the sort I just described; I do not think we know enough about the empirical relevance of the AUM-run mechanism, to say nothing of its quantitative importance, to be making such recommendations at this point. But, given the detailed nature of the microdata that are available on individual fund holdings and returns, there is clearly room to make significant further progress on this front. Indeed, recent work by Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang is very much in this spirit, although it restricts its analysis to equity funds and doesn't consider the fixed-income categories that are the focus of the current paper. 7 With this framing in mind, let me comment briefly on the empirical work in the paper. There is a lot of it, and I will just touch on a couple of points. A first observation is that the heavy focus on flows in and out of funds is a bit at odds with the theoretical model. As I mentioned earlier, the model, taken literally, is one of closed-end funds with fixed AUM. If one were interested in testing the specific mechanism in the model most directly, it seems to me that one would want to look not at fund flows but rather at the portfolio allocations within each fund. For example, the model suggests that, during the unfolding of an episode of bond market volatility like the one in the spring and summer of last year, we should see a coordinated shift among bond managers out of long-term bonds and into bills so that the average durations of their portfolios would co-move strongly together. There is a well-developed empirical literature on herding among fund managers in their portfolio allocations, but, as far as I know, this work has not looked at how such herding responds to changes in the monetary policy environment. 8 So this avenue seems like a potentially promising one to pursue. The paper's focus on flows in and out of funds is, however, well suited to thinking about mechanisms related to AUM-run dynamics. In this regard, a particularly interesting set of findings has to do with the ability of flows to forecast future asset returns, even controlling for past returns. And, most notably, this forecasting effect is much stronger in the less liquid high-yield and emerging market categories than it is in U.S. Treasury securities; indeed, it is essentially nonexistent in the latter category. While not a decisive test, this pattern is consistent with one of the necessary preconditions for the existence of strategic complementarities and run-like dynamics. Again, the key idea is that, when a fund's assets are illiquid, outflows today are met in part with drawdowns from cash reserves, with the other assets being sold off more gradually over time--hence, the predictable downward pressure on prices going forward. This predictability is what creates the incentive for any given investor to pull out quickly if he or she sees a large number of co-investors pulling out. 9 Let me summarize by noting the areas in which I agree most closely with the authors and by adding one key qualification. First, I think they are absolutely on target in emphasizing that the rapid growth of fixed-income funds--as well as other, similar vehicles--bears careful watching. As they point out, it would be a mistake to be complacent about this phenomenon simply because such funds are unlevered. Other economic mechanisms can mimic the run-like incentives associated with short-term debt financing, and one or more of these mechanisms may well be present in fixed-income funds. Second, I also agree that there is no general separation principle for monetary policy and financial stability. Monetary policy is fundamentally in the business of altering risk premiums such as term premiums and credit spreads. So monetary policymakers cannot wash their hands of what happens when these spreads revert sharply. If these abrupt reversions also turn out to have nontrivial economic consequences, then they are clearly of potential relevance to policymakers. My one qualification is as follows: In the absence of a general separation principle, when one might consider addressing financial stability issues either with regulation or with monetary policy, it becomes all the more critical to get the case-by-case analysis right--that is, to really dig into the microeconomic details of the presumed market failure and to ask when a regulatory intervention is comparatively more efficient than a monetary one, or vice versa. So while I think it is important to remain heterodox and to be open to taking either approach, I would not want to rule out the possibility that some of the risks identified by the authors could be mitigated, at least in part, via a regulatory approach. I look forward to seeing more work that helps us sort through these challenging issues. References Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, and Jeremy C. Stein (2001). " Forecasting Crashes: Trading Volume, Past Returns, and Conditional Skewness in Stock Prices (PDF) ," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 61, pp. 345-81 Chen, Qi, Itay Goldstein, and Wei Jiang (2010). " Payoff Complementarities and Financial Fragility: & Evidence from Mutual Fund Outflows ," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 97 (2), pp. 239-62. Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison (1999). " Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers ," Quarterly Journal of Economics , vol. 114 (2), pp. 389-432. Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig (1983). " Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity ," Journal of Political Economy , vol. 91, pp. 401-19. Feroli, Michael, Anil K. Kashyap, Kermit Schoenholtz, and Hyun Song Shin (2014). "Market Tantrums and Monetary Policy," paper presented at the 2014 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 28. Gertler, Mark, and Peter Karadi (2013). " Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs and Economic Activity (PDF) ," working paper, October. Gilchrist, Simon, David Lopez-Salido, and Egon Zakrajsek (2013). " Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-03. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December. Hanson, Samuel, and Jeremy C. Stein (2012). " Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-46. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin (2003). "Global Games: Theory and Applications," in Mathias Dewatripont, Lars Peter Hansen, and Stephen J. Turnovsky, eds., Advances in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications: Eighth World Congress, vol. 1 . New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 56-114. 1. The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to Nellie Liang for helpful conversations. Return to text 2. See Feroli and others (2014), p. 6. Return to text 3. See, for example, Hanson and Stein (2012); Gertler and Karadi (2013); and Gilchrist, Lopez-Salido, and Zakrajsek (2013). Return to text 4. See Chen, Hong, and Stein (2001). They document that, consistent with a "bubble popping" view, stock returns are more negatively skewed when past returns have been positive and when valuation ratios (for example, market-to-book ratios) are high. Alternatively, the ratio of downside to upside volatility is unusually high in such circumstances. Return to text 5. See Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Return to text 6. This feature is in contrast to many other models in the Diamond-Dybvig (1983) tradition, which have multiple equilibria and hence convey a sense of fragility, but have less to say about what underlying variable tips the scales toward a run-like equilibrium. The more pinned-down nature of the model in this paper comes from an application of the global-games methodology described in Morris and Shin (2003). Return to text 7. See Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2010). Return to text 8. Chevalier and Ellison (1999) is a classic reference. Return to text 9. Indeed, the results in the paper closely parallel those in Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang (2010), who find that fund flows forecast future returns more strongly among those equity funds that hold relatively illiquid stocks (for example, small-cap stocks). Moreover, Chen, Goldstein, and Jiang cast their regressions as being an explicit test of the strategic-complementarity hypothesis. Return to text Last Update: February 28, 2014 Back to Top
