1 Presentation to NBER East Asia Seminar on Economics, San Francisco, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on June 19, 2015 Data Is the New Black: Monetary Policy by the Numbers Good morning and welcome. It’s a pleasure to have everyone at the San Francisco Fed. Seeing as this is a conference on East Asia, and as I recently returned from a trip to the region, I thought I’d say a few words about that visit. Then I’ll give a brief U.S. economic outlook, after which I’ll tell you the exact date we will be raising rates. Before anyone calls their broker, that was a joke. As always, my views are mine and mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. China As I said, I recently returned from a trip that included Singapore, Hong Kong, and China. The full debrief would be too lengthy to recount here, so I’ll keep my remarks to the subject most on people’s minds: China. It’s fair to say that many current discussions of China on this side of the world have turned from a once awed envy of its extraordinary rise to a pessimistic prognostication of an imminent hard landing. People point to slower growth, the unsustainability of the current export- driven model, concern about debt buildup, and the risk of falling investment. This translates into worry about the repercussions both regionally and around the globe. This is a subject I heard in every meeting and every conversation. I have to say that after having firsthand discussions with officials, analysts, and policymakers in the region, I walked away a lot less concerned about China’s near-term economic outlook than when I walked in. 2 The main issue is that the Chinese government is facing a trade-off between their short- run growth goal and their longer-term reform agenda. For instance, late last year they instituted a number of reform initiatives that clamped down on local government borrowing. This was intended to rationalize credit allocation, but it was also having a negative effect on growth, in no small part because it impacted infrastructure investment, a key engine of growth for China these days. This is where response clearly indicates intent. In this case, the government eased up and postponed those reforms to maintain solid economic growth. This has happened in a number of instances; when the Chinese authorities see growth slowing, or other negative economic impacts, they take steps to keep growth near their target level. Many of the issues that overseas commentators are worried about can be addressed with fiscal and other policies, and China has proven again and again to have both the will and the leeway to take the necessary policy actions. I’m confident that they will do so again if needed. They are also realistic about what that target growth level should be. The days of double- digit growth are behind China. Most economists and officials there understand that the number is likely to move even lower than the current 7 percent target, due to myriad factors including demographics and the simple fact that years of prosperity and success have moved China into a bracket in which there’s a lot less road to make up and therefore less growth required to power to the top. In fact, you hear the phrase “new normal” just as much in China as you do here. For us, it’s the possibility of changing norms in a post-recession economy. For them, it’s an acknowledgment that they can’t look to meet some outdated growth target. The cost of taking this measured approach may be extending the horizon for some of their reforms. Nonetheless, it’s clear that they’ve continued to make strong progress on the 3 reform agenda, including financial market liberalization, movements towards internationalization of the renminbi, and a move to a more market-oriented economy. Of course, nothing is certain, and China still faces daunting challenges as it makes its way down the reform-agenda road. But all in all, I came back from Asia with a firm sense of two things: First that, to paraphrase Mark Twain, reports of China’s economic death are greatly exaggerated, and second, Singapore is way too hot to wear a suit and tie. Reading the tea leaves of first-quarter growth Turning to our side of the globe, the official reading of first-quarter real gross domestic product (GDP) growth was admittedly very poor. However, on closer inspection, the numbers weren’t nearly as bad as they appeared. Research at the San Francisco Fed and elsewhere has highlighted unusual seasonal patterns in the GDP numbers, with first-quarter growth tending to come in well below that in other quarters.1 The Bureau of Economic Analysis uses a bottom-up method to calculate seasonal adjustments at a narrow level to arrive at its overall numbers. They do this for a number of reasons that are appropriate for their purposes. But for monetary policy, it’s better to have the most accurate reflection of the broad economy. To get a measure that avoids seasonal patterns, SF Fed economists ran a second round of seasonal adjustment, not just on GDP, but on gross domestic income (GDI) and something called GDP Plus, a new measure of economy-wide activity that combines GDP and GDI and strips out the extraneous noise.2 1 Rudebusch, Wilson and Mahedy (2015). See also Gilbert et al. (2015), Groen and Russo (2015), Liesman (2015), and Stark (2015). 2 For more information on GDP Plus, see Aruoba et al. (2013) and http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/real-time-center/gdpplus/. 4 After correcting for recurring seasonal patterns in this way, the data show GDP actually grew about 1½ percent in the first quarter. GDI and GDP Plus growth were about 3 and 2¾ percent, respectively. Based on these corrected numbers and relative to trend growth of about 2 percent, growth appears to have been roughly on track in the first quarter. More recent data on spending have been encouraging, indicating the economy is still on a solid trajectory with a good deal of forward momentum. Looking forward, I expect growth to average about 2¾ percent for the next several quarters, then slow to a more sustainable pace next year. Employment Despite the mixed signals we’re getting on spending growth in the first quarter, the signs from the labor market have been consistent, marked by continued, solid improvement. Not only has there been strong job growth, but the data show most of those new jobs are full-time and higher paying. A wide set of other measures of labor market conditions have continued to trend upward as well. This is all welcome news, but it does provoke the question: When will we have reached our employment goal? The simple answer is when we hit the natural rate of unemployment, which in my estimation is 5.2 percent. The data convince me that we’ll be there before the end of the year. But there are other measures of labor market underutilization that suggest there’s additional labor market slack out there. As I said, we’re making good progress across most measures of the labor market. One is unemployed people who’ve dropped out of the labor force but still want to work, for instance. The good news is that that figure has come way down and is now just where you’d expect it to be given the modest amount of overall slack in the labor market. 5 One remaining puzzle is the still large number of people working part-time who want to be full time. So-called involuntary part-time work soared during the recession and has remained unusually high during the recovery. The question here is, how much of that is due to an economy still not at full strength and how much is due to other, more persistent influences? Recent research by SF Fed staff shows that most of the rise in involuntary part-time work was, in fact, related to the economic downturn. But there is an outside component—largely reflecting changes in industry employment shares and demographics—that may account for much, if not all, of the high rate of involuntary part-time work.3 We aren’t yet sure about the life span of these factors; they could dissipate over time, or they could reflect a permanent shift—another “new normal” of the post-recession world.4 But they suggest that the current rate of involuntary part-time employment does not indicate a level of slack that is out of proportion with other indicators. Another positive sign regarding the labor market is the increases we are seeing in wages. For some time, there was concern that this was an area seemingly immune to the recovery. In actuality, the stagnation in wage growth wasn’t particularly surprising, because history and experience show us that wage growth doesn’t really start to pick up until the economy nears full employment. Now that wage growth is starting to take off across multiple measures, it further confirms that the labor market is nearly healed. While businesses aren’t always thrilled about the prospect of paying workers more, a pickup in wages is a sign of a healthy economy. It’s good for the labor market, good for household income, good for consumer spending, and therefore good for business. In fact, what’s really been missing in this recovery is wage growth that’s around 3 or 3½ percent. That’s the rate I’d expect in a fully functioning economy with a 2 percent inflation rate. Now we’re starting to see that come to fruition, and it’s a good sign. 3 Daly and Hobijn (2014, 2015). 4 Valletta and Van der List (2015). See also Cajner et al. (2014). 6 Taken together, all signs point to a labor market that has made huge progress over the last few years and is zeroing in on full employment. We may not have far to go to close the remaining gap, though there is still some work to be done. As I mentioned, I see us reaching full employment by later this year. As we make our way to an economy that’s fully back on track, it’s important to consider what we should expect along the way. The pace of both growth and the decline in the unemployment rate have slowed recently, and that’s to be expected. When unemployment was at its 10 percent peak during the height of the Great Recession, and as it struggled to come down during the recovery, we needed a fast pace of decline. With the goal in sight, however, the urgency is not the same. Then, we needed to create lots of jobs to get the economy back on track; now, we’re near the end zone, and there are fewer yards to go. Looking towards next year, what we really want to see is an economy that’s growing at a steady pace of around 2 percent. If jobs and growth kept the same pace as last year, we would seriously overshoot our mark and the economy would overheat. I want to see continued improvement, but it’s not surprising, and it’s actually desirable, that the pace is slowing. Inflation Of course, nothing is perfect. Even with the positive signs I’ve mentioned, inflation is still well below our 2 percent goal. In fact, it has remained stubbornly below 2 percent for over three years now. The low rate of inflation today is in part due to transitory factors like the recent fall in energy prices and the strength of the dollar.5 Now we’re seeing oil edging higher and the dollar edging lower, so the downward pressure from those factors will recede. In addition, with the economy nearing full strength, we should start seeing signs that underlying inflation trends are coming back up. But, so far, that’s a forecast, not a reality. In that regard, recent inflation 5 Williams (2015). 7 readings are okay—“okay” being a technical economic term—but I have yet to see convincing signs that the underlying trend in inflation has bottomed out and is poised to move back to 2 percent. So the inflation data haven’t been discouraging, but they haven’t been as encouraging as I would like either. Nonetheless, I still expect inflation to move back up to our target over the next couple of years. With a strengthening economy, special factors dissipating, wages on the rise, inflation expectations stable at 2 percent, and, importantly, full employment in sight, I see all the factors in place to meet our inflation goal by the end of next year.6 But the point of being data dependent is that information drives your decisions; and while my forecast looks great, I am wary of acting before gathering more evidence that inflation’s trajectory is on the desired path. Implications for monetary policy Which leads to the part people really care about: What does this mean for interest rates? As I say without fail, policy is data dependent. And the difficulty of being data dependent is that data can be all over the place, as my discussion of first-quarter growth attests. Until I have more confidence that inflation will be moving back to 2 percent, I’ll continue to be in wait-and-see mode regarding raising interest rates. That doesn’t mean I’m changing my forecast; it means economic forecasting and the data-based assessments required to make enormously impactful policy decisions are two different things. I’ll be looking at the evidence, and every FOMC meeting is on the table. I still believe this will be the year for liftoff, and I still believe that waiting too long to raise rates poses its own risks. I know not everyone agrees and there are those who believe we should wait until we’re nipping at the heels of 2 percent. My reasons for advocating a rise before that happens remain the same. Monetary policy has long and variable lags, as Milton Friedman 6 See Nechio (2015) regarding inflation expectations. 8 famously taught us.7 Specifically, research shows it takes at least a year or two to have its full effect.8 We’re therefore dealing with my favorite analogy: The car speeding towards a red light. If you don’t ease up on the gas, you’ll have to slam on the brakes, possibly even skidding into the intersection. Waiting until we’re close enough to dance with 2 percent means the very real risk of having to dramatically raise rates to reverse course, which could destabilize markets and potentially derail the recovery. I see a safer course in starting sooner and proceeding more gradually. It’s also important to remember that when we do raise rates, we will not be instituting tight policy; we’ll be easing back on extremely accommodative policy, and those are two very different things. Policy will continue to be accommodative, and the Fed’s $4 trillion-plus balance sheet will continue to provide substantial stimulus. There’s no need to worry that we’re cutting the legs out from underneath the economy. Conclusion All in all, things are looking good, despite some mixed signals from the data from earlier in the year. I see growth on a good trajectory, full employment in sight, wages on the rise, and inflation gradually moving back up to meet our goal. I can’t tell you the date of liftoff…but I couldn’t anyway. I can say that it’s going to be an interesting rest of the year for monetary policy, and the Fed in general. Thank you. References Aruoba, S. Borağan, Francis X. Diebold, Jeremy Nalewaik, Frank Schorfheide, and Dongho Song. 2013. “Improving GDP Measurement: A Measurement-Error Perspective.” Federal Reserve Bank of 7 Friedman (1961). 8 Havranek and Rusnak (2013). 9 Philadelphia Working Paper 13-16. http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/publications/working-papers/2013/wp13-16.pdf Cajner, Tomaz, Dennis Mawhirter, Christopher Nekarda, and David Ratner. 2014. “Why Is Involuntary Part-Time Work Elevated?” FEDS Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 14. http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2014/why-is-involuntary-part-time- work-elevated-20140414.html Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2014. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips Curve.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 46(s2), pp. 51–93. Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2015. “Why Is Wage Growth So Slow?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015- 01 (January 5). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/january/unemployment-wages-labor-market-recession/ Friedman, Milton. 1961. “The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 69(5), pp. 447−466. Gilbert, Charles E., Norman J. Morin, Andrew D. Paciorek, and Claudia Sahm. 2015. “Residual Seasonality in GDP.” FEDS Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 14. http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/residual-seasonality-in-gdp- 20150514.html Groen, Jan, and Patrick Russo. 2015. “The Myth of First-Quarter Residual Seasonality.” Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 8. http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2015/06/the-myth-of-first-quarter-residual- seasonality.html Havranek, Tomas, and Marek Rusnak. 2013. “Transmission Lags of Monetary Policy: A Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(4, December), pp. 39–75. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q4a2.htm Liesman, Steve. 2015. “Why Is the Economy Always So Weak in the First Quarter? Nobody Really Knows.” CNBC, April 22. http://www.cnbc.com/id/102605010 Nechio, Fernanda. 2015. “Have Long-Term Inflation Expectations Declined?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-11 (April 6). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/april/low-long-term-inflation-survey-based-forecast/ Rudebusch, Glenn D., Daniel Wilson, and Tim Mahedy. 2015. “The Puzzle of Weak First-Quarter GDP Growth.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-16 (May 18). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2015/may/weak-first-quarter-gdp-residual-seasonality- adjustment/ Stark, Tom. 2015. “First Quarters in the National Income and Product Accounts.” Research RAP Special Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, May 14. https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research- and-data/publications/research-rap/2015/first_quarters_national_income_product_accounts.pdf Valletta, Rob, and Catherine van der List. 2015. “Involuntary Part-Time Work: Here to Stay?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-19 (June 8). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/june/involuntary-part-time-work-labor-market-slack-post-recession-unemployment/ 10 Williams, John C. 2015. “Looking Forward, Forward Looking: The Path for Monetary Policy.” Presentation to the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, May 12. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2015/may/data-driven- monetary-policy-new-york-association-business-economics/

1 Presentation to International Conference of Commercial Bank Economists, Los Angeles, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on July 8, 2015 The Recovery’s Final Frontier? Good morning, it’s a pleasure to be here. I’d like to give you the “straight, no chaser” view today; my outlook on the economy, where we are, where we’re headed, and what that means for monetary policy going forward. While the headline is not quite “man bites dog,” I’m happy to say that, overall, things are looking better and better—and are actually quite good. Our employment goal is in sight, though there’s still some way to go until we can say the same for inflation. And that means these continue to be interesting times for monetary policy. As always, my views are mine and mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Interpreting first-quarter growth A good deal of the recent commentary—and concern—has focused on the admittedly weak official reading of first-quarter gross domestic product (GDP), which was essentially flat. There’s been a lot of speculation about what it all means: Is it an indication that the recovery is stalling? What does it mean for employment? At the risk of sounding like an apostate, it actually doesn’t bother me too much. Because on closer inspection, and with alternative analysis, the numbers were much better than they seemed. The government agency that computes GDP and related economic statistics, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, uses a bottom-up method to account for seasonal adjustments to arrive at its overall numbers. They do this for a number of reasons that are appropriate for their purposes. But for monetary policy, it’s preferable to have the most accurate reflection of the broader 2 economy. Research at the San Francisco Fed and elsewhere has highlighted that even after the BEA’s seasonal adjustment, first-quarter GDP growth tends to come in well below that in other quarters.1 To get a measure that avoids seasonal patterns, SF Fed economists ran a second round of seasonal adjustment, not just on GDP, but on gross domestic income (GDI) and something called GDP Plus, a new measure of economy-wide activity that combines GDP and GDI and strips out the extraneous noise.2 After making this modification for recurring seasonal patterns, the data show GDP actually grew about 1½ percent in the first quarter. GDI and GDP Plus grew at about 3 and 2¾ percent, respectively. Based on these revised numbers, and relative to trend growth of around 2 percent, the first quarter appears to have been more or less on track. More recent data on spending have also been encouraging, indicating the economy is still on a solid trajectory with a good deal of forward momentum. Looking forward, I expect growth to average about 2¾ percent for the remainder of the year, then slow to a more sustainable pace next year. International outlook Since I’m speaking to an organization that has “international” in its title, I suppose it would be impossible to avoid the subject of risks from abroad, particularly as they’ve been dominating the headlines the past several weeks. A full global forecast would take up more time than I have—and more patience than you have—so I’ll focus on the two countries everyone cares about most: China and Greece. 1 Rudebusch, Wilson, and Mahedy (2015). See also Gilbert et al. (2015), Groen and Russo (2015), Liesman (2015), and Stark (2015). 2 For more information on GDP Plus, see Aruoba et al. (2013) and http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/real-time-center/gdpplus/. 3 I visited China recently, and I arrived fully cognizant of the concerns people highlight— slower growth, the unsustainability of the current export-driven model, debt buildup, bubbles in the equity and housing markets, the risk of falling investment, and the overall international implications of those risks. But I have to say that, after talking to officials and academics there, I was a lot less concerned about China’s near-term economic outlook on my return flight than I was heading over. The Chinese government is again facing a tradeoff between their short-run growth goal and their longer-term reform agenda. But it’s clear that when the Chinese authorities see growth slowing, they take steps to keep it near their target level. Many of the issues that overseas commentators are worried about can be addressed with fiscal and other policies, and China has shown that it has both the will and the leeway to take the necessary policy actions. They are also realistic about what that target growth level should be. The days of double- digit growth are behind China. Most economists and officials there understand that the number is likely to move even lower than the current target of 7 percent, due to multiple factors including demographics and the simple fact that years of economic success have moved China into a bracket in which there’s a lot less road to make up and therefore less growth required to power to the top. They know they can’t aim for an outdated growth target. The cost of taking this measured approach may be extending the horizon for some of their reforms. Nonetheless, it’s clear that they’ve continued to make progress on the reform agenda, including financial market liberalization, movements towards internationalization of the renminbi, and a move to a more market-oriented economy. As for Greece, an ultimate decision appears to be a moveable feast. What I can say is this: Yes, there are risks, but I see them as unlikely to overturn the otherwise strong 4 fundamentals of the U.S. economy. The financial situation there is certainly precarious. And the possibility of a Greek exit from the euro is looming larger. It is a tragedy for Greece that it finds itself on the brink of an even more severe financial crisis and further economic turmoil. But it can perhaps be heard as a soothing chorus that the direct exposure of foreign investors is relatively limited, and the European Central Bank appears to have the means and will to limit the financial fallout that could affect the rest of the euro area. While a worst-case scenario of a Greek exit from the euro leading to sizable financial and economic impacts on the global economy cannot be ruled out, it remains an unlikely tail risk. Employment Returning to the U.S., there were some concerns that the apparent slowdown in spending growth could spill over to employment, but the signs from the labor market have been consistently resilient and positive. Not only has there been solid job growth, but the data show most of those new jobs are full-time and higher paying. We have also seen a dramatic decline in long-term unemployment over the past few years. In fact, a wide set of measures of labor market conditions have continued to show improvement across the board. Most importantly, our employment goal is in sight. Economists tend to think of full employment as having reached the “natural rate” of unemployment, the rate we should expect in a fully functioning economy. Most put it between 5 and 5.5 percent; my estimation, to be exact, is 5.2 percent. So, with the unemployment rate now at 5.3 percent, we are obviously tantalizingly close. My forecast sees the unemployment rate continuing to edge down, falling to around 5 percent by the end of this year, and even drifting slightly below 5 percent next year. Of course, there are other measures of labor market underutilization. As I said, we’re making good progress across a broad spectrum of indicators. For instance, people who’ve 5 dropped out of the labor force but still want to work. That figure has come way down and is now about where you’d expect it to be given the overall state of the labor market. But there are other areas that suggest there may be some lingering slack. One is the still large number of part-time workers who would rather be full time. So-called involuntary part-time work soared during the recession and has remained unusually high during the recovery. The question we’re asking is: How much of that is due to an economy that still hasn’t reached full strength and how much is due to more persistent influences? Recent research by SF Fed staff shows that most of the rise in involuntary part-time work was, in fact, related to the economic downturn. But there is an outside component—largely reflecting changes in industry employment shares and demographics—that may account for much, if not all, of the rest of it.3 We aren’t yet sure about the life span of these factors; they could dissipate over time, or they could reflect a permanent shift—another “new normal” of the post-recession world. But when you take them into account, they point to the current rate of involuntary part-time employment being more or less in proportion, slack-wise, to other indicators. So, while I have the policymaker’s curse of approaching things with a certain amount of trepidation, it looks like the labor market is bringing home a good report card in just about every class. Another positive sign is the recent increases in wages. For some time, there was concern that wages were somehow immune to the recovery’s positive influences. In fact, the stagnation in wage growth wasn’t particularly surprising, because history and experience show us that wages don’t usually start to pick up until the economy nears full employment.4 Now that wage growth is starting to take off, based on the most comprehensive indicators, it offers further confirmation 3 Valletta and van der List (2015). See also Cajner et al. (2014). 4 Daly and Hobijn (2014, 2015). 6 that the labor market is nearly healed. While businesses aren’t always thrilled about the prospect of paying workers more, this pickup is a sign of a healthy economy. It’s good for the labor market, household income, and consumer spending, and is therefore good for business. In fact, what’s really been missing in this recovery is wage growth of around 3 or 3½ percent. That’s the rate I’d expect in a fully functioning economy with a 2 percent inflation rate. Now we’re starting to see that come to fruition, and it’s a good sign. The employment side of our mandate has made tremendous progress over the past few years, and taken together, all signs point to a labor market that is zeroing in on full employment. However, as we make our way back to an economy that’s at full health, it’s important to consider what we should expect along the way. The pace of output and employment growth, as well as the decline in the unemployment rate, have slowed recently…but that’s to be expected. Last year the economy added slightly more than 3 million jobs. So far this year, we’re on track to add about 2.5 million, with a further slowdown likely. When unemployment was at its 10 percent peak during the height of the Great Recession, and as it struggled to come down during the recovery, we needed a fast pace of decline. With the goal in sight, however, the urgency is not the same. Then, we needed to create lots of jobs to get the economy back on track; now that we’re getting closer, the pace of job gains needs to start slowing to more normal levels. Looking towards next year, what we really want to see is an economy that’s growing at a steady pace of around 2 percent. If jobs and growth kept the same pace as last year, we would seriously overshoot our mark. I want to see continued improvement, but it’s not surprising, and it’s actually desirable, that the pace is slowing. 7 Inflation Of course, nothing is perfect. I generally think of myself as an optimist, and as someone once said, “Being an optimist after you’ve got everything you want doesn’t count.” Accordingly, even with the positive signs I’ve mentioned, I still don’t have everything I want: Inflation is still well below our 2 percent goal. In fact, it has been virtually intransigent, stubbornly refusing to meet our goal for over three years now. Today’s low rate is in part due to transitory factors like the past fall in energy prices and the strength of the dollar.5 With oil prices having moved back up from past lows and the dollar retracing some of its past gains, their effects on inflation will recede. In addition, with the economy nearing full strength, we should start seeing signs that underlying inflation trends are coming back up. But, so far, that remains a forecast, not a reality. Recent inflation readings are fine, to use a technical economic term. But they haven’t yet shown convincing signs that the underlying trend has bottomed out and is poised to start moving back up to 2 percent. In a nutshell: the inflation data haven’t been discouraging, but they haven’t been as encouraging as I would like, either. Nonetheless, I still expect inflation to move back up to our target over the next couple of years. With a strengthening economy, special factors dissipating, wages on the rise, inflation expectations stable at 2 percent, and, importantly, full employment right around the corner, I see all the factors in place to meet our inflation goal by the end of next year.6 But the point of being data dependent is that information drives your decisions; and while my forecast looks great, I am wary of acting before gathering more evidence that inflation’s trajectory is on the desired path. 5 Williams (2015). 6 See Nechio (2015) regarding inflation expectations. 8 Implications for monetary policy Which leads to everyone’s favorite question: What does this mean for monetary policy? By which, I obviously mean interest rates, which is apparently what most people care about. As I say without fail, policy is data dependent. And the difficulty of being data dependent is that data can be all over the place. Until I have more confidence that inflation will be moving back to 2 percent, I’ll continue to be in wait-and-see mode. That doesn’t mean I’m changing my forecast; it means economic forecasting and the data-based assessments required to make impactful policy decisions are two different things. I’ll be looking at the evidence, and, as I’ve said almost as much as I’ve uttered the phrase “data dependent,” every FOMC meeting is on the table. I still believe this will be the year for liftoff, and I still believe that waiting too long to raise rates poses its own risks. I know not everyone agrees and there are those who believe we should wait until we’re nipping at the heels of 2 percent. My reasons for advocating a rise before that happens remain the same. Monetary policy has long and variable lags, as Milton Friedman famously taught us.7 Specifically, research shows it takes at least a year or two to have its full effect.8 We’re therefore dealing with my favorite analogy: The car speeding towards a red light. If you don’t ease up on the gas, you’ll have to slam on the brakes, possibly even skidding into the intersection. Waiting until we’re close enough to dance with 2 percent means running the very real risk of having to dramatically raise rates to reverse course, which could destabilize markets and potentially derail the recovery. I see a safer course in starting sooner and proceeding more gradually. 7 Friedman (1961). 8 Havranek and Rusnak (2013). 9 It’s also important to remember that when we do raise rates, we will not be instituting tight policy; we’ll be easing back on extremely accommodative policy, and those are two very different things. Policy will continue to be accommodative, and the Fed’s $4 trillion-plus balance sheet will continue to provide substantial stimulus. There’s no need to worry that we’re cutting the legs out from underneath the economy. Conclusion All in all, things are looking good. I see growth on a solid trajectory, full employment just in front of us, wages on the rise, and inflation gradually moving back up to meet our goal. I can’t tell you the date of liftoff, but I can say that it’s going to be an interesting rest of the year for monetary policy, and the Fed in general. Thank you. 10 References Aruoba, S. Borağan, Francis X. Diebold, Jeremy Nalewaik, Frank Schorfheide, and Dongho Song. 2013. “Improving GDP Measurement: A Measurement-Error Perspective.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 13-16. http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/publications/working-papers/2013/wp13-16.pdf Cajner, Tomaz, Dennis Mawhirter, Christopher Nekarda, and David Ratner. 2014. “Why Is Involuntary Part-Time Work Elevated?” FEDS Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 14. http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2014/why-is-involuntary-part-time- work-elevated-20140414.html Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2014. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips Curve.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 46(s2), pp. 51–93. Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2015. “Why Is Wage Growth So Slow?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015- 01 (January 5). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/january/unemployment-wages-labor-market-recession/ Friedman, Milton. 1961. “The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 69(5), pp. 447−466. Gilbert, Charles E., Norman J. Morin, Andrew D. Paciorek, and Claudia Sahm. 2015. “Residual Seasonality in GDP.” FEDS Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 14. http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/residual-seasonality-in-gdp- 20150514.html Groen, Jan, and Patrick Russo. 2015. “The Myth of First-Quarter Residual Seasonality.” Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 8. http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2015/06/the-myth-of-first-quarter-residual- seasonality.html Havranek, Tomas, and Marek Rusnak. 2013. “Transmission Lags of Monetary Policy: A Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(4, December), pp. 39–75. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q4a2.htm Liesman, Steve. 2015. “Why Is the Economy Always So Weak in the First Quarter? Nobody Really Knows.” CNBC, April 22. http://www.cnbc.com/id/102605010 Nechio, Fernanda. 2015. “Have Long-Term Inflation Expectations Declined?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-11 (April 6). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/april/low-long-term-inflation-survey-based-forecast/ Rudebusch, Glenn D., Daniel Wilson, and Tim Mahedy. 2015. “The Puzzle of Weak First-Quarter GDP Growth.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-16 (May 18). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2015/may/weak-first-quarter-gdp-residual-seasonality- adjustment/ Stark, Tom. 2015. “First Quarters in the National Income and Product Accounts.” Research RAP Special Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, May 14. https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research- and-data/publications/research-rap/2015/first_quarters_national_income_product_accounts.pdf 11 Valletta, Rob, and Catherine van der List. 2015. “Involuntary Part-Time Work: Here to Stay?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-19 (June 8). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/june/involuntary-part-time-work-labor-market-slack-post-recession-unemployment/ Williams, John C. 2015. “Looking Forward, Forward Looking: The Path for Monetary Policy.” Presentation to the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, May 12. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2015/may/data-driven- monetary-policy-new-york-association-business-economics/

1 Presentation to the Mesa Chamber of Commerce Mesa, Arizona By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on July 15, 2015 The Recovery’s Final Frontier? Good morning, it’s a pleasure to be here. I’d like to give you the “straight, no chaser” view today; my outlook on the economy, where we are, where we’re headed, and what that means for monetary policy going forward. While the headline is not quite “man bites dog,” I’m happy to say that, overall, things are looking better and better—and are actually quite good. Our employment goal is in sight, though there’s still some way to go until we can say the same for inflation. And that means these continue to be interesting times for monetary policy. As always, my views are mine and mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Interpreting first-quarter growth A good deal of the recent commentary—and concern—has focused on the admittedly weak official reading of first-quarter gross domestic product (GDP), which was essentially flat. There’s been a lot of speculation about what it all means: Is it an indication that the recovery is stalling? What does it mean for employment? At the risk of sounding like an apostate, it actually doesn’t bother me too much. Because on closer inspection, and with alternative analysis, the numbers were much better than they seemed. The government agency that computes GDP and related economic statistics, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, uses a bottom-up method to account for seasonal adjustments to arrive at its overall numbers. They do this for a number of reasons that are appropriate for their purposes. But for monetary policy, it’s preferable to have the most accurate reflection of the broader 2 economy. Research at the San Francisco Fed and elsewhere has highlighted that even after the BEA’s seasonal adjustment, first-quarter GDP growth tends to come in well below that in other quarters.1 To get a measure that avoids seasonal patterns, SF Fed economists ran a second round of seasonal adjustment, not just on GDP, but on gross domestic income (GDI) and something called GDP Plus, a new measure of economy-wide activity that combines GDP and GDI and strips out the extraneous noise.2 After making this modification for recurring seasonal patterns, the data show GDP actually grew about 1½ percent in the first quarter. GDI and GDP Plus grew at about 3 and 2¾ percent, respectively. Based on these revised numbers, and relative to trend growth of around 2 percent, the first quarter appears to have been more or less on track. More recent data on spending have also been encouraging, indicating the economy is still on a solid trajectory with a good deal of forward momentum. Looking forward, I expect growth to average about 2¾ percent for the remainder of the year, then slow to a more sustainable pace next year. International outlook While first-quarter GDP has been a major focus of discussion lately, the other subject that’s been dominating the headlines is, of course, the situation abroad. A full global forecast would take up more time than I have—and more patience than you have—so I’ll focus on the two countries everyone cares about most: China and Greece. I visited China recently, and I arrived fully cognizant of the concerns people highlight— slower growth, the unsustainability of the current export-driven model, debt buildup, bubbles in 1 Rudebusch, Wilson, and Mahedy (2015). See also Gilbert et al. (2015), Groen and Russo (2015), Liesman (2015), and Stark (2015). 2 For more information on GDP Plus, see Aruoba et al. (2013) and http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/real-time-center/gdpplus/. 3 the equity and housing markets, the risk of falling investment, and the overall international implications of those risks. But I have to say that, after talking to officials and academics there, I was a lot less concerned about China’s near-term economic outlook on my return flight than I was heading over. The Chinese government is again facing a tradeoff between their short-run growth goal and their longer-term reform agenda. But it’s clear that when the Chinese authorities see growth slowing, they take steps to keep it near their target level. Many of the issues that overseas commentators are worried about can be addressed with fiscal and other policies, and China has shown that it has both the will and the leeway to take the necessary policy actions. As for Greece, an ultimate decision appears to be a moveable feast. What I can say is this: Yes, there are risks, but I see them as unlikely to overturn the otherwise strong fundamentals of the U.S. economy. The financial situation there is certainly precarious. And the possibility of a Greek exit from the euro remains a risk. However, the direct exposure of foreign investors is relatively limited, and the European Central Bank appears to have the means and will to limit the financial fallout that could affect the rest of the euro area. While a worst-case scenario of a Greek exit from the euro leading to sizable financial and economic impacts on the global economy cannot be ruled out, it remains an unlikely tail risk. Employment Returning to the U.S., there were some concerns that the apparent slowdown in spending growth could spill over to employment, but the signs from the labor market have been consistently resilient and positive. Not only has there been solid job growth, but the data show most of those new jobs are full-time and higher paying. We have also seen a dramatic decline in 4 long-term unemployment over the past few years. In fact, a wide set of measures of labor market conditions have continued to show improvement across the board. Arizona is a good example of just how far we’ve come. Some areas suffered more during the recession than others, and you were one of the hardest hit. Unemployment’s peak here was just over 11 percent, more than a full point higher than the national average. Now, Arizona is very close to the national rate. Further, a sharp drop in the unemployment rate so far this year suggests solid momentum. As an aside, this is one of the reasons that the Fed has kept its policy accommodative: Neither the recession’s effects nor the recovery’s influence were evenly felt. Because areas like Mesa were harder hit than, say, New York City, they had further to go to rebound. Until recovery was evident across the nation—including in parts of Arizona, Nevada, and elsewhere in my District—we needed the solid foundation for growth that accommodation provides. Overall, our employment goal is in sight. Economists tend to think of full employment as having reached the “natural rate” of unemployment, the rate we should expect in a fully functioning economy. Most put it between 5 and 5.5 percent; my estimation, to be exact, is 5.2 percent. So, with the unemployment rate now at 5.3 percent, we are obviously tantalizingly close. My forecast sees the unemployment rate continuing to edge down, falling to around 5 percent by the end of this year, and even drifting slightly below 5 percent next year. Of course, there are other measures of labor market underutilization. As I said, we’re making good progress across a broad spectrum of indicators. For instance, people who’ve dropped out of the labor force but still want to work. That figure has come way down and is now about where you’d expect it to be given the overall state of the labor market. 5 But there are other areas that suggest there may be some lingering slack. One is the still large number of part-time workers who would rather be full time. So-called involuntary part-time work soared during the recession and has remained unusually high during the recovery. The question we’re asking is: How much of that is due to an economy that still hasn’t reached full strength and how much is due to more persistent influences? Recent research by SF Fed staff shows that most of the rise in involuntary part-time work was, in fact, related to the economic downturn. But there is an outside component—largely reflecting changes in industry employment shares and demographics—that may account for much, if not all, of the rest of it.3 We aren’t yet sure about the life span of these factors; they could dissipate over time, or they could reflect a permanent shift—another “new normal” of the post-recession world. But when you take them into account, they point to the current rate of involuntary part-time employment being more or less in proportion, slack-wise, to other indicators. So, while I have the policymaker’s curse of approaching things with a certain amount of trepidation, it looks like the labor market is bringing home a good report card in just about every class. Another positive sign is the recent increases in wages. For some time, there was concern that wages were somehow immune to the recovery’s positive influences. In fact, the stagnation in wage growth wasn’t particularly surprising, because history and experience show us that wages don’t usually start to pick up until the economy nears full employment.4 Now that wage growth is starting to take off, based on the most comprehensive indicators, it offers further confirmation that the labor market is nearly healed. While businesses aren’t always thrilled about the prospect of paying workers more, this pickup is a sign of a healthy economy. It’s good for the labor 3 Valletta and van der List (2015). See also Cajner et al. (2014). 4 Daly and Hobijn (2014, 2015). 6 market, household income, and consumer spending, and is therefore good for business. In fact, what’s really been missing in this recovery is wage growth of around 3 or 3½ percent. That’s the rate I’d expect in a fully functioning economy with a 2 percent inflation rate. Now we’re starting to see that come to fruition, and it’s a good sign. The employment side of our mandate has made tremendous progress over the past few years, and taken together, all signs point to a labor market that is zeroing in on full employment. However, as we make our way back to an economy that’s at full health, it’s important to consider what we should expect along the way. The pace of output and employment growth, as well as the decline in the unemployment rate, have slowed recently…but that’s to be expected. Last year the economy added slightly more than 3 million jobs. So far this year, we’re on track to add about 2.5 million, with a further slowdown likely. When unemployment was at its 10 percent peak during the height of the Great Recession, and as it struggled to come down during the recovery, we needed a fast pace of decline. With the goal in sight, however, the urgency is not the same. Then, we needed to create lots of jobs to get the economy back on track; now that we’re getting closer, the pace of job gains needs to start slowing to more normal levels. Looking towards next year, what we really want to see is an economy that’s growing at a steady pace of around 2 percent. If jobs and growth kept the same pace as last year, we would seriously overshoot our mark. I want to see continued improvement, but it’s not surprising, and it’s actually desirable, that the pace is slowing. Inflation Of course, nothing is perfect. I generally think of myself as an optimist, and as someone once said, “Being an optimist after you’ve got everything you want doesn’t count.” Accordingly, even with the positive signs I’ve mentioned, I still don’t have everything I want: Inflation is still 7 well below our 2 percent goal. In fact, it has been virtually intransigent, stubbornly refusing to meet our goal for over three years now. Today’s low rate is in part due to transitory factors like the past fall in energy prices and the strength of the dollar.5 With oil prices having moved back up from past lows and the dollar retracing some of its past gains, their effects on inflation will recede. In addition, with the economy nearing full strength, we should start seeing signs that underlying inflation trends are coming back up. But, so far, that remains a forecast, not a reality. Recent inflation readings are fine, to use a technical economic term. But they haven’t yet shown convincing signs that the underlying trend has bottomed out and is poised to start moving back up to 2 percent. In a nutshell: the inflation data haven’t been discouraging, but they haven’t been as encouraging as I would like, either. Nonetheless, I still expect inflation to move back up to our target over the next couple of years. With a strengthening economy, special factors dissipating, wages on the rise, inflation expectations stable at 2 percent, and, importantly, full employment right around the corner, I see all the factors in place to meet our inflation goal by the end of next year.6 But the point of being data dependent is that information drives your decisions; and while my forecast looks great, I am wary of acting before gathering more evidence that inflation’s trajectory is on the desired path. Implications for monetary policy Which leads to everyone’s favorite question: What does this mean for monetary policy? By which, I obviously mean interest rates, which is apparently what most people care about. 5 Williams (2015). 6 See Nechio (2015) regarding inflation expectations. 8 As I say without fail, policy is data dependent. And the difficulty of being data dependent is that data can be all over the place. Until I have more confidence that inflation will be moving back to 2 percent, I’ll continue to be in wait-and-see mode. That doesn’t mean I’m changing my forecast; it means economic forecasting and the data-based assessments required to make impactful policy decisions are two different things. I’ll be looking at the evidence, and, as I’ve said almost as much as I’ve uttered the phrase “data dependent,” every FOMC meeting is on the table. I still believe this will be the year for liftoff, and I still believe that waiting too long to raise rates poses its own risks. I know not everyone agrees and there are those who believe we should wait until we’re nipping at the heels of 2 percent. My reasons for advocating a rise before that happens remain the same. Monetary policy has long and variable lags, as Milton Friedman famously taught us.7 Specifically, research shows it takes at least a year or two to have its full effect.8 We’re therefore dealing with my favorite analogy: The car speeding towards a red light. If you don’t ease up on the gas, you’ll have to slam on the brakes, possibly even skidding into the intersection. Waiting until we’re close enough to dance with 2 percent means running the very real risk of having to dramatically raise rates to reverse course, which could destabilize markets and potentially derail the recovery. I see a safer course in starting sooner and proceeding more gradually. It’s also important to remember that when we do raise rates, we will not be instituting tight policy; we’ll be easing back on extremely accommodative policy, and those are two very different things. Policy will continue to be accommodative, and the Fed’s $4 trillion-plus balance 7 Friedman (1961). 8 Havranek and Rusnak (2013). 9 sheet will continue to provide substantial stimulus. There’s no need to worry that we’re cutting the legs out from underneath the economy. Conclusion All in all, things are looking good. I see growth on a solid trajectory, full employment just in front of us, wages on the rise, and inflation gradually moving back up to meet our goal. I can’t tell you the date of liftoff, but I can say that it’s going to be an interesting rest of the year for monetary policy, and the Fed in general. Thank you. 10 References Aruoba, S. Borağan, Francis X. Diebold, Jeremy Nalewaik, Frank Schorfheide, and Dongho Song. 2013. “Improving GDP Measurement: A Measurement-Error Perspective.” Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Working Paper 13-16. http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/publications/working-papers/2013/wp13-16.pdf Cajner, Tomaz, Dennis Mawhirter, Christopher Nekarda, and David Ratner. 2014. “Why Is Involuntary Part-Time Work Elevated?” FEDS Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 14. http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2014/why-is-involuntary-part-time- work-elevated-20140414.html Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2014. “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips Curve.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 46(s2), pp. 51–93. Daly, Mary C., and Bart Hobijn. 2015. “Why Is Wage Growth So Slow?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015- 01 (January 5). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/january/unemployment-wages-labor-market-recession/ Friedman, Milton. 1961. “The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 69(5), pp. 447−466. Gilbert, Charles E., Norman J. Morin, Andrew D. Paciorek, and Claudia Sahm. 2015. “Residual Seasonality in GDP.” FEDS Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 14. http://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/residual-seasonality-in-gdp- 20150514.html Groen, Jan, and Patrick Russo. 2015. “The Myth of First-Quarter Residual Seasonality.” Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 8. http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2015/06/the-myth-of-first-quarter-residual- seasonality.html Havranek, Tomas, and Marek Rusnak. 2013. “Transmission Lags of Monetary Policy: A Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(4, December), pp. 39–75. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q4a2.htm Liesman, Steve. 2015. “Why Is the Economy Always So Weak in the First Quarter? Nobody Really Knows.” CNBC, April 22. http://www.cnbc.com/id/102605010 Nechio, Fernanda. 2015. “Have Long-Term Inflation Expectations Declined?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-11 (April 6). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/april/low-long-term-inflation-survey-based-forecast/ Rudebusch, Glenn D., Daniel Wilson, and Tim Mahedy. 2015. “The Puzzle of Weak First-Quarter GDP Growth.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-16 (May 18). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2015/may/weak-first-quarter-gdp-residual-seasonality- adjustment/ Stark, Tom. 2015. “First Quarters in the National Income and Product Accounts.” Research RAP Special Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, May 14. https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research- and-data/publications/research-rap/2015/first_quarters_national_income_product_accounts.pdf 11 Valletta, Rob, and Catherine van der List. 2015. “Involuntary Part-Time Work: Here to Stay?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-19 (June 8). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/june/involuntary-part-time-work-labor-market-slack-post-recession-unemployment/ Williams, John C. 2015. “Looking Forward, Forward Looking: The Path for Monetary Policy.” Presentation to the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, May 12. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2015/may/data-driven- monetary-policy-new-york-association-business-economics/

1 Presentation to Bank Indonesia–BIS Conference on “Expanding the Boundaries of Monetary Policy in Asia and the Pacific,” Jakarta, Indonesia By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on August 20, 2015 Measuring the Effects of Monetary Policy on House Prices and the Economy It’s a pleasure to participate in this excellent conference dealing with important and timely issues. This is my first visit to Indonesia and my second trip to Southeast Asia this year. This is a truly fascinating part of the world—in many ways distinct from neighboring regions but also very much connected to the global economy—and I look forward to learning a great deal during my time here. Before I go any further, I should note that, as always, the views I express here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. With that out of the way, let me get to the topic of my talk. The great unresolved question in central banking today is: Should monetary policy be used to foster financial stability, even at the expense of achieving other macroeconomic goals such as inflation and employment? Rivers of ink have already been spilled on this question and no doubt much more will be in coming years. In my talk today, however, I will take a step back from the “big picture” policy questions, such as the pros and cons of “lean” vs. “clean” and the appropriate roles of fiscal, regulatory, and monetary policies in addressing risks to financial stability. Instead, I will put on my researcher’s hat and focus narrowly on one particular issue that is central to thinking about the role of monetary policy in supporting financial stability—the effects of monetary policy on house prices and the overall economy. 2 Monetary policy, housing, and financial stability Why focus on house prices? Although monetary policy’s influence on house prices represents only one channel by which it affects financial stability, it is an important one for a number of reasons. First, the global financial crisis provides an all-too-real example of the devastating effects of a debt-fueled housing boom and crash. And real estate finance has grown enormously in many countries1 and is therefore likely to remain a key source of risk to financial stability. Second, standard economic theory tells us that monetary policy should affect house prices and housing finance more generally.2 All else equal, higher interest rates increase the cost of owning a house, which implies a lower asset value. Hence, there is a prima facie case for considering a role for monetary policy in tempering housing booms in support of financial stability. Third, there is a wealth of data and research on this issue that provides a rich opportunity for analysis and testing of various hypotheses. Of course, this last argument exposes me to the criticism that I am foolishly looking under a lamppost because the light is better there, but so be it. Of course, the effect of monetary policy on house prices is only half of the story: When considering the potential benefits of monetary policy for combatting the risk of a housing boom and ultimately for financial stability, it’s equally important to gauge the effects on other macroeconomic variables of interest, such as inflation and economic activity.3 In many circumstances, macroeconomic and financial stability goals may be well aligned. For example, if the housing sector and the overall economy are both booming, then tighter monetary policy may serve to both reduce the risks to the financial system and keep economic activity from exceeding desired levels. But, in other circumstances, macroeconomic and financial stability goals may 1 2 3 Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2014). See also Mian and Sufi (2014). Kuttner (2012). Yellen (2014). 3 conflict, and policymakers face a tradeoff between the two. As a case in point, Lars Svensson has argued that in Sweden, the costs of higher interest rates in terms of higher unemployment exceed the benefits in terms of reducing financial stability risks.4 Therefore, it is important to quantitatively gauge the costs and benefits of using monetary policy to influence house prices when macroeconomic and financial stability goals do not coincide. Measuring the effects of monetary policy The question remains: How does one best estimate the effects of monetary policy on house prices and other economic variables of interest? Economists typically take one of two approaches. The first is to use economic theory to describe the relationship between variables, say interest rates and house prices. The model can then be used to evaluate the “counterfactual” experiment of a rise in interest rates and compute the simulated effect on house prices or other variables.5 The main strength of this model-based approach is that it gives a clear theoretically grounded answer to the question. The potential shortcoming is that the answer is only as good as the model is at providing a reasonably accurate description of the relationships that occur in the real world. Specifically, standard textbook theories may provide an inadequate description of the determination of house prices.6 This suggests looking to a more evidence-based approach. The second approach focuses more squarely on the empirical evidence and relies less directly on economic theory. In a nutshell, the empirical approach looks at what has typically happened to other variables when interest rates go up (or down). The strengths and weaknesses of this approach are the mirror image of those of the model-based approach. The main strength is that one does not rely so much on having an accurate model. The weakness is that it’s hard to 4 Svensson (2014). 5 Dokko (2009). See also Svensson (2014) and Ungerer (2015). 6 Kuttner (2012). 4 distinguish between statistical correlation and economic causation. Interest rates go up and down in response to economic conditions and also tend to be highly correlated with other variables. However, to answer the question about the effects of a policy decision to change interest rates, it is crucial for one to properly identify times when policy changes are not a response to economic developments, but rather the driver of them. Recent research provides an ingenious way to identify monetary policy actions that are arguably exogenous to domestic economic conditions. It examines the effects of changes in interest rates in countries that have given up their ability to freely adjust interest rates on their own because they fixed their exchange rate to a foreign currency. 7 In such circumstances, changes in domestic interest rates are tied to developments in a foreign country, such as the United States, and not to domestic conditions. Thus, one can simply look at the responses of domestic economic variables to changes in interest rates to trace out the effects of monetary policy. Findings Applying this method to a sample of 17 countries over the past 140 years indicates that monetary policy has significant and persistent effects on real house prices and output. Figure 1 shows the responses of short-term interest rates, real house prices, real GDP per capita, and the inflation rate following a shock to monetary policy. These results are based on a slightly modified version of recent research by Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan Taylor.8 The sample covers 1870–2013 (except for the interwar period of 1914–45 and the oil crisis years of 1973–80). The estimated responses have been scaled so that the initial rise in short-term interest 7 Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015a, b). 8 Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015a). 5 rates is 1 percentage point. The shaded regions show the 90 percent confidence regions of the estimated effects. Two years after a 1 percentage point increase in the short-term interest rate, real house prices are estimated to decline by over 6 percent, while real GDP per capita declines by nearly 2 percent. This implies a ratio of 3.3 in terms of the decline in house prices for a 1 percent decline in the level of output after two years. Looking at a longer time horizon of three or four years (not shown in the figure), the ratio rises to about 3½. Although imprecisely estimated, inflation also responds negatively to a monetary policy shock after a two-year lag. One caveat in interpreting this result is that by construction the sample only includes countries with fixed exchange rates. Many countries today have adopted inflation targeting or similar regimes with explicit mandates for low inflation, which likely alters the inflation responses to monetary policy shocks relative to a fixed exchange rate regime. Robustness of findings These findings are based on the average response of house prices and other variables to changes in monetary policy. But, do they depend on specific circumstances? In particular, is monetary policy more or less powerful during housing or real estate debt booms that are frequently precursors to financial crises? To assess this possibility, I examined estimated responses to monetary policy during periods when house prices or mortgage debt are high (or low) relative to their underlying trends. In neither case are the estimated effects of monetary policy meaningfully different from the estimates shown in Figure 1. One potential concern with using such a long time sample is that structural change has fundamentally altered the effects of monetary policy on the economy. To assess that possibility, 6 the same analysis is conducted using only data from the period after the Second World War. For this shorter sample, the estimated effect on house prices is somewhat larger and the effect on output is smaller. This results in a larger estimated ratio of 5.7 for the decline in house prices relative to that in output, compared with the full-sample estimates. The main result that monetary policy affects house prices and output is consistent with other estimates reported in the literature. Table 1 provides a summary of findings from numerous research papers using different samples and methodologies. For comparison, the first line of the table reports the results using the full-sample “baseline” estimates described above and shown in Figure 1; the second line reports the results using just the postwar sample. The remainder of the table reports results from other studies. In particular, these studies use different methods to identify exogenous movements in monetary policy than the approach I described earlier. The table reports the percent change in house prices and a measure of economic activity (typically real GDP) two years after a monetary policy shock. The results have been scaled so that the initial movement in the short-term interest rate is 1 percentage point. In cases where I could not get the precise estimates from the author, the numbers reported in the table are estimates based on a visual inspection of the charts included in the papers. Although the individual estimates differ, the estimated ratios of the effect on house prices relative to that on real GDP after two years tend to be clustered between 3 and 6, with a median estimate of about 4. It is worth noting that one of the outliers likely in part reflects the specific measure of economic activity used: Ungerer (2015) reports industrial production, which tends to be more cyclically sensitive than GDP. Overall, the results on the ratio of the effects on house prices relative to GDP appear to be robust, especially for studies that include a large set of countries. 7 To put this in perspective, consider the magnitude of the run-up in house prices in the United States over 2000–06. Figure 2 shows the U.S. house price-to-rent ratio over the past 40 years. In the five years running up to the peak in the spring of 2006, the house price-to-rent ratio increased over 50 percent. Based on the empirical estimates described above, to offset this increase using monetary policy would require a decline in real GDP per capita of over 12 percent. That is far larger than the 5½ percent peak-to-trough decline in real GDP per capita the United States actually experienced in the Great Recession. Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor conduct a similar analysis using a different measure of house price overvaluation, and reach the same overall conclusion.9 Not all of these research papers report effects on inflation; however, consistent with the findings reported above, those that do also find that inflation moves in the same direction as house prices. 10 As noted above, the effects on inflation likely depend on the monetary policy regime, and this issue needs further study. Nonetheless, these findings add to the potential macroeconomic costs of directing monetary policy at house prices or other financial stability goals. 11 Conclusion In summary, I draw two main conclusions from a large volume of research on the effects of monetary policy on house prices. Both are robust across countries, samples, methodologies, and other factors. First, monetary policy actions have sizable and significant effects on house 9 Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015b). 10 Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach (2008). See also Jarocinski and Smets (2008), Iacoviello and Minetti (2008), Calza, Monacelli, and Stracca (2013), and Sá, Towbin, and Wieladek (2011). 11 See Williams (2015) for further discussion. 8 prices in advanced economies. That is, an increase in interest rates tends to lower real (inflation- adjusted) house prices. Second, this reduction in house prices comes at significant costs in terms of reductions in real gross domestic product and inflation. A typical estimate is that a 1 percent loss in GDP is associated with a 4 percent reduction in house prices. This implies a very costly tradeoff of using monetary policy to affect house prices when macroeconomic and financial stability goals are in conflict. 9 Figure 1: Estimated Effects of Monetary Policy Shock Note: Pooled estimates across 17 countries, based on data update to Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015a). Sample: annual data from 1870–2013, excluding the interwar period (1914–1945) and the oil crises period (1973–1980). 10 Figure 2: U.S. House Price Booms and Busts Note: Ratio of CoreLogic single-family house price index and owner-equivalent rent component of the price index for personal consumption expenditures, scaled to equal one at average value over 1980–2000. 11 Table 1: Estimated Effects of 1 percentage point Monetary Policy Shock after 2 Years Source Number of countries House Prices Economic Activity Ratio BASELINE ESTIMATES (BASED ON JORDÀ, SCHULARICK, AND TAYLOR) Full sample 17 -6.3 -1.9 3.3 Postwar sample 17 -8.2 -1.4 5.7 INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE Sá, Towbin, and Wieladek 18 -7.8 -7.6 1.0 Assenmacher-Wesche and Gerlach 17 -10.8 -3.0 3.6 Goodhart and Hofmann 17 -7.2 -1.7 4.2 Iacoviello and Minetti 4 -8.8 -2.1 4.2 Calza, Monacelli, and Stracca 19 -2.3 -0.3 7.9 U.S. EVIDENCE Fratantoni and Schuh -1.7 -2.1 0.8 Ungerer -7.2 -9.3 0.8 Otrok and Terrones -5.7 -1.9 2.9 Jarocinski and Smets -7.8 -1.3 6.0 Del Negro and Otrok -10.4 -0.9 12.0 Median 3.9 Notes: Responses reported as percent change two years after the shock. Economic activity measured as real GDP except for the following: Otrok & Terrones [global GDP]; Sá, Towbin, and Wieladek and Calza, Monacelli, and Stracca [private consumption]; Ungerer [industrial production]; Fratantoni, and Schuh [real non-housing GDP]; and Jordá, Schularick, and Taylor [real GDP per capita]. 12 References Assenmacher-Wesche, Katrin, and Stefan Gerlach. 2008. “Financial Structure and the Impact of Monetary Policy on Asset Prices.” Working Paper 2008-16, Swiss National Bank. http://www.snb.ch/n/mmr/reference/working_paper_2008_16/source/working_paper_2008_16.n.pdf Calza, Alessandro, Tommaso Monacelli, and Livio Stracca, 2013. “Housing Finance and Monetary Policy.” Journal of the European Economic Association 11, pp. 101–122. Del Negro, Marco, and Christopher Otrok. 2007. “99 Luftballons: Monetary Policy and the House Price Boom across U.S. States.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54(7, October), pp. 1,962–1,985. Dokko, Jane, Brian Doyle, Michael T. Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim, Skander Van den Heuvel. 2009. “Monetary Policy and the Housing Bubble.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2009-49, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2009/200949/200949pap.pdf Fratantoni, Michael, and Scott Schuh. 2003. “Monetary Policy, Housing, and Heterogeneous Regional Markets.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 35(4), pp. 557–589. Goodhart, Charles, and Boris Hofmann. 2008. “House Prices, Money, Credit, and the Macroeconomy.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 24(1), pp. 180–205. Iacoviello, Matteo, and Raoul Minetti. 2008. “The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy: Evidence from the Housing Market.” Journal of Macroeconomics 30(1), pp. 69–96. Jarocinski, Marek, and Frank R. Smets. 2008. “House Prices and the Stance of Monetary Policy.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 90(4, July/August), pp. 339–365. https://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/review/08/07/Jarocinski.pdf Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2014. “The Great Mortgaging: Housing Finance, Crises, and Business Cycles.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2014-23, September 2014. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working-papers/wp2014- 23.pdf Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2015a. “Betting the House.” Journal of International Economics 96(S1), pp. S2−S18. Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2015b. “Interest Rates and House Prices: Pill or Poison?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-25 (August 3). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2015/august/interest-rates-and-house-prices-central-bank-goals/ Kuttner, Kenneth. 2012. “Low Interest Rates and Housing Bubbles: Still No Smoking Gun.” Williams College Department of Economics Working Paper 2012-01. http://web.williams.edu/Economics/wp/Kuttner-smoking-gun.pdf Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2014. House of Debt. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 13 Otrok, Christopher, and Marco E. Terrones. 2005. “House Prices, Interest Rates, and Macroeconomic Fluctuations: International Evidence.” Conference paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. https://www.frbatlanta.org/news/conferen/housing2005/otrok_terrones.pdf Sá, Filipa, Pascal Towbin, and Tomasz Wieladek. 2011. “Low Interest Rates and Housing Booms: The Role of Capital Inflows, Monetary Policy, and Financial Innovation.” Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper 79, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. https://www.dallasfed.org/assets/documents/institute/wpapers/2011/0079.pdf Svensson, Lars E.O. 2014. “Inflation Targeting and ‘Leaning against the Wind.’” International Journal of Central Banking 10(2, June), pp. 103–114. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb14q2a5.htm Ungerer, Christoph. 2015. “Monetary Policy, Hot Housing Markets, and Leverage.” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-048. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.048 Williams, John C. 2015. “Macroprudential Policy in a Microprudential World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-18 (June 1). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/june/macroprudential-policy-in-a-microprudential-world/ Yellen, Janet L. 2014. “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability.” Speech at the 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC, July 2. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20140702a.htm
