Modernizing Our Payments System Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Fourth Annual Financial Literacy Day: Understanding Global Markets and Finance The Global Interdependence Center University of South Florida Sarasota-Manatee College of Business Sarasota, FL February 14, 2020 1 Introduction I thank David Kotok and the Global Interdependence Center for this wonderful opportunity to speak on the campus of the University of South Florida, Sarasota-Manatee. As you probably know, the Federal Reserve is very interested in promoting financial literacy. One reason is that our economy performs better if people are equipped with the knowledge to make sound savings and investment decisions. Another reason is that our monetary policy is actually more effective if people understand how it works. I am proud to be on the board of the Council for Economic Education (CEE), which is a champion of both economic and financial literacy for students from kindergarten through high school. The CEE recently released the 2020 Survey of the States, a biennial look into the state of K-12 economic and financial education in the U.S. 1 The results show that progress is being made. Twenty-one states now require high school students to take a course in personal finance, four more than in 2018, and 25 states now require an economics course, three more than in 2018. The CEE is working to encourage more states to adopt such requirements because research indicates that they lead students to make more informed real-world economic decisions, such as those pertaining to college financing. I am also proud that the Cleveland Fed is an active partner with schools across the Fourth Federal Reserve District to improve the financial skills of students and members of our community. You are welcome to visit our learning centers in Cleveland or Cincinnati, but some of our materials are also available online for those of you who’d prefer to stay in the warmth of the Florida sun. 2 I want to spend my time with you today focusing on one particular aspect of our country’s financial system, one that is less understood and is undergoing rapid change: the payments system. The Federal Reserve System plays an important role in helping to ensure that our payments system is efficient, secure, 1 The Council for Economic Education offers many materials to advance financial literacy and economic education on its website at www. https://www.councilforeconed.org/. The Survey of the States is available at https://www.councilforeconed.org/survey-of-the-states-2020/. EconEdLink, at https://www.econedlink.org/, is CEE’s web portal of resources supporting K-12 teachers of economics and finance. 2 The Cleveland Fed’s Learning Center and Money Museum provides materials to foster financial and economic literacy on its website at https://www.clevelandfed.org/learningcenter/explore.aspx. 2 and effective. I recently became chair of the Financial Services Policy Committee (FSPC), which oversees the provision of payment services to depository institutions and the U.S. Treasury by the 12 Federal Reserve Banks. So as a follow-up to the discussion we just heard about new forms of payments, I thought it would be useful to provide you with an update on some of the Fed’s ongoing work to modernize the U.S. payments system, and then offer a policymaker’s perspectives on some payments innovations. Of course, the views I will present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. FedNow SM Service3 Will Be a New Service for Making Real-Time Payments in the U.S. It shouldn’t surprise anyone when I say that a well-functioning and secure payments system is an essential ingredient for a sound economy. Like highways, bridges, and railroads, the payments system is a critical part of the infrastructure of our country; everyone has a stake in a healthy U.S. payments system. According to the 2019 Federal Reserve Payments Study, noncash payments have been growing by almost 7 percent per year since 2015; these include debit and credit card transactions, checks, and direct deposit and automatic payment transactions that go through the automated clearing house system. In 2018 there were 174 billion noncash transactions made in the U.S. – more than 500 payments for every American.4 These transactions totaled over $97 trillion. As the nation’s central bank, the Federal Reserve works to promote the macroeconomic and financial stability of our $21 trillion economy and the Fed’s oversight of and participation in the payments system is a vital part of this work. Last year, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System announced that the Fed would develop a new service called FedNow. This new interbank payments service will allow people all over the country to make payments securely and in real time, at all times of the day and night, including on weekends and 3 “FedNow” is a service mark of the Federal Reserve Banks. 4 See Federal Reserve System (2019). 3 holidays.5 Although payments made through mobile apps and the internet appear to be instantaneous, the underlying infrastructure does not move funds immediately from the payer’s bank to the payee’s bank. Currently, this takes several days. With FedNow, you’ll be able to send and receive payments securely at any time and anywhere, and get access to funds within seconds. This speed will provide economic benefits, making it easier for individuals and businesses to manage money and make time-sensitive payments. This service, along with similar private-sector alternatives like The Clearing House’s Real- Time Payments (RTP ®) service, may be especially beneficial for those households and businesses that don’t have as much funds in reserve, allowing them to avoid late fees when making last minute payments. Similarly, workers who aren’t getting regular payroll checks will be able to get faster access to their wages. The history of the U.S. payments system shows the need for the FedNow service. Over the decades, the evolution of the payments landscape has led to a patchwork of payment vehicles and providers, often lacking interoperability with one another or the ability to combine billing invoice information with a payment. Our payments system is concentrated in the banking system but is quite complex. Currently, there are several platforms for making payments. The automated clearing house (ACH), which was conceived of in the late 1960s, handles smaller value, regularly scheduled payments, like your paycheck or your utility bills, via batch processing of a group of transactions during a predetermined time period. Although ACH was conceived as a way to eliminate the use of paper checks, checks are still used for making some payments. There are credit and debit card systems as well. This complexity makes it harder to foster payments innovations. Indeed, not all parts of the U.S. payments system have kept up with the evolving expectations and demands of consumers and businesses. This has allowed nonbank providers, including fintech companies, to enter the payments business, offering consumers and 5 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019). More information on FedNow is available at the FedNow web site: https://www.frbservices.org/financial-services/fednow/index.html. 4 businesses more modern payments methods that clear and settle on the bank-centric traditional payments infrastructure. The consumers and businesses enjoy a more user-friendly experience, and while it appears that the payments are moving in real time, the actual clearing and settlement of payment instructions on both sides of these transactions take place through the traditional system: transactions are settled in periodic batches, processed one or more days later, and available only during regular banking hours. Of course, this creates some risk because banks might choose to make final funds available to the customer before receiving the covering funds from the payer’s bank. This highlights the need for an updated U.S. payments system that is faster from end-to-end and meets the needs of consumers, businesses, and financial institutions in a safe and efficient way. To address this need, the Fed engaged in several years of study and consultation with a diverse group of payment system stakeholders, including financial institutions of all sizes, private-sector payment networks, businesses, consumers, fintech companies, and software vendors. Those stakeholders made clear that they wanted access to enhanced interbank settlement mechanisms 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year. This was reinforced when the vast majority of respondents to a 2018 Federal Reserve request for comment advocated for the Fed to build a faster payment system. 6 In response to this demand, the Federal Reserve has embarked on building a resilient real-time payments system that will enable our nation’s more than 10,000 banks and credit unions of all sizes to use their existing electronic connections to the Fed and their existing Fed settlement accounts to process real-time retail payments for consumers and businesses. This payments system modernization will bring the U.S. in line with other countries that have developed faster payment networks, including Australia, the U.K., Singapore, India, Mexico, and some European countries. Before making the decision to move forward with the FedNow service, the Fed determined that the 6 See the Federal Register Notice in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019). 5 service met its established criteria for offering a new payments service. These criteria are, first, that it is a service that other providers alone cannot be expected to provide with reasonable effectiveness, scope, and equity; second, that there is a clear public benefit; and, third, that the Fed be will able to fully recover its costs of providing the service over the long run. It is important to know that the Fed will offer FedNow alongside payments services operated by private- sector companies, just as it does today with check, ACH, and wire transfer services. This will encourage competition among operators and provide an added layer of resiliency in the event of downtime at any one of the real-time payment systems. The Fed is working closely with financial institutions and technology firms to prepare for an anticipated launch of the FedNow service in 2023 or 2024. An official launch date has not been announced, as ongoing work to finalize business requirements and design features to meet the needs of potential users of the service will help determine the timeline for implementation. The project is complex, and we want to get it right. Achieving a Broad Reach for Faster Payments to Serve the Public The FedNow service is being developed with the aim of having a broad nationwide reach and the ability to work across different systems. Payments industry stakeholders have emphasized the importance of establishing a real-time payment capability for the nation whereby any payer can reach any payee, regardless of which real-time retail payments system is used by their banks. Such interoperability has not always been a given in the U.S. and no doubt will be a challenge. For example, in the early 1970s, there were several regional automated clearing house associations, each providing clearing and settlement among and between only their own bank members. In most cases, the ACH associations had an agreement with the regional Federal Reserve Banks to help operate the ACH networks. In 1974, the regional ACH associations formed Nacha to facilitate the nationwide clearing of ACH transactions. And by 1978, an interoperator agreement between the Federal Reserve and Nacha was executed to link local ACHs on a nationwide basis. The message exchange protocols that allowed that to happen are still in 6 place today. Interoperability is also a feature of debit cards and of wire transfers. For each of these services, interoperability also evolved over decades and followed different paths to arrive at different models. Today, the Fed, private sector-operators, and other stakeholders are exploring options to ensure a broad reach for faster payments. Interoperability as currently achieved in the ACH system is one possible approach. Another approach is dual participation, where some banks choose to join more than one operator network. This is the prevailing model for high-value, urgent payments processed through the wire transfer networks. Hybrid models are also possible, where service providers are designated as agents in each network and route payments to the receiving bank’s network of choice. A broad reach is achieved by relying on relatively few service providers, each of which establishes connections to all of the payment operators for that payment type, thereby acting as hubs. This type of interoperability characterizes today’s debit card networks. The Fed will be exploring the various possibilities, working with private-sector stakeholders, to arrive at the best solution for ensuring that we deliver a faster payment service that is broadly accessible to consumers and businesses alike so that it best serves the public. Beyond the development of FedNow, the Fed is actively monitoring and studying new technologies and approaches to payments. These approaches don’t always rely on sovereign currency or a country’s central bank to settle payments, or on traditional bank accounts to transact payments. I will use the remainder of my time to discuss one of these payments innovations: digital currencies. Digital C urrencies Cryptocurrencies By now, everyone has heard of Bitcoin, an example of a digital currency, which was introduced in 2008, 7 holding the promise that it could serve as a means of faster payments, as a unit of account, and as a store of value.7 Since Bitcoin’s introduction, thousands of other digital currencies have been created. Such currencies present an innovative approach to processing payments in which a bank or central authority is replaced with a distributed group of anonymous people who verify the accuracy and trustworthiness of the transaction over the internet. Distributed ledger technology, open source software, and a downloadable database of account balances allow decentralized members of the network to vote with their computing power to determine whether a transaction is valid or not.8 Since transactions are cryptographically secured, many have adopted the term “cryptocurrencies” to describe Bitcoin and other similar products. Although its market capitalization has grown to over 100 billion euros, Bitcoin has not seen wide adoption as a means of payment. 9 Its value is volatile, driven by speculation in the currency, making it less useful as a unit of account. Its settlement time has been too slow to make it practical for mainstream payments. In addition, the real costs of operating the system, driven by energy consumption to power a vast web of computers, are much higher than those associated with traditional sovereign currency. The distributed nature of the governance system around Bitcoin and similar digital currencies also makes it more difficult to resolve any disputes that may arise or to decide on technical changes that likely would be needed as the platform grows.10 Stablecoins In part to address some of these challenges, there has been a proliferation of so-called “stablecoins.”11 7 See Nakamoto (2008). 8 See Craig and Kachovec (2019). 9 Brainard (December 18, 2019). 10 See Craig and Kachovec (2019). 11 For informative overviews of stablecoins, including their benefits and challenges, see Bank for International Settlements (October 2019 and December 2019), Financial Stability Board (October 10, 2018; June 6, 2019; and October 18, 2019), Brainard (October 16, 2019 and December 18, 2019), and Evans (2019). 8 Stablecoins are digital currencies designed to minimize price volatility by pegging their value to the value of a stable asset or basket of assets, such as commodities, commercial bank deposits, government securities, or sovereign currencies. This limits the price volatility in the stablecoins, making them candidates for payments that require a stable medium of exchange. The practice of backing a form of money by a stable asset is not new. The gold standard, in which the economic unit of account is based on a fixed quantity of gold, was widely used in the 19 th and early 20th centuries. Another example is Kenya’s M-PESA system, established in 2007 to enable transfers of mobile phone account balances backed by deposits held at commercial banks, which in turn hold government securities. Facebook’s June 2019 announcement of Libra, a stablecoin to be made available to its more than 2.5 billion users, garnered considerable attention because of its potential to reach a global scale in a short period of time. Announcements such as this have served as a wakeup call to regulators, standards-setting bodies, and central banks around the world for the need to study the benefits and risks of stablecoins. A global stablecoin has the potential to deliver some benefits by increasing the speed of certain payments and improving competition in and lowering the cost of making cross-border payments. By enhancing the diversity of the payment system infrastructure, global stablecoins could increase resiliency. Stablecoins might also be attractive to countries that prefer an alternative to the U.S. dollar or the euro for making international transactions, and they could provide an efficient mechanism for commercial banks to settle the payment leg of a wholesale transaction involving the sale of another digital asset. But against these potential benefits, stablecoins also pose some challenges, including a range of legal, governance, and compliance issues. It is likely that there are conflicts in the legal frameworks of different jurisdictions that a global currency may traverse, and such conflicts would need to be reconciled before adoption. For example, there would need to be clarity about when the finality of the payment is achieved 9 and around the rights and obligations of all parties, including on whom or what the stablecoin holder has a claim. Regulators would need to understand who is responsible for operating different aspects of the system, and how international safety and soundness standards, such as the principles for financial market infrastructures, would apply to this type of payments system. In recent congressional testimony, Fed Chair Jerome Powell highlighted some of the concerns about compliance with consumer privacy and protection statutes, including the rules around know-your-customer, anti-money laundering, and consumer data privacy.12 Policymakers also need to assess potential risks to financial stability if stablecoins gain traction. While the availability of stablecoins may enhance payments system resiliency, it could also undermine stability if there is a loss of confidence in a global stablecoin that leads to runs on stablecoin redemptions. Similarly, understanding whether stablecoins would impact the effectiveness of traditional monetary policy tools must also be part of the research agenda. Central bank digital currencies Another development under study is digital currency issued by a central bank.13 This would be just like the physical currency issued by central banks today, but in a digital form and, potentially, without the anonymity of physical currency. Depending on how these currencies are designed, central banks could support them without the need for commercial bank involvement via direct issuance into the end-users’ wallets combined with central-bank-facilitated transfer and redemption services. Of the 66 central bank respondents to a 2020 survey conducted by the Bank for International Settlements, 80 percent are currently or soon will be engaged in digital currency work, mostly related to researching, planning for, or piloting the technology.14 China, Europe, and Russia, among other jurisdictions, have initiatives underway. Some countries, like Sweden, cite the declining use of cash as motivating their interest in 12 Powell (July 10, 2019). 13 Powell (November 19, 2019) discusses the Fed’s view on this subject. Also see Brainard (September 16, 2019, and December 18, 2019), and Evans (2019). 14 See Boar, Holden, and Wadsworth (2020). 10 central bank digital currencies.15 To the extent that they displace cash, such currencies may help to prevent money laundering and tax evasion. Of course, for the same reason, if they are designed without anonymity, they could be used by a totalitarian regime to control its citizenry. In other jurisdictions, like Uruguay, central bank digital currency offers the promise of broadening financial inclusion by being more accessible to underserved segments of the population compared with bank accounts. In another survey, many of the responding central banks expressed interest in central bank digital currency as a way to maintain payment systems that are competitive with costly cash issuance or emerging private-sector alternatives, like Libra. 16 Others have suggested that central bank digital currency could enhance the transmission of monetary policy, offering a more practical way to implement negative interest rates, which some central banks, including the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Swiss National Bank, are currently imposing on reserve deposits to address low inflation and low growth.17 Just as with private-sector digital currencies, a range of potential risks and policy issues surrounding central bank digital currency need to be better understood, and the costs and benefits evaluated, before a central bank would implement a central bank digital currency. In the U.S. a basic question is whether the Federal Reserve has the legal authority to issue such a currency and offer transfer and safekeeping services directly to consumers and businesses. Another is whether the central bank would need to gain access to sensitive consumer and business information in order to issue digital currency and how privacy could be protected. In addition, the design features necessary to prevent illicit activities would need to be determined. Finally, monetary policy transmission, potential disruption to short-term funding markets, and financial stability issues would need to be evaluated. 15 Information on the Swedish central bank’s e-krona project is available on its website at https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/payments--cash/e-krona/. See also Sveriges Riksbank (2018) for several articles on the e-krona, the Riksbank’s potential digital currency. 16 See Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum (2019). 17 See Rogoff (2016) and Bordo and Levin (2017). 11 The outcome of the cost-benefit analysis may differ across countries. The status of the U.S. dollar as a global reserve currency, the stable demand for U.S. bank notes, and the mature, developed nature of the U.S. financial system are all distinguishing factors that would need to be taken into account when considering the benefits vs. the costs of central bank digital currency in the U.S. Central banks around the world, including the Federal Reserve, continue to research this potential payments innovation, and they are sharing what they learn with one another and the public. Conclusion The payment system is undergoing a period of rapid change. The emergence and widespread adoption of new technologies have shaped the public’s expectations for faster, more efficient, secure, and broadly accessible payment services. In the U.S., FedNow, a new real-time payments system, will be an integral part of this modernized payment system. As work on FedNow proceeds, so does the evolution of other payment methods like digital currencies. While each payments innovation offers benefits, it also comes with some risks and policy implications that need to be evaluated. The Federal Reserve is monitoring developments, evaluating potential new payments enhancements, and engaging with private-sector stakeholders and fellow central banks, as we work to modernize the payment system on behalf of the public. 12 References Bank for International Settlements, Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures, “Wholesale Digital Tokens,” December 2019. (https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d190.pdf) Bank for International Settlements, G7 Working Group on Stablecoins, “Investigating the Impact of Global Stablecoins,” October 2019. (https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d187.pdf) Boar, Codruta, Henry Holden, and Amber Wadsworth, “Impending Arrival – A Sequel to the Survey on Central Bank Digital Currency,” Bank for International Settlements, BIS Papers No. 107, January 2020. (https://www.bis.org/publ/bppdf/bispap107.pdf) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Federal Reserve Announces Plan to Develop a New Round-the-Clock Real-Time Payment and Settlement Service to Support Faster Payments,” August 5, 2019. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/other20190805a.htm) Bordo, Michael D., and Andrew T. Levin, “Central Bank Digital Currency and the Future of Monetary Policy,” National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Paper Series, Working Paper 23711, August 2017. (https://www.nber.org/papers/w23711) Brainard, Lael, “Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Evolving Payments Landscape,” Remarks at the Future of Money in the Digital Age, sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics and Princeton University’s Bendheim Center for Finance, Washington, DC, October 16, 2019. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/brainard20191016a.pdf) Brainard, Lael, “Update on Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Challenges Ahead,” Remarks at Monetary Policy: The Challenges Ahead, at the ECB Colloquium, Frankfurt, Germany, December 18, 2019. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/brainard20191218a.pdf) Council for Economic Education, Survey of the States: Economic and Personal Finance Education in Our Nation’s Schools, 2020. (https://www.councilforeconed.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/2020-Survey-of-the-States.pdf) Craig, Ben R., and Joseph Kachovec, “Bitcoin’s Decentralized Decision Structure,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, no. 2019-12, July 16, 2019. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/~/media/content/newsroom%20and%20events/publications/economic%20 commentary/2019/ec%20201912/ec%20201912.pdf) Evans, Charles, “Innovation on the Fringe and at the Core of Financial Services,” Third Annual Fintech Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, November 14, 2019. (https://www.chicagofed.org/~/media/publications/speeches/2019/11-14-19-innovations-on-fringe-and-at- core-pdf.pdf) Federal Reserve System, “The 2019 Federal Reserve Payments Study,” December 2019. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/2019-payments-study-20191219.pdf) 13 Financial Stability Board, “Crypto-asset Markets: Potential Channels for Future Financial Stability Implications,” October 10, 2018. (https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P101018.pdf) Financial Stability Board, “Decentralised Financial Technologies,” Report on Financial Stability, Regulatory and Governance Implications, June 6, 2019. (https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P060619.pdf) Financial Stability Board, “Regulatory Issues of Stablecoins,” October 18, 2019. (https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P181019.pdf) Nakamoto, Satoshi, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System,” 2008. (https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf) Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum, “A Central Bank Will Issue a Consumer-Ready Digital Currency Within Five Years,” October 29, 2019. (https://www.omfif.org/press-releases/a-central-bank-will-issue-a-consumer-ready-digital-currency- within-five-years-a-new-omfif-and-ibm-report-finds/) Powell, Jerome, “Letter to Congressman French Hill on Digital Currencies,” November 19, 2019. (https://src.bna.com/MYB) Powell, Jerome, “Testimony before the House Financial Services Committee,” July 10, 2019. (https://financialservices.house.gov/calendar/eventsingle.aspx?EventID=403999#Wbcast03222017). Rogoff, Kenneth, The Curse of Cash. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2016. Sveriges Riksbank, Special Issue on the e-Krona, Economic Review, Third Quarter, 2018. (https://www.riksbank.se/globalassets/media/rapporter/pov/engelska/2018/economic-review-3-2018.pdf)

Remarks for the Session: “Hall of Mirrors: Feedback Between Monetary Policy and Financial Markets” * Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Panel Remarks at the 2020 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum Sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business New York, NY February 21, 2020 * The views expressed here are those of the author and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. 1 Introduction Welcome to this session entitled “Hall of Mirrors: Feedback Between Monetary Policy and Financial Markets.” I thank Anil Kashyap and Ric Mishkin for inviting me to moderate today’s panel discussion. I have been attending the U.S. Monetary Policy Forum for many years, and I marvel at the organizers’ prescience in anticipating the issues confronting monetary policymakers. This panel’s topic is no exception. It ties together various aspects of modern monetary policymaking, including the information content in asset prices, the role of expectations in monetary policy transmission, policy communications, and the wisdom of crowds. As most of you know, the title of the session harkens back to a 2004 speech made by former Fed Chair Ben Bernanke. Speaking about how monetary policymakers can gain insights from asset price movements, he pointed out that if policymakers are too concerned about meeting market expectations for fear of creating excess volatility, then this undermines the information content of asset prices. As he put it: “Such a strategy quickly degenerates into a hall of mirrors” in which the policymaker is at once sending signals to the market about future policy and trying to gain insights from the market. However, if the market’s expectations get too far out of alignment with those of the policymaker, the policymaker finds herself in a difficult situation. If financial markets expect easier policy than what the policymaker feels is appropriate and she chooses to accommodate the markets’ belief, this suboptimal policy could lead to macroeconomic instability in the future. If, instead, the policymaker chooses to disappoint the markets, she risks increased volatility and an unwanted tightening of financial conditions. Even a policymaker who declares that surprising the markets won’t deter her from following appropriate policy might find that this declaration is not time consistent when faced with such a choice. At the same time, as Amato, Morris, and Shin (2002) point out, the policymaker’s view of the world may not be correct. If policymakers are successful in getting agents to accept their view, then the 2 informational content one might glean from agents’ decisions just reflects back the policymakers’ view and not the agents’ own private information. The potential is that asset prices could deviate far from fundamentals if the policymakers’ view is wrong. The question is: how can policymakers best avoid the “expectations trap” (Chari, Christiano, Eichenbaum, 1998), and utilize the information content in asset prices? Bernanke emphasizes the role of communications. In his view, policymakers should pay attention to the market’s expectations for policy because they are a check on how well the central bank is communicating. When expectations are not well aligned, either policymakers aren’t communicating the rationale for their own policy views very well, or they are communicating, but market participants aren’t buying it. Thus, market expectations speak directly to two factors that are paramount in effective monetary policymaking: transparency and credibility. The Federal Reserve has been on a journey of increased transparency for some time now in order to better communicate the Committee participants’ current views on the economic outlook and appropriate policy.2 Nonetheless, the Committee’s views and those of the market are not always in alignment. In these cases, policymakers shouldn’t just capitulate to the market.3 But they should be open to reassessing their view of the economy based on all incoming information, including the views of participants in the financial markets. We have to be open to the possibility that the markets’ view may be 2 The Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) was launched in October 2007. It summarizes information about the individual FOMC participants’ views on the economic outlook based on their own individual assessments of the appropriate path of policy. In January 2012, the SEP began including information on the individual appropriate policy paths, summarized in the well-known dot plot. In September 2015, the FOMC began publishing the median SEP responses for each variable in the projections. And in March 2017, the SEP began including confidence bands around the median path for each variable. 3 Jeremy Stein and Adi Sunderam (2018) present a model in which society is worse off if the central bank cares too much about bond market volatility and moves policy rates too gradually. 3 more in alignment with fundamentals than the policymakers’ view. Significant misalignment between the central bank’s views and market expectations should also prompt the chair to augment communications in intermeeting periods and to consider improvements in how the central bank explains the rationale for its outlook for the economy, the risks around the outlook, and its view of appropriate monetary policy based on the outlook and risks. I don’t want to underplay the challenges of formulating effective policy communications. Consider the FOMC’s post-meeting statement. It is pretty sparse. The chair’s press conference does give more context, but I’d like to see more of that information in the Committee’s statement, to provide more of a sense of our outlook and why we think our anticipated policy path is appropriate. Our assessment of risks is an important part of the policy discussion. We should provide more information on risks in the statement and consider releasing the balance of risk graphs that are part of the SEP with the other charts released at the time of the press conference. Currently, these charts are released with the minutes three weeks later. What I’m advocating would result in a longer statement – which may not be fashionable in the age of Twitter. But I think it would help us escape the statement’s “Hotel California” problem: words check in but they don’t check out. The market hangs on each word in the statement, so there is a legitimate reluctance to change any word from one meeting to the next because of the signal it might send to the market. If we used more words to explain things, each word would carry less weight. The language would be less boilerplate. This would free us to explain our rationale and change the statement’s language productively from meeting to meeting without fear of sending the wrong message. One last comment before I introduce our speakers. I’ve been talking about the market’s expectations as if there is one monolithic market. But, of course, that isn’t correct. The market is made up of many individual participants. In liquid markets, asset prices aggregate these individual investors’ beliefs about the current and future state of the economy, but the diversity of views can still matter. The so-called taper tantrum in mid-2013 comes to mind. Before the FOMC communicated that tapering its asset purchases 4 might soon be appropriate, it looked as if market expectations were in alignment. Nonetheless, financial markets reacted sharply when the communication actually came. Both Jeremy Stein (2014) and Stan Fischer (2017) have discussed the episode, pointing out that the distribution of views across market participants and how strongly they hold these views are important determinants of how asset prices might react to an announcement, even one that is aligned with the median view in the market. The point being that even the best policy communications won’t be able to prevent market swings all the time and policymakers and markets need to understand that. As you can see, there are many things to talk about in this session. Our panelists bring broad academic, market, and central bank experience. Their bios are in your booklet, but briefly: Richard Clarida is vice chair of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Prior to joining the Fed, he was a professor at Columbia University. He has served in the U.S. Treasury Department and on the Council of Economic Advisers, and was a managing director of PIMCO. Rick Rieder is managing director of BlackRock, where he is global chief investment officer and co- head of global fixed income. Prior to this, he was president and CEO of R3 Capital Partners, and was an advisor to the U.S. Treasury and the NY Fed. Silvana Tenreyro is professor of economics at the London School of Economics and serves as an external member of the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee. She is president-elect of the European Economic Association, and, I’m happy to say, a member of the advisory council of the Cleveland Fed’s Center for Inflation Research. We’ll hear from our speakers in the order in the program and then open it up to participants for discussion and questions. 5 References Amato, Jeffery D., Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin, “Communication and Monetary Policy,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 18 (2002), pp. 495-503. Bernanke, Ben S. “What Policymakers Can Learn from Asset Prices,” remarks before the Investment Analysts Society of Chicago, Chicago, IL, April 15, 2004. Chari, V.V., Lawrence J. Christiano, and Martin Eichenbaum, “Expectations Traps and Discretion,” Journal of Economic Theory 81, 1998, pp. 462-492. Fischer, Stanley, “Monetary Policy Expectations and Surprises,” remarks at the School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia University, New York, NY, April 17, 2017. Stein, Jeremy C., “Challenges for Monetary Policy Communication,” remarks to the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, NY, May 6, 2014. Stein, Jeremy C. and Adi Sunderam, “The Fed, the Bond Market, and Gradualism in Monetary Policy,” Journal of Finance 73 (June 2018), pp. 1015-1060.

The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy in 2020 Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland National Association for Business Economics 36th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference Washington, DC February 24, 2020 1 Introduction Good afternoon. I thank the National Association for Business Economics for inviting me to participate in this year’s economic policy conference. I had the pleasure of speaking at this conference five years ago and I recall a very engaging question-and-answer session following my remarks. I hope we will have a similar session today because I believe that one of the responsibilities (and pleasures) of being a monetary policymaker is listening to other people’s perspectives and learning from them. Today, I will give you an update of my own take on the economy and monetary policy for the coming year. As always, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Economic Growth The U.S. economic expansion is now in its 11th year, making this the longest expansion on record. It has not been a smooth ride; risks of various kinds have risen and ebbed over the journey. Last year, uncertainties around trade policy and tariffs and slow growth abroad clouded the outlook. In prior years, the sharp drop in oil prices and strength of the dollar weighed on the U.S. economy. Yet, with support from fiscal and monetary policy, the expansion continued. The length of the expansion is a true testament to the resiliency of the U.S. economy. For 2020, my outlook is for the expansion to continue, with growth around trend, solid performance in the labor market, and low and stable inflation. As is always the case, there are risks to the outlook, including the recent emergence of the coronavirus in Wuhan, China. There are also longer-run challenges for the U.S. economy, including low productivity growth, limits on access to education and training for the jobs of the future, and rising income inequality. But viewed through the lens of the Fed’s statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability, the economy has been performing well and I expect that to continue. Last year, real GDP grew at a 2.3 percent pace, down a bit from 2018’s 2.5 percent pace. My estimate of longer-run growth is 2 percent, so the economy has been growing somewhat above trend. Indeed, last 2 year’s performance was better than many economists and businesses had expected. Before the start of last year, it was widely anticipated that output growth would be slower than in 2018 because the effects of the fiscal stimulus from the tax cuts and federal government spending were expected to wane and financial conditions were expected to be less accommodative. But as 2019 started, concerns developed that a sharper slowdown in the economy was a real possibility. In light of the FOMC’s reassessment of the outlook and risks, the FOMC’s anticipated path of appropriate monetary policy flattened, leading to more accommodative financial conditions that helped to support the expansion. As the year wore on, several downside risks to the outlook worsened and new ones emerged. These risks include those associated with trade policy and slower global growth, as well as geopolitical risks surrounding the possibility of a “hard” Brexit, social unrest in Hong Kong, and rising tensions in the Middle East. The FOMC responded to these risks to the outlook by lowering the federal funds rate a cumulative 75 basis points. More accommodative financial conditions and some easing of trade tensions and uncertainty by the end of the year helped to support last year’s above-trend growth. With respect to the mix of growth across sectors, it is a tale of two cities. For most of the expansion, consumer spending, which accounts for nearly 70 percent of output, has been driving the economy forward; the strength in business spending has varied and it has been weak of late. Although consumer spending softened a bit in the fourth quarter, this isn’t troubling as it followed strong readings in the second and third quarters. Solid fundamentals will continue to support consumer spending this year. The strong performance of the labor market has brought more people into the labor force and has sustained wage growth, so household incomes are rising. Measures of consumer confidence are at high levels. And household balance sheets, at the aggregate level, are healthy. Equity prices have been rising and the interest rates paid by consumers are at low levels. These same factors have led to a pickup in housing market activity over the past year. Residential investment turned around in the second half of 2019, rising for the first time since the end of 2017. On a 3 year-over-year basis, housing starts, new single-family home sales, and existing home sales all posted double-digit rates of increase at the end of last year. Demand is outstripping supply. One indicator of this is the month’s supply of homes on the market. At the December sales pace, the current inventory of homes up for sale would last three months. This is the lowest level in the history of the series, which dates back to 1982. As a consequence, house prices are beginning to accelerate. In contrast to the strength in consumer spending and the improvement in housing conditions, business investment, manufacturing, and exports have been weak, declining over most of last year. Slow growth abroad, especially in Europe and China, and uncertainty over trade policy and tariffs have weakened demand for U.S. exports, which has weighed on the U.S. manufacturing and agricultural sectors. The uncertainty also dampened business sentiment and caused some firms to postpone planned investment. If it continues, the low level of investment will be troubling for the economy over the longer run. The economy’s long-run growth potential is determined by the growth of its labor and capital stock and how productively it uses these inputs. Without investment in new technologies and capital, productivity will continue to be weak, dampening the economy’s growth potential and living standards. Fortunately, the picture for 2020 is somewhat better on the trade front. Some of the uncertainty over trade policy eased with the signing of the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA) and the Phase One trade deal with China; this reduction in uncertainty should prove positive for investment. Nevertheless, some long-lasting effects arising from the trade war are likely. For example, some of our business contacts report that foreign firms have reoriented their supply chains away from U.S. firms, which means these exports may be permanently lost. The start of the year brought some tentative signs that growth abroad in our trading partners was stabilizing. But offsetting the positive news on foreign growth and trade are the continuing problems with 4 the Boeing 737 MAX airplane. The decision to halt production of the plane will be a drag on growth at least in the first quarter of this year and perhaps longer. In addition, the coronavirus is exacting a heavy human toll. It is also clouding the near-term economic outlook for China, with potential spillovers to the rest of the world. Most estimates of the possible impact draw on the experience of the SARS epidemic in 2003. A Brookings study suggested that that epidemic reduced growth in China by about 1 percentage point in 2003 and growth in the U.S. by only about 0.1 percentage point.1 However, there are many differences between 2003 and 2020. China was not as big a player in the global economy back then as it is today, so there is the potential for a larger impact, through decreases in tourism and travel, reductions in consumer spending in China and by Chinese tourists elsewhere, disruptions in supply chains, and a pullback in investors’ willingness to take on risk. On the other hand, China now has more resources with which to address the epidemic than it had in 2003 and early actions have been taken to try to limit the spread and cushion the Chinese economy. This might mean a larger negative impact on growth in China in the near term but perhaps a less protracted one. At this point, it is difficult to assess the magnitude of the economic effects, but this new source of uncertainty is something I will be carefully monitoring. I’ve incorporated it as a downside risk to my modal forecast, which calls for growth to continue at trend, slightly slower than the pace of last year, with continued healthy consumption growth and some pickup in investment spending. Labor Markets Supporting this forecast is the strength we’ve seen in labor markets. I expect solid labor market conditions to continue. Last year, firms added an average of 175,000 jobs per month to their payrolls, and in January, an even stronger 225,000 jobs were added. So the pace of job growth has been well above 1 Jong-Wha Lee and Warwick J. McKibbin, “Globalization and Disease: The Case of SARS,” Brookings Discussion Papers in International Economics, No. 156, February 2004. (https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/20040203-1.pdf) 5 trend, which most estimates put in the range of 75,000 to 120,000 per month. The unemployment rate, at 3.6 percent, is near its 50-year low; it has fallen nearly half of a percentage point over the past year. A broader measure of the unemployment rate, the U-6 measure, which includes workers who haven’t been actively looking for work and those working part-time who would prefer full-time work, is under 7 percent, near its lowest level since the start of this series in January 1994. In the Cleveland Fed’s District, which includes the state of Ohio, western Pennsylvania, eastern Kentucky, and the panhandle of West Virginia, the unemployment rate is about 4-1/4 percent, near the lowest levels seen in two decades. My expectation is that job growth will remain solid and the unemployment rate will remain near its current level this year. A benefit of the long expansion is that more people have been drawn into the labor force. Even though demographic forces such as the aging of the large baby boom generation mean people are leaving the workforce through retirement, the participation rate has held up. The prime-age participation rate of those between ages 25 and 54 has been rising and is now at its highest level of the expansion. Women have been leading this rise. The participation rate for prime-age women has risen over 2 percentage points over the past two years, and the rate for men has edged up as well.2 Business contacts have continually reported that they are having trouble finding qualified workers. Some tell us that they have turned away orders and would be able to take on more work if they could attract and retain the employees they need. Aggregate wages have been rising in line with productivity growth and inflation, and we’ve seen stronger wage gains for lower paying jobs. But wages have not accelerated as much as one might have expected based on the reports from firms about how hard it is to find workers. It could be a question of labor mix, with those older workers exiting the labor force typically being higher paid than those entering. It could 2 According to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, as compiled by Haver Analytics, the (combined) prime-age participation rate rose to 83.1 percent in January 2020, its highest level since August 2008. From January 2018 to January 2020, the participation rate for prime-age women rose from 74.8 percent to 77.0 percent; over the same period, the rate for prime-age men edged up from 89.0 percent to 89.3 percent. 6 also reflect a faster pace of automation. Some of our business contacts have told us they are substituting machines for workers rather than increasing wages. Others tell us they don’t believe that raising wages will attract qualified workers and are not willing to go that route to fill positions. It remains to be seen how much longer that situation can last, especially if labor markets tighten further. Assessing how the labor market is doing relative to what is sustainable over the longer run is a key factor when setting monetary policy, as maximum employment and price stability are our mandated goals. The behavior of the labor market over this expansion has led me to believe that one needs to be humble about this assessment and let not only past experience but also current experience be a guide. In fact, the strong performance of the labor market over this expansion has made many economists reevaluate what unemployment rate is sustainable over the longer run and consistent with price stability. This is true of participants on the FOMC as well. Five years ago, their estimates of the unemployment rate over the longer run ranged from 5.0 to 5.8 percent; the current range is 3.5 to 4.5 percent.3 I’ve brought my estimate down over time and recently have been estimating a range of 4 to 4-1/4 percent. But if the unemployment rate continues at these low rates and wage pressures remain muted, I’m open to lowering my estimate again. Inflation Turning to inflation, the FOMC’s longer-run inflation goal is 2 percent, as measured by the year-over- year change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index. This measure moved up to 2 percent in 2018, but the increase wasn’t sustained as PCE inflation moved back down in 2019 and stood at 1.6 percent in December. Core PCE inflation, which excludes food and energy prices to strip out some volatility, also moved down to 1.6 percent. Although core inflation is often used as an indicator of the 3 See the Summary of Economic Projections included in the Minutes of the FOMC, December 16 -17, 2014, at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20141217.pdf and the Summary of Economic Projections included in the Minutes of the FOMC, December 10-11, 2019, at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20191211.pdf. 7 underlying trend in inflation, it is important to remember that a sizable fraction of the variability of core inflation is due to idiosyncratic factors, for example, changes in Medicare reimbursement rates or cell phone prices. So to gauge the underlying trend I look at a broad set of inflation measures. These measures show firmer inflation readings. The CPI measures typically run about 1/4 percentage point above the PCE measures. In January, CPI inflation rose to 2.5 percent and core CPI inflation was 2.3 percent. The Dallas Fed’s trimmed-mean PCE inflation measure has been stable at 2 percent. The Cleveland Fed’s new Center for Inflation Research is carrying on the pioneering work done at the Bank to develop better measures of underlying inflation trends.4 In January, the Cleveland Fed’s median and trimmed-mean CPI measures were 2.9 and 2.4 percent, respectively, and our median PCE inflation measure was 2.6 percent in December. These alternative gauges are not a substitute for the PCE inflation measure that the FOMC has targeted, but they do reduce some of my concern that inflation will continue to be weak. Indeed, research done by our Center suggests that if labor markets remain strong, then we should see the components of the PCE that are more responsive to labor market conditions continue to firm, helping total PCE inflation return to our 2 percent goal on a sustainable basis over time.5 This forecast depends on inflation expectations remaining stable. If firms and households begin to expect that lower inflation will prevail over the longer run, the Fed would have a harder time hitting its inflation target, because theory suggests that these expectations influence actual price- and wage-setting decisions. Lower inflation expectations could lead to lower inflation. In my view, expectations have been relatively well anchored near 2 percent. The movements in the monthly readings of some of the measures have been within the typical variation seen in these measures. The Cleveland Fed produces a measure of inflation expectations that combines survey readings with market-based readings; the 5-year/5-year- 4 The Cleveland Fed’s Center for Inflation Research aims to further the understanding of inflation among policymakers, researchers, and the public by providing data, forecasts, analysis, and research. The Center’s website is https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/our-research/center-for-inflation-research.aspx. 5 See Saeed Zaman (2019) “Cyclical versus Acyclical Inflation: A Deeper Dive,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary 2019-13, https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/publications/economic-commentary/2019-economic-commentaries/ec-201913-cyclical-versus-acyclical- inflation. 8 forward reading on inflation from this measure has been fairly stable over the past 12 months, although somewhat under 2 percent. My projection is that PCE inflation will move up to our 2 percent goal in line with the FOMC’s objective, but this will be a gradual return over the next year or two. Monetary Policy Because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, policymakers need to be forward looking and determine what interest rate path will best achieve the FOMC’s dual mandate goals of price stability and maximum employment over the longer run, based on the economic outlook and risks around the outlook. At our meeting at the end of January, the FOMC maintained the target range of the federal funds rate at 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. I agreed with this decision. Keeping the fed funds rate at current levels for a time gives us an opportunity to assess the cumulative effects of last year’s policy easing on the economy and to assess whether the economy is evolving according to our outlook. Even before last year’s cumulative 75 basis point reduction, monetary policy had become easier as the Committee’s view of the appropriate policy path had flattened. You can see this by looking at FOMC projections. In September 2018, the median participant thought it appropriate for the fed funds rate to rise to 3.4 percent by the end of this year. By June 2019, that rate had fallen over a percentage point, to 2.1 percent. The most recent reading from last December is 1.6 percent. Given the risks from slower growth abroad and trade policy uncertainty, I believed a flatter policy path was appropriate, although I would have preferred to wait for clearer evidence that the downside risks were materially affecting the economy before actually cutting the funds rate last year. Still, I am comfortable with the current stance of policy. While some of the downside risks have eased, including trade tensions, the possibility of a “hard” Brexit, and continued weakening of global growth, other risks like the coronavirus have emerged. In my view, our current policy stance is appropriate given the outlook of growth near its trend pace, solid labor market conditions, 9 and inflation rates not far from the FOMC’s symmetric 2 percent objective, and given the risks around the outlook that we continue to monitor. I am committed to achieving both of our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. As many of you know, the FOMC is in the process of assessing our monetary policy framework, including our strategy, tools, and policy communications. As part of that review, we conducted Fed Listens events around the country to hear from various groups about how our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices affect them. The Cleveland Fed held our Fed Listens event at our Community Development Policy Summit in Cincinnati.6 One of the main themes that came out of this discussion was the importance of jobs. People were less concerned about inflation; in fact, some were skeptical of the Fed’s view that inflation was too low, because in their experience it is costing more, not less, to get by. This lack of concern about inflation partially reflects the success the Fed has had in achieving price stability. It’s a tribute to the late Paul Volcker, former Fed chair. If inflation were to get out of hand again as it was in the 1970s and early 1980s, it would become a major concern again for everyone. From an individual’s perspective, low inflation is not a problem. But inflation running below our goal is a problem for the macroeconomy and for monetary policymakers. When inflation runs persistently below our goal, expected inflation can move lower, putting further downward pressure on inflation and pulling down interest rates. Lower rates constrain monetary policy’s ability to stabilize the economy by giving us less room to reduce rates in the event of a future downturn. So hitting our symmetric inflation goal is an important part of ensuring a healthy economy over the longer run. 6 A summary of the Cleveland Fed’s Fed Listens event is available at https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/events/2019/policy-summit/fed-listens.aspx. A full list of Fed Listens events is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed- listens-events.htm. 10 We have been undershooting our inflation goal for some time, so a natural question is whether policymakers should add even further accommodation to spur a faster return of inflation to our goal. I would not favor that at this time. In my view, doing so would raise the risk of generating imbalances that would threaten the expansion and undermine our employment goal. Even given the low level of interest rates, equity prices and commercial real estate valuations are elevated; corporate debt levels are high; and underwriting standards on leveraged loans are weak. While commercial banks are well capitalized, their capital buffers are falling, which could potentially limit their ability to lend through the cycle should a negative shock hit. I think we should be particularly attuned to financial market developments in the current environment. Given the low level of the funds rate and the outlook for growth and the labor market, and the fact that inflation rates are already near our objective, I support taking an opportunistic approach to raising inflation to our symmetric goal. This entails leaving policy at current levels for a time to support a firming in inflation rates, refraining from taking deliberate policy action at this point to try to lift inflation more quickly, and also refraining from taking deliberate action against shocks that would, for a time, move inflation somewhat above 2 percent. This approach attempts to keep inflation sustainably in a reasonable range around 2 percent, consistent with our symmetric 2 percent objective, while balancing our dual mandate goals and risks to financial stability. I don’t view this opportunistic approach as ignoring the inflation undershoot because it works to move inflation up by keeping policy more accommodative than if the Committee were behaving as it has in the past, as illustrated by the range of monetary policy rules that the Cleveland Fed publishes on its website.7 In assessing the appropriate path of policy going forward, I will be monitoring incoming economic and financial data and reports from District contacts to assess the outlook and risks to the outlook. My 7 See the Cleveland Fed’s simple monetary policy rules at https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/our-research/indicators- and-data/simple-monetary-policy-rules.aspx. 11 current view is that monetary policy is well calibrated to support our dual mandate goals, and a patient approach to policy changes is appropriate unless there is a material change to the outlook.

An Update on the U.S. Economy and the Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Framework Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Society of Professional Economists Annual Dinner London, United Kingdom March 3, 2020 1 Introduction Good evening. I thank the Society of Professional Economists for inviting me to speak at the society’s annual dinner. It is truly an honor to join you and to count myself among the list of distinguished speakers who have addressed you at previous events. This evening I will update you on the outlook for the economy and monetary policy from my side of the pond and on the Federal Reserve’s review of our monetary policy framework: the strategy, tools, and communications we use to make monetary policy. As always, the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook for the U.S. Let me start with the topic on everyone’s mind: the coronavirus. The recent emergence of the coronavirus in Wuhan, China, and its spread to other countries in the world, including the U.K. and the U.S., is causing considerable human suffering. It is also clouding the outlook for the global economy. This is a rapidly evolving situation that we are continuing to monitor closely. For the U.S. economy, the risks and uncertainty surrounding the outlook have increased in a short period of time. In China, the reductions in travel and shutdown in activity are widely expected to cause a sharp decline in output in China in the first quarter. China is a large player in the global economy, accounting for 16 percent of global GDP. So what happens there will have effects in other countries, especially those with strong trade ties to China. Trade and supply chain disruptions, travel spending cuts, and declines in consumer and business sentiment will also weigh on U.S. growth at least in the first half of the year, as will the extreme moves we have experienced in U.S. financial markets. These moves have reflected a sharp pullback in investors’ willingness to take on risk and the flight to quality into U.S. Treasury securities. At this point, both the magnitude and duration of the economic effects of the virus are highly uncertain. They will depend on how the disease progresses, the efficacy of the actions countries take to help contain the spread of the virus and treat the sick, public health officials’ contingency planning and 2 implementation of those plans, and other actions policymakers take to mitigate the effects on sentiment and economic activity. Today, the FOMC reduced its target range for the federal funds rate, our policy rate, by 50 basis points to 1 to 1-1/4 percent in response to the risks to the outlook. I am currently putting together the forecast I will submit as part of the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections, which will be released after the conclusion of our March FOMC meeting in two weeks. In structuring my remarks, I thought it would be helpful to first discuss my views on the U.S. economy before the emergence of the coronavirus, and then discuss the potential ramifications of this risk. The economic expansion in the U.S. is now in its 11th year, the longest expansion on record. The course of the expansion has seen its ups and downs, but the resiliency of the U.S. economy has been remarkable. Last year, uncertainties around trade policy and tariffs, as well as slow global growth, clouded the U.S. outlook. In prior years, the sharp drop in oil prices and strength of the dollar weighed on the U.S. economy. Yet, with support from fiscal and monetary policy, the expansion continued. The Federal Reserve has a statutory mandate to set U.S. monetary policy to achieve the longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment. Viewed through this lens, the U.S. economy has been performing well. Last year, real GDP grew at a 2.3 percent pace, above my 2 percent estimate of its longer-run trend and better than many economists and businesses had expected. Indeed, at the start of last year, concerns developed that a sharper slowdown in the economy was a real possibility. In light of the FOMC’s reassessment of its outlook and risks, the FOMC’s anticipated path of appropriate monetary policy flattened, leading to more accommodative financial conditions that helped to support the expansion. As the year wore on, several downside risks to the outlook worsened and new ones emerged. These risks included those associated with trade policy and slower global growth, as well as geopolitical risks surrounding the possibility of a “hard” Brexit, social unrest in Hong Kong, and rising tensions in the 3 Middle East. The FOMC responded to these risks to the outlook by lowering the federal funds rate, our policy rate, a cumulative 75 basis points. More accommodative financial conditions, coupled with some easing of trade tensions and uncertainty by the end of the year, helped to support last year’s above-trend growth. With respect to the mix of growth across sectors it has been a tale of two cities. Business spending has been soft, while consumer spending, which accounts for nearly 70 percent of output in the U.S., has been solid. Business investment, manufacturing, and exports declined over most of last year. Slow growth abroad, especially in Europe and China, and uncertainty over trade policy and tariffs have weakened demand for U.S. exports, which has weighed on the U.S. manufacturing and agricultural sectors. Problems with the Boeing 737 MAX airplane also weighed on investment and the decision to halt production of the plane will be a drag on U.S. growth at least in the first quarter of this year and perhaps longer. On the positive side, some of the uncertainty over trade policy and its impact on business sentiment eased with the signing of the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA) and the Phase One trade deal with China. In contrast to soft business spending, consumer spending has been driving the U.S. economy forward, and that has been the case for most of the expansion. Solid fundamentals have helped to support consumer spending. Household balance sheets are healthy. Low mortgage rates contributed to the turnaround in residential investment in the second half of 2019, which rose for the first time since the end of 2017. Household income has been growing, reflecting the solid performance of the labor market. Last year, firms added an average of 175,000 jobs per month to their payrolls, and in January, an even stronger 225,000 jobs were added. So the pace of job growth in the U.S. has been well above trend, which most estimates put in the range of 75,000 to 120,000 per month. A benefit of the long expansion is that more people have been drawn into the labor force. The participation rate has held up even though the 4 large baby boom generation is aging and leaving the workforce through retirement. The prime-age participation rate of those between ages 25 and 54 has been rising and is now at its highest level of the expansion, led by women. The unemployment rate, at 3.6 percent, is near its 50-year low; it has fallen nearly half of a percentage point over the past year. Broader measures of the unemployment rate that include discouraged workers and those working part-time who would prefer full-time work are also near historic lows. Strong labor markets mean aggregate wages are rising in the U.S., especially for lower paying jobs. But wages have not accelerated as much as one might have expected based on the reports from firms about how hard it is to find workers. This could reflect labor mix: older workers exiting the labor force typically are higher paid than those entering. It could also reflect a faster pace of automation, one way some of our business contacts are addressing labor shortages. Other contacts tell us that they don’t believe raising wages will attract qualified workers and are not willing to go that route to fill positions. It remains to be seen how much longer that situation can last, especially if labor markets tighten further. In assessing how the labor market is doing relative to what is sustainable over the longer run, we need to remain humble. Five years ago, FOMC participants’ estimates of unemployment over the longer run ranged from 5.0 to 5.8 percent; the current range is 3.5 to 4.5 percent. I’ve brought my estimate down over time and recently I’ve been estimating a range of 4 to 4-1/4 percent. But if the unemployment rate continues at these low rates and wage pressures remain muted, I’m open to lowering my estimate again. Turning to inflation, the FOMC’s longer-run inflation goal is 2 percent, as measured by the year-over- year change in the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index. This measure moved up to 2 percent in 2018, but the increase wasn’t sustained as PCE inflation moved back down in 2019; it stood at 1.7 percent in January. Core PCE inflation, which excludes food and energy prices to strip out some volatility, also moved down last year; it now stands at 1.6 percent. But other measures of inflation show 5 firmer readings, at or above 2 percent.1 These alternative gauges are not a substitute for the PCE inflation measure that the FOMC has targeted, but they do reduce my concern that inflation will continue to be weak. Inflation expectations have been relatively well anchored near 2 percent. Conditional on that, research done by the Cleveland Fed’s Center for Inflation Research suggests that if labor markets remain strong, then we should see the components of PCE that are more responsive to labor market conditions continue to firm, helping total PCE inflation return to our 2 percent goal on a sustainable basis over time.2 Monetary Policy Because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, policymakers need to be forward looking and determine what interest rate path will best achieve the FOMC’s longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment, based on the economic outlook and risks around the outlook. At our meeting at the end of January, the FOMC maintained the target range of the federal funds rate at 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. I agreed with this decision because it seemed appropriate to take the opportunity to assess the cumulative effects of last year’s policy easing on the economy and whether the economy is evolving according to our outlook. Even before last year’s cumulative 75 basis point reduction, monetary policy had become easier as the Committee’s view of the appropriate policy path had flattened. You can see this by looking at FOMC projections. In September 2018, the median participant thought it appropriate for the fed funds rate to rise to 3.4 percent by the end of this year. By June 2019, that rate had fallen over a percentage point, to 2.1 percent. The most recent reading from last December was 1.6 percent. I viewed this flatter policy path as being consistent with taking an opportunistic approach to 1 The Cleveland Fed’s median PCE inflation measure was 2.6 percent in January and the Dallas Fed’s trimmed- mean PCE inflation measure has been stable at 2 percent. In January, CPI inflation rose to 2.5 percent, core CPI inflation was 2.3 percent, and the Cleveland Fed’s median and trimmed-mean CPI measures were 2.9 and 2.4 percent, respectively. 2 See Saeed Zaman (2019) “Cyclical versus Acyclical Inflation: A Deeper Dive,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary 2019-13, https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/publications/economic-commentary/2019-economic-commentaries/ec-201913-cyclical-versus-acyclical- inflation. 6 raising inflation to our symmetric goal – refraining from taking deliberate policy action to lift inflation more quickly but also refraining from taking deliberate action against shocks that would, for a time, move inflation somewhat above 2 percent. This approach attempts to keep inflation sustainably in a reasonable range around 2 percent, consistent with our symmetric 2 percent objective, while balancing our dual mandate goals and risks to financial stability. Before the emergence of the coronavirus, my expectation was that output growth would be about trend this year, with solid performance in the labor market, and inflation continuing to move up gradually over the next year or two to the FOMC’s goal of 2 percent. The underlying fundamentals of the U.S. economy remain strong, but the coronavirus will weigh on U.S. growth at least during the first half of the year, with a pullback in spending by households and businesses. It is what economists call a negative supply shock. Much is still unknown about the disease making it difficult to predict how large and persistent the economic impact will be. Heightened and persistent uncertainty can affect the economy. It raises the possibility that negative effects on consumer and business sentiment and a pullback in investor risk-taking could last after the spread of the coronavirus has stabilized. The supply shock could evolve into a demand shock. The extreme volatility in financial markets is noteworthy. When a shock like this hits financial markets, the first task of central bankers is to ensure that there is sufficient liquidity and funding to allow markets to continue to function in an orderly way in the midst of extreme volatility, and to assure the public that they are prepared to act as necessary. Fed Chair Jay Powell issued such a statement last Friday. The Bank of England, Bank of Japan, and European Central Bank took similar steps; the International Monetary Fund and World Bank jointly stated that they stand ready to help affected countries with emergency financing, policy advice, and technical assistance; and the G7 finance ministers and central bankers released a joint statement this morning reaffirming their commitment to use all appropriate policy tools to support growth and safeguard against downside risks. Times like this underscore the value of an 7 effective framework of financial system regulation and supervision to help ensure that the financial system is well-capitalized and resilient, enabling financial institutions to better withstand volatility so that they can continue to extend credit to households and businesses. While the economic fundamentals underlying the U.S. economy remain strong, in light of the risks to the outlook and guided by our statutory goals to promote price stability and maximum employment, today the FOMC lowered its target range for the federal funds rate by 50 basis points to 1 to 1-1/4 percent. The virus’s near-term effects on the supply side of the economy, including the reduction in activity from closures, reduced social interactions, cuts in travel and tourism, and disruptions in supply chains, are not things that can be affected by lowering interest rates. However, the action taken by the FOMC can help support confidence and ease financial conditions of indebted households and firms, thereby helping to mitigate potential demand-side impacts of the virus. It was within this context that I supported today’s interest rate reduction, while recognizing that appropriate actions taken by other parties, including global public health officials and fiscal authorities, would likely do more to support confidence and spending by helping to contain the spread of the virus, ensure adequate healthcare services are available to the sick, speed development of a vaccine, and provide relief to workers and smaller businesses that are affected by the pullback in activity. Review of the Federal Reserve’s Monetary Policy Framework Let me now step away from current monetary policy and discuss future monetary policy. While the U.S. Congress has specified the Fed’s longer-run monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment, it has given the Fed considerable independence in choosing the framework used to achieve these goals.3 The FOMC currently uses a flexible inflation-targeting framework. This framework 3 Section 2A of the Federal Reserve Act says that the Fed should conduct monetary policy to “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” (https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/section2a.htm) When prices are stable and the economy is at maximum employment, long-term interest rates are typically at moderate levels, so it is often said that the U.S. Congress has given the Fed a dual mandate. 8 recognizes that, over the longer run, monetary policy can influence only inflation and not the underlying real structural aspects of the economy such as the natural rate of unemployment or maximum employment, but that monetary policy can be used to help offset shorter-run fluctuations in employment around maximum employment. The framework is briefly described in the FOMC’s statement on longer- run goals and monetary policy strategy, which was originally released in January 2012.4 The flexible inflation-targeting framework has served the FOMC well and has been effective in promoting our monetary policy goals. But the economic environment of the future is likely to differ from the past environment in some important dimensions. The expected slowdown in population growth and lower labor force participation rates due to changes in demographics will weigh on long-run economic growth, the natural rate of unemployment, and the longer-term equilibrium interest rate.5 This is true not only in the U.S., but in other advanced economies as well.6 Real interest rates are expected to remain lower than in past decades. If so, this means there will be less room for monetary policymakers to cushion against a negative economic shock by lowering its policy rate and a higher likelihood that the policy rate will hit its effective lower bound more frequently. In this case, tools including forward guidance and balance-sheet policies such as longer-term asset purchases will need to be used more often. 4 See FOMC, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 29, 2019. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf) 5 See Loretta J. Mester, “Demographics and Their Implications for the Economy and Policy,” Cato Journal, 38 (Spring/Summer 2018), pp. 399-413. (https://www.cato.org/sites/cato.org/files/serials/files/cato-journal/2018/5/cj- v38n2-6.pdf) 6 FOMC participants have been lowering their estimates of the fed funds rate that will be consistent with maximum employment and price stability over the longer run. The median estimate has decreased fro m 4 percent in March 2014 to 2.5 percent in December 2019, the most recently available estimate. (See the Summary of Economic Projections included in the Minutes of the FOMC, March 18-19, 2014, at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20140319.pdf, and the Summary of Economic Projections included in the Minutes of the FOMC, December 10-11, 2019, at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20191211.pdf.) Also, empirical estimates of the equilibrium real fed funds rate, so-called r-star, while highly uncertain, are lower than in the past. For a review of the literature on the equilibrium interest rate, see Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West, “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future,” IMF Economic Review 64, 2016, pp. 660-707. (https://doi.org/10.1057/s41308-016-0015-z) 9 In past recessions, the FOMC has reduced the federal funds rate target by 5 to 6 percentage points. With interest rates expected to stay low, that policy space will not be available. Moreover, in some economic models, the proximity to the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates can impart a downward bias to inflation, making it harder for central banks to hit their inflation targets. And inflation now appears to be less responsive to resource slack than it once was. In light of these structural changes in the economic environment and our experience during the Great Recession and its aftermath, the FOMC has engaged in a review of our monetary policy framework to ensure it will continue to be effective in maintaining macroeconomic stability in the future. The review covers our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications, taking as given our statutory mandate and that an inflation rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the long run with this mandate. Since the FOMC announced its review in November 2018, it has been spending time at its regularly scheduled meetings considering various aspects of its framework.7 The Committee is evaluating different strategies such as whether to target inflation, average inflation, or the price level. These latter two strategies attempt to make up for past misses on the inflation target; in contrast, targeting inflation lets bygones be bygones. We are also analyzing the types of policy tools and best formulations of these tools that could be used to add accommodation in a future downturn, once our policy rate has been brought down to its effective lower bound. The FOMC did not use negative interest rates during the Great Recession and its aftermath, but our review is open minded and we are taking a look at the experience of other central banks that have used negative interest rates to address low inflation and low growth. A third aspect of our framework review is monetary policy communications. Policy communications are an important part of policymaking because they can increase the effectiveness of monetary policy in a number of ways. For example, communications can help to anchor inflation expectations at the target and 7 Information about the Fed’s monetary policy framework review is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and- communications.htm. 10 they can better convey the rationale for policymakers’ decisions, helping to transmit monetary policy throughout the economy. Various aspects of the FOMC’s communications are being evaluated, including forward guidance used as a policy tool at the effective lower bound on interest rates. In addition to internal discussions, the Fed engaged with academics at a research conference held last June; selected papers from the conference were published in the International Journal of Central Banking.8 We also held a series of Fed Listens events across the U.S. to gain the perspectives of people with diverse backgrounds and in different economic circumstances about how our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices affect them. The Cleveland Fed held our Fed Listens event at our Community Development Policy Summit in Cincinnati.9 One of the main themes that came out of this discussion was the importance of jobs. People were less concerned about inflation; in fact, some were skeptical of the Fed’s view that inflation was too low, because in their experience it is costing more, not less, to get by. This lack of concern about inflation partially reflects the success the Fed has had in achieving price stability. If inflation were to get out of hand again as it was in the 1970s and early1980s in the U.S., it would become a major concern again for everyone. From an individual’s perspective, low inflation is not a problem. But inflation running below our goal is a problem for the macroeconomy and for monetary policymakers. When inflation runs persistently below our goal, expected inflation can move lower, which can put further downward pressure on inflation and pull down interest rates, which then puts further constraints on monetary policy’s ability to stabilize the economy. 8 “Special Issue: Federal Reserve System Conference on Monetary Policy - Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices,” International Journal of Central Banking, February 2020. (https://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb2002.htm) 9 A summary of the Cleveland Fed’s Fed Listens event is available at https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/events/2019/policy-summit/fed-listens.aspx. A full list of Fed Listens events is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed- listens-events.htm. 11 Our framework review seeks to ensure that we are approaching monetary policy in the most effective way to achieve our mandated longer-run goals of maximum employment and price stability. The minutes of the FOMC meetings summarize the initial impressions of the Committee participants on the topics raised in the framework review. I’d like to conclude with some of my thoughts on the three broad areas of the review. Regarding monetary policy strategy, in my view, while make-up strategies like price-level targeting tend to work well in some models, I am skeptical that they would be as effective in the real world because their benefits depend on high levels of credibility and commitment. For example, I question whether the public will think it credible that policymakers will keep interest rates low to make up for past shortfalls even when demand is growing strongly or that the public will believe that policymakers will tighten policy when demand is weak after a supply shock has raised the price level. Instead of adopting a make-up strategy, I think some changes to communication could help to convey a better sense of the FOMC’s approach and commitment to its policy goals. For example, I think it would be useful for us to explain that it is normal for inflation to vary in a range around our target due to a number of factors, including measurement issues, idiosyncratic shocks, and economic developments. It would also be useful to explain that the lower general level of interest rates likely to prevail in the future and changes in inflation dynamics suggest that inflation would likely be lower during economic downturns. In terms of strategy, after a period when inflation has been running below our goal for a sustained period, I would be comfortable with inflation moving somewhat higher than 2 percent for a time during economic expansions in order to help anchor inflation expectations and achieve our long-run symmetric 2 percent inflation goal. Regarding tools, I believe that asset purchases and forward guidance have been and will continue to be useful tools at the effective lower bound. I am skeptical that the benefits of negative interest rates would outweigh the costs in the U.S. The experiences in Europe and Japan suggest that negative rates may have 12 some beneficial effects on bank lending and so far have not had adverse effects on market functioning or financial stability. But the financial markets in the U.S. are considerably different and are less bank- centric than those in Europe or Japan. Regarding policy communications, I have spoken often about improvements the FOMC might make to the way we explain the rationale for our policy decisions, thereby making monetary policy more effective.10 Indeed, for forward guidance at the effective lower bound to work, people need to understand that we have entered a different mode and are using it as a policy tool. But that means they need to understand our policy setting in normal times: in particular, the goals we are trying to achieve; how we use changes in the fed funds rate to influence inflation, economic activity, and the labor market; and the key elements in our reaction function. A post-meeting policy statement that gives a fuller view of the Committee’s outlook and attendant risks to the outlook, and that ties the Committee’s policy decisions to that outlook and assessment of risks would be a worthwhile enhancement.11 These are some of my own thoughts, but our review is ongoing and Federal Reserve Chair Powell has indicated that the FOMC will publicly report the outcome of the review once it is completed. One can view the FOMC’s review of its monetary policy framework as a form of good governance that is becoming a standard best practice of central banks around the world. The Bank of Canada reviews its framework to support the renewal of its agreement with the government on its inflation target every five 10 See Loretta J. Mester, “Transitions: The Economy, Monetary Policy, and Policy Communications,” Lyons Companies and the Center for Economic Education and Entrepreneurship, Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, February 19, 2019 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/speeches/sp-20190219-transitions-the-economy-monetary-policy-and-policy-communications) and Loretta J. Mester, “Improving Our Monetary Policy Strategy,” panel remarks for “Strategies for Monetary Policy: A Policy Conference,” The Hoover Institution, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, May 3, 2019 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20190503-improving-our-monetary-policy- strategy), and the references therein. 11 See Loretta J. Mester, “Remarks for the Session: ‘Hall of Mirrors: Feedback Between Monetary Policy and Financial Markets’,” 2020 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, NY, February 21, 2020. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20200221-hall-of-mirrors) 13 years. In 2014, the Bank of England undertook an external review of its policy communications led by former Fed governor Kevin Warsh.12 And earlier this year, the European Central Bank launched a review of its monetary policy strategy, which the ECB expects to conclude by the end of this year.13 In an economic environment of low interest rates that are likely to prevail for some time to come, reviewing the monetary policy framework is not only good governance, it is a prudent step to ensuring that monetary policy continues to be effective at providing macroeconomic stability. 12 See “Bank of England Announces Measures to Bolster Transparency and Accountability,” news release, December 11, 2014 (https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/news/2014/december/boe-announces- measures-to-bolster-transparency-and-accountability.pdf) and Kevin Warsh, “Transparency and the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee,” December 2014. (https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/- /media/boe/files/news/2014/december/transparency-and-the-boes-mpc-review-by-kevin-warsh.pdf) 13 See “ECB Launches Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy,” press release, January 23, 2020. (https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2020/html/ecb.pr200123~3b8d9fc08d.en.html)

Remarks for the Panel: “Transparency and Communications”* At the Shadow Open Market Committee Conference – Current Monetary Policy: The Influence of Marvin Goodfriend Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Shadow Open Market Committee New York, NY March 6, 2020 * The views expressed here are those of the author and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. 1 A tradition at FOMC meetings is that the research directors go out for dinner the night before the meetings. Sometimes some of the Reserve Bank presidents join this group. Shortly after I had been appointed research director at the Philadelphia Fed in 2000, a group of us, which included my president and Marvin Goodfriend, were walking to dinner when an accident happened. In the midst of a robust conversation, the Philadelphia Fed president walked into a metal parking sign and cut his forehead. The prospect of losing the Bank’s president to a bout of tetanus flashed through my mind: it was clear he had to go to the emergency room to get patched up. It took some convincing, but he and I headed over to George Washington University hospital where he was quickly taken to the back for triage. That was the last I saw of him for a very long time. If any of you have ever experienced the waiting area of a large urban emergency room you understand that it’s not the most comfortable place to be. After a couple of hours, you can imagine my surprise when I saw Marvin Goodfriend walking through the emergency room door. Dinner was over and he had come back to check on me, knowing it was going to be a long night. I have never forgotten this act of kindness and caring for an individual. I tell you this story now to illustrate the kind of person Marvin was. He a great scholar who advanced knowledge in the field of monetary policy, not just out of intellectual curiosity but because he cared about people. He understood that if policymakers did things right they could improve how the economy works for real people. I feel very fortunate to be a part of this conference that honors Marvin Goodfriend and recognizes his many contributions to the theory and practice of monetary policy. Our session discusses the contributions Marvin made to our understanding of the role of transparency and communication in monetary policymaking. I will frame my remarks around the two things Marvin indicated in his confirmation hearing statement that he would pursue if confirmed. First, Marvin planned to draw on his “academic and professional experience to promote policies that would further increase transparency and accountability at the Federal Reserve.”1 This is a worthy pursuit. Congress has given 1 “Statement of Marvin Goodfriend, Nominee to be a Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System” before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, United States Senate, January 23, 2018. (https://www.banking.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/01-23-18%20Goodfriend%20Testimony.pdf) 2 the Fed a mandate to promote price stability and maximum employment, and it has given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of those goals. This independence has been shown to yield better economic outcomes. But a central bank cannot expect to remain independent from the political process unless it is held accountable for its policy decisions and is transparent about the basis for these decisions. Marvin was a strong advocate of transparency in monetary policymaking and clear communications about the strategy policymakers use to set policy. He was also a persuasive advocate: many of Marvin’s suggestions that were contrary to how policy setting was being done at the time have become standard operating practice in central banking. Recall that it wasn’t until 1994 that the FOMC began to explicitly announce changes in its fed funds rate target. At a time when the Federal Reserve was still quite secretive, Marvin argued that more transparency would confer social benefits by helping to align markets’ and policymakers’ expectations.2 Well before the Fed adopted its explicit numerical inflation target in 2012, Marvin had been explaining the benefits such an explicit goal could play in anchoring inflation expectations. He argued further that the Fed’s actions and its communications needed to be designed so as to make this goal a credible commitment on the part of the Fed. One way to do this is to ensure that policymakers are taking a systematic approach to setting policy, which can help align the public’s policy expectations with policy decisions, thereby helping to transmit monetary policy to the broader economy. Policy rules are one way to foster systematic policymaking and Marvin suggested that the FOMC refer to a Taylor-type rule when explaining its policy decisions.3 2 See, for example, Goodfriend, Marvin, “Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 17 (January 1986), pp. 63-92. (https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3932(86)90006-1) 3 Goodfriend, Marvin, “The Fed Needs a Credible Commitment to Price Stability,” testimony before the Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, March 16, 2017. (https://financialservices.house.gov/uploadedfiles/03.16.2017_marvin_goodfriend_testimony.pdf) 3 The FOMC has been reluctant to relinquish policymaking to following a simple rule because no one rule works well enough across a variety of economic models and circumstances, and judgment will likely always need to be a part of policymaking. Nonetheless, rules provide useful benchmarks. The Board of Governors has begun to include a discussion of rules as benchmarks in the monetary policy report.4 In some of my speeches I have referred to simple rules that have been shown to yield good economic outcomes as reference points to explain my own views of appropriate policy.5 The Cleveland Fed’s website regularly updates the outcomes of seven simple policy rules across several forecasts.6 Of course, one of the communications challenges for the FOMC continues to be how to convey to the public a good sense of how policy is likely to respond conditional on how the economy evolves without implying that policy is pre-committed to a particular policy path regardless of how the economy evolves. My own view is that if the Committee were willing to expand what it says in its post-meeting statement, it could give a better sense of its reaction function, its medium-run outlook, the risks around the outlook, and policy rationale. The statement could provide a summary of changes in a consistent set of indicators on inflation, inflation expectations, the unemployment rate, employment growth, output growth, and financial conditions that the Committee regularly assesses to formulate its outlook and view of appropriate policy. The statement would convey whether the accumulated changes in these indicators have materially changed the Committee’s outlook. That outlook and the risks around the outlook would also be summarized. The statement would then describe the Committee’s policy decision, tying that policy to the achievement of its policy goals, given the outlook and risks. The statement would articulate the considerations the Committee would take into account when determining future changes in policy to 4 See Board of Governors, “Monetary Policy Report,” February 7, 2020, pp. 33-37. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20200207_mprfullreport.pdf ) 5 See, for example, Mester, Loretta J., “The Outlook for the Economy and Monetary Policy in 2020,” National Association for Business Economics, 36th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, DC, February 24, 2020. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20200224-outlook-for-the-economy- and-monetary-policy-in-2020) 6 See “Simple Monetary Policy Rules,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/our- research/indicators-and-data/simple-monetary-policy-rules) 4 help the public anticipate how policy is likely to change in response to changes in economic developments that affect the economic outlook, without having to be prescient about how those conditions will actually evolve. Since the FOMC’s assessment of risks is an important part of the policy discussion, for the four meetings a year in which the FOMC releases its Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the Committee could release the balance of risk graphs that are part of the SEP with the other charts released at the time of the press conference, rather than waiting three weeks to release them with the minutes of the meeting. I believe enhancements like this would allow the FOMC to better control the narrative about its economic and policy views and they are consistent with Marvin’s desire to increase FOMC transparency in a productive way. A second thing Marvin said in his confirmation hearing statement was that his years at the Richmond Fed “gave him a deep appreciation of the role of the regional Reserve Banks in the Federal Reserve System,” and that the regional structure encourages diverse perspectives and innovative thinking that he would consider in formulating monetary policy.7 In 1998, Marvin was a presenter at a workshop on the structure of the newly formed European Central Bank and laid out some of the benefits of the decentralized structure of the Federal Reserve System.8 The regional structure enhances credibility by making the institution less prone to political pressure. The diffusion of power across the 12 regional Reserve Banks helps build rapport with constituencies throughout the country. The regional structure also aids communication. It helps the institution collect information on economic and financial developments across the country. Reserve Banks have boards of directors drawn from the private sector and typically have multiple advisory councils; their presidents and staffs speak regularly with a large number of contacts representing business, labor, consumers, and banking. In a dynamic economy, anecdotal 7 See “Statement of Marvin Goodfriend (2018). 8 See Goodfriend, Marvin, “The Role of a Regional Bank in a System of Central Banks,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 51, 1999, pp. 51-71. (https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-2231(00)00004-X) and reprinted in Economic Quarterly, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 86, Winter 2000, pp. 7-25. (https://www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/economic_quarterly/2000/winter/goodfriend). The workshop was “Monetary Policy of the ESCB: Strategic Implementation Issues,” sponsored by the Bank of Italy, IGIER, and Bocconi University, July 6-7, 1998, in Milan, Italy. 5 information from the regional Reserve Banks can provide early indications of changing sentiment or developing trends well before they show up in the data. Because the dispersion of activity across the country is not even, the regional structure also allows for some specialization in expertise about particular industries relevant to each region, expertise that can be called on when needed. A further benefit of the regional presence is that it helps the Fed disseminate its policy messages via speeches and presentations made by Reserve Bank officials. In addition, it provides a way to collect information about the impact of its policy in the community. An example of the power of the regional structure in action was the program of Fed Listens events that the System held as part of its ongoing review of its monetary policy framework. These events were held across the country to gain the perspectives of people with diverse backgrounds and in different economic circumstances about how our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices affect them.9 As has been documented, the regional Reserve Banks have also been able to provide thought leadership within the Federal Reserve System.10 Reserve Bank economists regularly interact with academic economists and have provided a way for diverse analytical methods and innovative thinking to enter into the process of monetary policymaking, helping the institution to guard against group think and leading to better policy outcomes. Ideas such as rational expectations, time consistency, the important roles of credibility and commitment, and inflation targeting first came into the System via a Reserve Bank.11 The 9 A summary of the Cleveland Fed’s Fed Listens event is available at https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom -and- events/events/2019/policy-summit/fed-listens.aspx. A full list of Fed Listens events is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed- listens-events.htm. 10 See Bordo, Michael D., and Edward S. Prescott, “Federal Reserve Structure, Economic Ideas, and Monetary and Financial Policy,” NBER Working Paper No. 26098, July 2019 and Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper No. 19-13, June 2019. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/publications/working- papers/2019-working-papers/wp-1913-federal-reserve-structure-economic-ideas-and-monetary-and-financial- policy.aspx), and Wheelock, David C., “National Monetary Policy by Regional Design: The Evolving Role of Federal Reserve Banks in Federal Reserve System Policy,” in Regional Aspects of Monetary Policy in Europe, eds. Jurgen von Hagen and Christopher J. Waller, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000, pp. 241-274. (https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-6390-4_9) 11 See Bordo and Prescott (2019). 6 Federal Reserve has been criticized at times for offering a cacophony of views that can be detrimental to clear communication. However, the reality is that the economy is complex and so is monetary policymaking. Different models, techniques, and measurements need to be brought to bear in order to assess appropriate monetary policy. Participants on the FOMC bring their perspectives to the table and these perspectives are inputs into the consensus-building process. While the FOMC works hard to get to a consensus, there will inevitably be times when individual policymakers hold different views. These diverse views are shared with the public and ultimately result in better policymaking as sound ideas gain traction. Indeed, the contributions that Marvin Goodfriend made while he was an economist and policy advisor at the Richmond Fed prove this point. His arguments on the value of transparency and good communication in monetary policymaking began in the 1980s and ultimately gained traction within the System. The FOMC can thank Marvin Goodfriend for starting us on our journey toward better policy communications in support of more effective monetary policy, a journey that continues to this day.

Statement Regarding My Dissenting Vote at the Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee Held on March 15, 2020* Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland March 17, 2020 * The views expressed here are those of the author and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. 1 I usually discuss my views on the economy and monetary policy in public speeches. Because of the coronavirus, my upcoming speeches have been canceled, so I am providing this statement in lieu of a speech. On March 15, 2020, I dissented from the action of the majority of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). As the post-meeting statement issued by the Committee notes, I was fully supportive of all of the actions taken to promote the smooth functioning of markets and the flow of credit to households and businesses but preferred to reduce the target range of the federal funds rate to 1/2 to 3/4 percent instead of to 0 to 1/4 percent as was done. The coronavirus outbreak is harming communities and disrupting economic activity in the U.S. and other countries. In the Fourth Federal Reserve District and elsewhere in the country, steps are being taken to protect people’s health, including practicing social distancing, canceling gatherings, and closing schools. When they are able to, businesses have invoked work-from-home practices and many have restricted all nonessential travel. These are necessary steps taken in the interest of public health. There will be a sharp pullback in economic activity, at least in the near term, as the country focuses on tackling the challenges posed by the virus. The recent fiscal policy actions to increase access to testing and healthcare for those who are sick, to support public and private healthcare providers who are dealing with virus containment and the treatment of ill patients, and to help workers and small businesses that will be most affected by work stoppages are the types of government policy measures that can be most helpful in defending against the adverse consequences of the disease for individuals and the economy. In the wake of the widening spread of the virus and the rising level of uncertainty it brings, global financial conditions have tightened considerably, as investors, businesses, and financial institutions reassess their tolerance for risk and their economic outlooks. In the week leading up to our recent FOMC meeting, increased stress and illiquidity were seen in financial markets, including the U.S. Treasury 2 market, a foundational market for the world’s financial system. In response, the Federal Reserve expanded its overnight and term repurchase agreement operations to help to improve liquidity, and I fully supported this action. However, illiquid market conditions continued. Lack of liquidity in financial markets is a first-order problem that can reverberate through the financial system and the economy and hinder the transmission of monetary policy throughout the economy. It is critical that there is sufficient liquidity to allow markets to function in an orderly way so that credit continues to flow to households and businesses. So I fully supported all of the actions that the Federal Reserve announced on March 15 to help ensure that there is adequate liquidity in financial markets so that trades can be made and credit can continue to flow. These measures include increasing our holdings of U.S. Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities; lowering the rate on the standing U.S. dollar liquidity swap arrangements; reducing the spread between the rate at which depository institutions can borrow at the Federal Reserve’s discount window (the primary credit rate) and the top of the federal funds rate target range to 0 basis points; instituting term discount window lending; encouraging banks to use the liquidity and intraday credit available at the Federal Reserve’s discount window and to use their own capital and liquidity buffers as they lend to households and businesses affected by the coronavirus; and reducing reserve requirement ratios to zero percent. If market illiquidity continues, I will support our taking further actions to address funding needs, including activating facilities like those the Federal Reserve has used in the past, including the commercial paper funding facility, to help ensure access to credit by small businesses, and the term auction facility to auction term funds to depository institutions should their use of the discount window prove insufficient. When markets are not functioning well, the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to the economy is disrupted, and any reduction in the target federal funds rate will have less of an impact on the real 3 economy. In current circumstances, with social distancing and the stoppage of spending activity, rate cuts are also less impactful. I dissented because I viewed a 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate as appropriate, in support of the liquidity actions we were taking and in light of the outlook. I did not favor returning the funds rate to zero and using up all of our interest-rate policy space at this time when the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to the economy is impaired. I preferred to stage our policy actions by first providing liquidity to improve market functioning, supported by a smaller reduction in the funds rate. This would have preserved the option of a further cut in the funds rate, if needed, for a time when market functioning had improved and such an action could be expected to be most effective in supporting the economy as it emerges from the health crisis after the medical response has been put in place, new cases of the virus have begun to stabilize, social distancing has eased, and life begins to return to some semblance of normal. Despite my dissent at our recent meeting, I have the utmost respect for Chair Jay Powell and other colleagues on the FOMC who reached a different conclusion than I did and for the Federal Reserve’s policymaking process, which allows for a full discussion of the issues and the opportunity to express dissenting views, as we all work to set monetary policy to promote our longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment on behalf of the American public.

An Update on the Economy and the Federal Reserve’s Policy Response Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland POWER Series CFA Society Chicago Chicago, IL (via videoconference) May 12, 2020 1 Introduction I thank the CFA Society Chicago and the CFA’s Women’s Network for inviting me to speak today. In preparing my remarks, I noticed that the last formal speech I gave on the economy was on March 3, which seems like a lifetime ago, and it was in London, which seems like a world away. A lot has happened since then. So before the question and answer portion of today’s session, I’d like to start with a brief update on the economy and the Federal Reserve’s policy response. As always, the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The coronavirus pandemic is a global public health crisis that has inflicted pain and hardship on people all over the world. I want to express my deepest sympathies to those who have been affected by the virus. This is an unprecedented situation. In the interests of public health, the country has taken aggressive social distancing measures to limit the spread of the virus, resulting in a shutdown of much of the economy. This investment in public health is buying time for the healthcare system to increase its capacity to care for the sick, for doctors and scientists to learn more about the disease itself, and for the country to develop tests and treatments. This investment is beginning to pay off in terms of fewer new hospitalizations in some locations. We owe a great deal of thanks to the healthcare workers, public health officials, scientists, and all those who support them as they battle the virus, and to all the people working in essential activities, including grocery stores, delivery companies, and municipal services, whose dedication allows many of us to stay safely at home. While the shutdown has yielded public health benefits, its effects on the economy have been swift and severe. In the first quarter, real output declined at a nearly 5 percent annual rate, with real consumption down over 7-1/2 percent and nonresidential business fixed investment down nearly 9 percent. And these sharp declines reflect mainly what occurred in just one month, March. In April, the unemployment rate surged to 14.7 percent, its highest level since the Great Depression. Remember, it was only this past 2 February when the unemployment rate was a low 3.5 percent. Over the past two months, payrolls declined by more than 21 million jobs; that is nearly the same the number of jobs added over the entire 10-plus-year expansion. There were losses across all major sectors. The deterioration in the labor market is even sharper than these numbers indicate. A large number of people left the workforce last month and they do not show up in the unemployment rate, and many workers had their hours cut. Certainly, this is the worst and speediest deterioration in the labor market many of us have ever seen. Both headline and core inflation readings moved down in March, reflecting the drop in oil prices due to both supply and demand conditions in global markets, and the start of the shutdown in activity. I expect inflation will move down further this year because the sharp pullback in demand will outweigh any upward pressure due to limited supply in certain goods and services. Our outreach at the Cleveland Fed is painting a very painful picture. Since mid-March, we have watched confidence among regional businesses and households drop from week to week as the negative effects of the virus have risen. Regional firms are taking defensive positions, pulling back from risk taking, conserving cash, putting capital expenditures on hold, and drawing on their credit lines. At the start of the shutdown, many told us that they intended to keep their employees on their payrolls, but over time, an increasing number have felt the need to lay off or furlough workers. The Cleveland Fed’s national survey of consumers indicates that most respondents initially thought the virus outbreak would last less than six months. More now believe it will last one year, and a growing number think it could last two years.1 In some sense, the sharp contraction we are seeing should not come as a surprise: it is a direct result of the necessary actions taken to shut down activity to try to limit the spread of the virus. Nevertheless, the numbers are eye-popping. And it is worth noting that much of the sacrifice is being borne by the most 1 The Cleveland Fed’s website provides updates of these survey results each Wednesday on the Consumers and COVID-19 page, https://www.clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and-data/consumers-and-covid-19.aspx. 3 vulnerable in our economy: lower-income workers and communities and small businesses. In fact, the job losses in April fell disproportionately on lower-wage workers. This resulted in a sharp rise in average hourly earnings in the report, which was not indicative of the state of the job market. Our outreach paints a more accurate picture. Over three-quarters of the regional community development organizations recently surveyed by the Cleveland Fed said that the low- and moderate-income areas they serve are experiencing significant disruptions that will hamper recovery. I anticipate that the second quarter will show the most severe effects on the economy. Given the unprecedented nature of the shutdown, private-sector forecasters are offering a wide range of estimates for second quarter real GDP growth, with most falling in the range of minus 25 to minus 40 percent. My own estimate is in the middle of this range, but with numbers so bad, the precision seems less relevant. I anticipate that the reported unemployment rate is likely to go up further, perhaps to 20 percent or even more. Looking ahead, parts of the country are beginning to relax some of the stay-at-home orders, and economic activity will likely begin to pick up in the second half of the year. But these are still early days, and there is considerable uncertainty around what the recovery will look like. It will depend on the evolution of the virus and the success of our methods to control its spread while it is still among us. It will also depend on how successful policy actions are in ensuring that the temporary disruption in activity does not cause more persistent damage to the economy and that the economy is well staged for a recovery. Let me discuss some of these policy actions and then talk about the outlook. Unprecedented times require unprecedented actions. Both the federal government and the Federal Reserve took action quickly. These relief efforts can be viewed as building a bridge to get households and businesses from the generally good economy we had in February to the other side of the pandemic shutdown period. The shutdown period has lengthened over time, driven by the course of the disease. So 4 the bridge has to be longer than first assumed, and it also has to be wider, as more households and firms are in need of some kind of help. Fiscal policymakers have taken significant actions, including making grants to individuals, certain businesses hit hardest by the pandemic, and states and municipalities. They have expanded unemployment benefits and have funded the Paycheck Protection Program, which provides small businesses with loans that turn into grants if they maintain their payrolls. As the magnitude of the need has come into better focus, the federal government has increased its level of support. Although the amount of support has been sizable, so is the depth of the economic downturn. In my view, further direct fiscal support will be needed if we are to avoid the longer-lasting damage to the economy that would happen if job losses become persistent and a large share of otherwise viable businesses fail. The Federal Reserve is not legally able to make grants, but it has taken significant actions and has committed to using its full set of tools to support the economy, guided by our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. The actions fall into three general categories. First, some of the Fed’s actions focus on ensuring that financial markets have enough liquidity to continue to function well. Well-functioning financial markets allow credit to flow to households and businesses and monetary policy to effectively transmit to broader financial conditions. The Fed aggressively responded to stresses in the U.S. Treasury market by purchasing Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities and by conducting operations in the repo market. With the approval and financial backing of the U.S. Treasury, the Fed is also setting up emergency lending facilities to serve as a backstop to other key credit markets, including money market mutual funds and the commercial paper market. And the Fed is ensuring that primary dealers have access to liquidity and that our central bank counterparties abroad have access to dollar funding. Although volatility and risk spreads have not returned to pre-pandemic levels, there has been a significant lessening of stress and an improvement in market functioning in many markets since these actions have been taken. 5 A second set of Fed actions focuses more directly on supporting the flow of credit to households, to businesses of all sizes, and to state and local governments. These programs include the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, the Main Street Lending Program, the Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, and the Municipal Liquidity Facility.2 Based on consultations with both lenders and potential borrowers, the Fed adjusted the terms on some of these programs to ensure that they will support the economy as effectively as they can while safeguarding taxpayer funds. The third category of Fed actions focuses on banks because much of the flow of credit to households and businesses relies on the banking system. The Fed has encouraged banks to use its discount window as a source of liquidity and to work with their borrowers affected by the virus. The Board of Governors has temporarily relaxed some of the regulatory requirements and supervisory oversight so that banks have greater capacity to lend in a safe and sound manner through the downturn. Our current situation highlights the value of a resilient banking system, one that builds up sufficient capital and liquidity buffers in good economic times in preparation for bad ones. While this is a long list of actions, the Fed continues to look for gaps where our tools can be used to benefit the economy. For example, the Board of Governors is evaluating an approach to meet the needs of nonprofits, including institutions of higher education, because they play an important role in the economy. And I shouldn’t conclude this list of policy actions without discussing our usual tool of monetary policy, the federal funds rate. The FOMC has reduced its target range for the fed funds rate to 0 to 1/4 percent, and we have said that we expect to maintain this target range until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum employment and price 2 More information on the Federal Reserve’s actions in response to the effects of the coronavirus on the economy is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/covid-19.htm. 6 stability goals. Low rates cannot stop the sharp drop in activity caused by the pandemic shutdown, but once the economy begins to reopen, accommodative monetary policy will be needed for some time to support the recovery. So what might that recovery look like? A reasonable baseline outlook is that as some of the stay-at-home restrictions are lifted, the economy will begin to grow again in the second half of this year and unemployment will begin to move down, with continued recovery in 2021. I would expect this improvement to start off slowly, with variation across sectors, because even if people can resume some of their normal activities, they need to feel some reassurance that it is safe to do so. In some industries, like travel and leisure and hospitality, it will likely take quite a while longer for activity to pick up than in others. Under this baseline, by the end of this year, output would still be below its level at the end of last year, by 5 percent or even somewhat more, and the unemployment rate would still be in the high single digits or low double digits. I expect inflation to remain low for the remainder of this year and for some time to come. Achieving this outcome depends on a number of things falling into place. It depends on there being a solid enough bridge of economic relief and support. It depends on the relaxation of stay-at-home restrictions being based on public health criteria and being done in a careful and responsible way, respecting guidelines on social distancing, mask-wearing, and hygiene. It depends on more progress being made on testing and treatments so that the virus can be better controlled and people feel safe re- engaging in activity. And it depends on the medical system being prepared to handle the periodic increases in cases that epidemiologists tell us to expect. These are a lot of conditions, which is another way of saying there is considerable risk around this outcome. It isn’t difficult to imagine more pessimistic scenarios, especially if an upsurge in virus cases necessitates shutting down activity again or if there is considerably more harm in terms of business and personal bankruptcies or if instabilities in the 7 banking system arise. At this point, I think some of the more pessimistic outcomes are almost as likely as the reasonable baseline I just described. So I think it makes sense for policymakers to continue to monitor the economy, continue to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and the smooth functioning of financial markets, evaluate several scenarios rather than focusing only on a modal forecast, and stand ready to address the challenges that will arise as the country incrementally re-engages in economic activity as the year progresses.
