Message from the President Kashkari discusses his goals for the Minneapolis Fed, highlighting the important and critical challenges facing people throughout the Ninth District. April 18, 2016 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Message from the President Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter In the short time I’ve been at the Minneapolis Fed, I’ve learned a great deal—about the institution itself certainly and the System we’re part of, but even more so about the community we serve, the Ninth District. In particular, I’ve learned about some of the economic challenges our area faces, from hunger and housing shortages to unemployment and unnecessary regulation. These problems are daunting. But by no means are they unbeatable. I’ve learned as well that the people of the Ninth District are bringing incredible resources to address these challenges: running food shelves and homeless shelters; building innovative, job-generating small businesses; growing Fortune 500 companies that employ thousands; working with government agencies to design policies that encourage economic vitality. And perhaps most importantly, educating tomorrow’s citizens to create an even healthier economy, society and culture. It’s my goal here at the Minneapolis Fed to support this effort with strong, bold policy ideas. I’ve been incredibly impressed by the talent and dedication of my colleagues here at the Fed. Through our outreach and research programs, we’re constantly learning more about the district economy. We’re doing our best to serve its needs through our contributions to policy, payments, supervision, knowledge and community development. Our Center for Indian Country Development is a prime example. In the conversation that follows, my intent is to share a little about myself, my goals and, above all, the policy efforts we’re launching, such as our Ending Too Big to Fail initiative. But I also hope to convey some of my thoughts on broader questions about the national and international environment we work in. I welcome more questions from the people of the Ninth District. To this end, I’ll be traveling widely over the coming months to meet with as many of you as possible, to learn and share more—working together to build and strengthen the district’s economic future. 2015 Annual Report Interview with Neel Kashkari 2015 Annual Report Essay Message from the First Vice President Jim Lyon highlights the Minneapolis Fed's community development work as well as the Bank's operational excellence in 2015 2015 Financial Statements The Federal Reserve Board engaged KPMG to audit the 2015 combined and individual financial statements of the Reserve Banks and Maiden Lane LLC 2015 by the Numbers Explore details and processing volumes for some of the Bank's operations Video: Neel Kashkari on changes to policy framework Kashkari: "When the time called for it, the Fed was willing to be bold and creative and to adapt." Video: Neel Kashkari on The Fed's reputation and communication Kashkari: "We need to show the public who we are. This is an amazing institution with wonderful, talented people who care about their communities, who care about the country." Video: Neel Kashkari on the origin of the Too Big to Fail policy initiative Kashkari: "I immediately started talking to the experts here at the bank in research and banking supervision, asking them: What do you think are the big issues that we as a country need to address?" More On Region & Community More On Region & Community Related Content Kolb appointed SVP of Risk and Compliance at the Minneapolis Fed News New members named to Minneapolis Fed advisory council News Minneapolis Fed welcomes 2026–2027 class of Institute visiting scholars News Related Content Kolb appointed SVP of Risk and Compliance at the Minneapolis Fed News Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Update on Minneapolis Fed Ending Too Big to Fail Initiative Remarks given at the Minnesota Chamber of Commerce in Minneapolis, MN. April 18, 2016 Minnesota Chamber of Commerce | Minneapolis Neel Kashkari President and CEO Update on Minneapolis Fed Ending Too Big to Fail Initiative Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Your browser does not support the audio element. Speech and Q&A ( video ) Note * Good afternoon. Thank you for that warm introduction. I appreciate the Minnesota Chamber of Commerce hosting this event today and inviting me to address its members. Before I begin, I would just like to remind everyone that the views I express today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Board of Governors, which sets supervision and regulatory policy for the Federal Reserve System. In today’s talk, I will cover two main items. First, I will explain why we launched a major initiative to end too big to fail (TBTF). I continue to think that the largest banks 1 in the country are too big to fail, and I am skeptical that current efforts to fix that problem will ultimately work. I will provide a few key examples from the recent financial crisis, when I ran the Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP), which explain why I am skeptical. Second, I will summarize where our initiative stands today. We just had our first symposium, 2 which focused on two transformational reforms to end TBTF. I will summarize key points I took away from that event. I will then conclude with issues that I continue to wrestle with as we seek the right reform framework. Then I will be happy to take your questions. Current Efforts to Address TBTF I come at the too-big-to-fail problem from the perspective of a policymaker who was on the front line responding to the 2008 financial crisis. In the past six years, legislators and regulators have worked hard to address the TBTF problem. My colleagues in the Federal Reserve System, working closely with other financial regulators, have implemented important tools and regulations that are making the financial system stronger under the reform framework Congress established. I agree that many current reform efforts are headed in the right direction, particularly those that make banks stronger with additional capital, deeper liquidity and stress testing. But I am not sure those measures go far enough. More importantly, we know that banks will still get into trouble. So we need a way to deal with failing large banks. The current reforms attempt to address this problem with a new legal framework to resolve failing banks combined with a plan to bring new investors into banks who agree to absorb losses when the bank gets into trouble. The idea is that by having these new investors take the hit, taxpayers will not be on the hook. This sounds good, but it has not worked in practice in prior crises, and I doubt it will work in the future. I fear policymakers will have to turn to taxpayers rather than impose losses on creditors. My experiences from the 2008 crisis highlight this problem. One of the toughest challenges we faced was dealing with risk spreading between large banks: Multiple large banks were under stress at the same time, and actions we might have taken to recapitalize one bank (by haircutting creditors or counterparties) could actually lead to increased stress at other banks as their creditors worried they too might face losses. In effect, a “run” at one bank could quickly become a run at multiple banks. This risk is one reason the Treasury Department asked Congress in 2008 to authorize the TARP, giving the government the ability to inject capital rather than haircut creditors as a means of recapitalization. In fact, Treasury’s announcement on October 13, 2008, to simultaneously inject capital into nine of the largest American banks was done in part to stop the spreading of risk from one bank to another. The challenge of sticking debt holders with losses also occurred with the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, providing another relevant example of the failure of debt as a loss absorption instrument during a crisis. In 2001, the GSEs began issuing subordinated debt with the specific intention that it would be available to absorb losses if they ran into trouble. The GSEs compensated investors with higher yields than senior debt holders for the additional risk they were taking. During the 2008 crisis, because of widespread risk in financial markets, Treasury chose to protect the GSEs’ subordinated debt rather than haircut it. The risky economic environment prevented debt that had been specifically issued to absorb losses from being harmed. Instead, taxpayer money again had to be used to recapitalize the GSEs. Let me point to one more example from the crisis about the difference between intentions to impose losses and actual behavior. Some large banks had sponsored off-balance-sheet structured investment vehicles (SIVs) before the crisis. They had no legal obligation to provide a financial backstop if their SIVs ran into trouble. Yet during the crisis, some banks chose to rescue their SIVs because of reputational risks they would incur if they had allowed the SIVs to collapse. The SIVs’ liabilities became the sponsoring banks’ liabilities. During the crisis, reputational risk broke through what had appeared to be a strong legal firewall. Perhaps it is easier to impose losses on creditors today than it was during the crisis, but a recent case gives me pause. Some large European banks have issued contingent convertible debt, which is designed to convert to equity if a bank runs into trouble. This debt, however, may actually be a mechanism that spreads uncertainty from one big bank to another. We saw this in recent months as concern arose that some banks might have insufficient capital to be eligible to pay coupons on their contingent convertible debt securities. Proponents of such contingent debt argue that it will be cheaper for banks to issue than common equity. Given the volatility of this debt in recent months, it is hard to see bond investors not demanding equity-like returns for the risks they are taking. If it isn’t significantly cheaper than equity as a funding source, the benefits of the additional complexity and unpredictability are not justified. And I have serious concerns that such contingent convertible debt will add to uncertainty in a crisis environment rather than reduce it. At a minimum, regulatory structures must not make a crisis worse. Our ability to impose losses on creditors of large banks is just as important now as it was prior to the 2008 crisis. The recent decision by the Federal Reserve and FDIC to deem the resolution plans of some of the largest banks in the country not credible suggests that their complexity, operations and structures continue to make their potential failure a real challenge for all of us. To me, this means we must work even harder to reduce the likelihood of large bank failures because resolving them in ways that does not trigger widespread economic harm is proving so difficult. What do I take away from these examples? First, as we analyze the current regulatory framework and other potential solutions to TBTF, we must attempt to understand whether they would really allow creditors and not taxpayers to take losses. Second, we must work to assess whether these plans increase the transmission of risk from one bank to another. Third, complex securities and legal protections may not behave as expected in a future crisis. If they don’t, taxpayers will likely be on the hook. Update on Our Initiative to End TBTF Our initiative includes a series of public symposiums to be held throughout this year. Experts from around the country will help examine these issues and will contribute to informing our plan to end TBTF, which we will release to the public by the end of the year. Today we published a summary of the first symposium, 3 and all presented materials and video recordings are available on our website at minneapolisfed.org. When I gave my initial speech on ending TBTF in February, 4 I highlighted three potential options experts have offered to address systemic risks posed by large banks: (1) breaking them up, (2) substantially increasing capital requirements and (3) taxing leverage across the financial system. But we also asked for other ideas from experts and the public at large. Experts have pointed us to another potential option: alternative resolution mechanisms that could address some of the perceived shortcomings of current resolution plans. We have added this fourth option for consideration and could potentially add others as we move forward with our initiative. In our first Ending TBTF symposium on April 4, we heard from experts about the need to assess the costs and benefits of proposals, and we explored the first two potential solutions to TBTF: substantially increasing capital requirements and breaking up large banks. I will now offer my perspective on the ideas that were discussed at the symposium. Costs and Benefits of Regulation Former Federal Reserve Governor Randy Kroszner made a strong case for the need for carefully considering costs and benefits in assessing current and potential future regulatory reforms. He argued that we need to consider the costs of new regulations against the benefits of increased safety in our banking system. How much safety do we want, and what price are we willing to pay for that safety? A simple analogy to illustrate the trade-offs between increased safety and increased costs comes from airport security. We understand that air travel includes some inherent risk of falling victim to a terrorist attack. The odds are very low, but not zero. One cost of safety is waiting in airport security lines. Of course, we could always be safer. For example, we could discard x-ray machines and instead hand-search all bags individually. But what is the cost of this added safety? Instead of 15 minutes to go through security, it might take an hour. Instead of the ticket prices we are familiar with, routine flights might cost tens or hundreds of dollars more to pay for additional TSA agents. As a society, we have decided that the costs of extra safety provided by hand-searching all bags outweigh the benefits. As the terror threat environment changes, for better or for worse, we may adjust the amount of safety we are willing to pay for in both time and money. Preventing banking failures that could trigger a widespread economic downturn poses similar trade-offs between safety and costs. The benefits of a more resilient financial system are clear: less-frequent and less-severe financial crises, resulting in reduced loss of income, jobs, savings and foreclosures for Main Street. What are the costs? Potentially lower average economic growth between financial crises. For example, increasing regulatory requirements as a result of Dodd-Frank has forced many banks to hire more compliance officers and auditors. Requiring banks to issue more equity may increase their average funding costs. These cost increases would have to at least in part be passed on to customers in the form of higher borrowing costs. Increased borrowing costs for businesses to fund a new factory, or for families to fund a home or car purchase, could lead to lower economic growth for society. However, we must consider not only the expected growth rates between crises, but also the expected growth rates including the effects of financial crises. An illustration of two simplified economies highlights the choice: One economy has a less-regulated financial system and experiences a higher average growth rate between financial crises. But it also experiences more-frequent and more-severe financial crises than the more-regulated, slower-growth economy. Depending on the costs and benefits of the various regulations, Main Street could be better off in one economy or potentially the other. I found the discussion of costs and benefits compelling—but, as Governor Kroszner noted, we must not suffer from “analysis paralysis.” Weighing of costs and benefits will be an important part of our work to develop our plan to end TBTF. Substantially Increasing Capital Requirements Professor Anat Admati of Stanford presented her recommendation to substantially increase capital requirements for the largest banks. Before the financial crisis, large banks averaged 3 percent shareholder capital. Today, with the implementation of the Dodd-Frank and Basel III standards, large banks have approximately 6 percent shareholder capital. 5 The presenter made the case that is far too low and should be closer to 25 percent, noting that nonbanks typically have at least 30 percent equity funding. The advantages of substantially increased capital requirements are that banks are much better positioned to withstand unknown, and perhaps unforeseeable, shocks in the future. Increased capital will force banks to internalize the negative externality of the costs to Main Street of a financial crisis. Discussants noted that substantially higher capital requirements could lead to higher borrowing costs for businesses and families, which then have the potential to slow economic growth. There was a wide range of views about the magnitude of such effects. Discussants also noted that by substantially increasing capital requirements of large banks, risk may be encouraged to migrate from the highly regulated banking sector to the unregulated shadow banking sector. For example, if just as many subprime loans were written leading up to the financial crisis, but rather than being held by large banks, they were held by other highly leveraged financial firms, would the financial system have been any safer? Perhaps not. I found this to be an important consideration as we work to reduce systemic risk. As I listened to the wide range of views on the merits and costs of higher capital, it struck me that we could increase capital requirements in a straightforward way to address TBTF. As we saw in my earlier comments about the behavior of legal structures in a crisis, there is a strong argument that simpler solutions are more likely to be effective than complex ones, so I see virtue in focusing on increasing common equity to assets, which seems the simplest and potentially the most powerful in terms of safety and soundness. More capital has another advantage. We have seen extraordinary structural changes in our financial system over the past several decades. We have to be prepared for more change. More capital will absorb losses even from activities we cannot anticipate today. Thinking back to my earlier comments about risk spreading between banks in the 2008 crisis, I realize that capital by itself is not a direct firewall to contain risk, but at a minimum, it does not intensify the spreading of risk from bank to bank. If all of the largest banks had enough capital that investors were confident in their strength, even during an economic shock, such concerns about shared risks could be substantially reduced. We saw this in 2008, as noted above, when Treasury injected capital into the nine large banks simultaneously. Altering the Organizational Structure of Large Banks Professor Simon Johnson of MIT and senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics presented his recommendation to impose an effective cap on bank size of 2 percent of GDP, or approximately $350 billion. His proposal is for capital requirements to dramatically increase if banks exceed that size requirement. The presenter noted that the failure of Lehman Brothers, which had in excess of $600 billion in assets, triggered widespread damage to financial markets in 2008, while the eventual failure of CIT Group, with $80 billion in assets, but potentially up to $120 billion in total exposure, did not. 6 The presenter argued that having large banks at the center of the U.S. financial system is a fairly recent phenomenon, taking off in the past couple of decades, and yet economic growth was strong in the decades before banks became so large and concentrated. He argued that there is little evidence this recent growth of large banks has led to real economic benefits for the U.S. economy. I had not heard this argument before the symposium and found it compelling. Discussants appropriately noted that simply having numerous smaller banks is not necessarily less risky than having one large bank, depending on the underlying risks each bank takes. For example, if a $3 trillion bank were to split into 10 $300 billion banks, and each of those new banks made identical investments, there is little enhancement to financial stability. If a shock were to hit the economy that imposed large losses on the original $3 trillion bank, the 10 smaller banks would simply share the identical losses, each coming under similar distress. I believe this argument, while logically true, must be tempered. It is unlikely that 10 smaller banks, each with its own management team and board of directors, would all make identical investment decisions to one another and to the original consolidated bank long into the future. To the extent their business strategies differed, financial stability should be enhanced. Discussants also expressed doubts about how easy it would be to actually implement a “break-up” plan if it were enacted. An image of government analysts arbitrarily deciding how to divide a trillion-dollar bank into smaller pieces, deciding, for example which branches and which operations went with which new entity, gives many people concern—including me. The presenter noted that rather than the government deciding how to divide a large bank, incentives should be put in place such that banks decide how to optimally divide themselves to meet a new regulatory cap. In fact, the new requirements put in place after the financial crisis have already encouraged some large financial institutions to shed some operations and assets. While the magnitude and speed of their spin-offs may not satisfy financial stability concerns, they do demonstrate firms’ ability to downsize in response to new requirements. I believe that given sufficient incentive, banks would be able to restructure themselves. Discussants presented analysis that large banks benefit the economy by providing economies of scale. While there is a wide range of estimates of such benefits, they should lead to lower operating costs compared to relatively smaller banks. I believe these scale arguments need to be thought of in the benefit and cost framework I mentioned before, as banks with scale may also pose significant risks to stability. But accepting it at face value, I worry that Dodd-Frank is adding to the advantage large banks have over small banks, given that complying with regulatory costs likely exhibits scale economies. We need a regulatory system that does not add to the advantage large banks have over small ones. Next Steps Reflecting on our first symposium, I am left with some important questions for further consideration: Should we view proposals to address TBTF in isolation, or could we combine them? How do the costs and benefits of proposed solutions line up relative to the status quo? How much confidence do we have that the solutions will perform as expected in a crisis environment? Will markets think the proposal credibly puts creditors at risk of loss? Will the solutions merely push risk into unregulated areas of the financial markets? Will the solutions promote fairness between the regulatory burdens imposed upon large, medium and small banks? How likely are the solutions to remain effective over decades? The Minneapolis Fed’s initiative to end TBTF is still in its early stages. Our next symposium is scheduled for May 16. We will hear from Professor John Cochrane of the Hoover Institution, who will present his plan to tax leverage across the financial system as a means of reducing systemic risk. In addition, we will hear from John Bovenzi of the Bipartisan Policy Center and Oliver Wyman, who will present an alternative resolution mechanism. We will once again have a group of experts bring a wide range of experiences and perspectives to respond to those proposals and offer their own ideas. Like the first one, all of our symposiums will be open to the press and live-streamed so that we can inform the public while we learn ourselves. We believe engaging the public in an open and transparent process is an important part of building confidence in our regulatory system. Thank you. Note * I thank Ron Feldman, Danita Ng, Jenni Schoppers, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, Tom Tallarini and David Wargin for giving helpful feedback on this speech. Endnotes 1 I use “banks” in this talk to include banks, bank holding companies and other nonbank financial institutions. 2 Visit the symposium website here . 3 Read the summary here . 4 Read the full speech here . 5 Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig, The Bankers’ New Clothes , 2013, p. 96. 6 See Johnson’s symposium outline here . Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

The Role and Limitations of Monetary Policy Remarks given at the Economic Club of Minnesota May 9, 2016 | 12:15 p.m. CT Economic Club of Minnesota | Minneapolis, Minnesota Neel Kashkari President and CEO The Role and Limitations of Monetary Policy Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Your browser does not support the audio element. Speech and Q&A ( video ) Media QA ( audio ) Note * Good morning. Thank you, Kathy, for that kind introduction. I commend you for your excellent judgment in selecting Mark Kennedy to lead the University of North Dakota as its new president. Congratulations, Mark, on this wonderful and well-deserved appointment, and thank you, and the Economic Club of Minnesota, for hosting this event and inviting me to address your members. Before I begin, I would just like to remind everyone that the views I express today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee. In this speech, I am going to talk about monetary policy—not just about what policy I think is appropriate today, but also about how I am approaching the task of communicating about monetary policy in the context of important problems we face as a nation. I am going to spend some time talking about what monetary policy can do for society, and what it can’t do, and why it’s important that we understand those differences. I find forming my monetary policy views in the current economic environment easier than determining how to communicate them in a way that advances the Fed’s policy goals. One of the things I really like about my job is that it is multifaceted. There is a large management responsibility leading an organization of a thousand people. There is a deep policy component, as we craft policy recommendations for interest rates as well as for other important economic topics such as financial stability. And there is the public facing aspect, both representing the Bank across the Ninth Federal Reserve District and advocating for our public policy views. As you can probably tell from our initiative to end too big to fail (TBTF), I am not shy about speaking my mind and advocating for policies I believe are in the best interest of the country. But I give careful consideration to whether drawing attention to an issue is the best way to positively influence that issue. In the case of TBTF, I believe we need to have a serious national conversation about whether we have done enough to address large bank failures. This is why we are having public symposiums to raise awareness and educate the American people while we educate ourselves. But not every issue will be advanced by drawing more attention to it, and this is why I have been more hesitant to speak out about monetary policy, even though I do have views about the right course of action. I think market participants are too focused on the Fed, and I am reluctant to draw even more attention to short-term monetary policy decisions, when attention should be focused on solutions to longer-term issues. When I think about the market’s preoccupation with every short-term move the Fed might make, I am reminded of the Summer of the Shark in 2001. Sharks had gone crazy and were biting people seemingly every day. Television crews were camped out at beaches ready to catch the latest bite. What was causing the sharks to turn so viciously on their human neighbors? Was it some new solar activity driving them crazy? Were they under orders from the aliens in Star Trek who lost interest in the whales? No. It turns out the sharks weren’t biting any more than usual. It was a slow news summer, and there was not much else to pay attention to. Given all the attention market participants pay to every FOMC statement, one would think the Fed could control a lot. But the truth is that central banks can’t influence many of the things that really matter to the long-term well-being of a society. We can’t influence trend productivity growth. We can’t influence competitiveness. We can’t influence educational performance. I think it is important to remind ourselves that central banks can really do only three things: (1) create a long-term stable monetary environment, (2) respond to an economic crisis and (3) influence short-term economic performance. Creating and maintaining a stable monetary environment is enormously important for society. Ensuring that inflation remains low and stable allows households and businesses to plan ahead and keeps borrowing costs low. Thus, by doing its inflation-stabilization job well over the long run, a central bank helps create the environment that allows an economy to flourish. We saw the damage caused to Main Street in the 1970s when the Fed failed to control inflation. It took bold action by the Volcker Fed to regain control and put the economy back on a stable course. The Federal Reserve was originally created by Congress in 1913 to help end the too-frequent occurrence of financial panics and crises. In response to the most recent financial crisis, the Fed brought extraordinary courage and creativity to stabilizing the financial system and preventing another Great Depression. If the Fed had failed to act, generations of Americans would have been even more negatively affected. Finally, between periods of crisis, the Fed’s job is to keep unemployment and inflation low by adjusting interest rates. This is important in the short term, but it doesn’t affect the underlying trajectory of the economy, although sometimes people think it can. For example, real interest rates today are very low by historical standards. Some people see these low long-term real interest rates as the result of decisions made by the Fed. The reality is they are not. Real interest rates have been falling around the world for the past few decades, largely driven by broader macroeconomic forces outside of any central bank’s control: demographic trends, technological advancements and global fiscal policies. In the face of these long-term trends, it has been appropriate policy for the Fed to set lower interest rates to achieve the best possible results for inflation and employment—but the Fed is just keeping pace with broader global trends, not causing them. So if the Fed doesn’t shape the long-term trajectory of the economy, who does? Our legislative and executive branches of government can influence many of the important determinants of macroeconomic outcomes for Main Street. Our tax, spending and trade policies influence how much we produce and consume at home versus import from or export to other nations. The tax system affects incentives to work, save and invest. Congress also determines how much public money we dedicate to educating our workforce and to basic research, which can lead to tomorrow’s breakthroughs. Ultimately, fiscal policy decisions like these will determine whether our children and grandchildren are better off than we are. Despite this, people seem to be paying much more attention to the Fed. This chart shows the number of articles that mention the Federal Reserve versus the number of articles that mention Congress in the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal over the past three decades. You can see the trend for yourselves. The focus of news coverage has been shifting toward the Fed and away from Congress, despite the comparatively small influence the Fed has on long-term economic performance. Why is this so? I will offer two possible explanations, though there are probably others as well. First, the Federal Reserve is providing much more information to the public. This is a positive from the perspective of transparency, but the Fed might also be occupying more mindshare because there is simply more information to digest. For example, prior to 1994, the Fed didn’t issue statements after FOMC meetings. Then it began issuing brief statements, sometimes just a few sentences, and not after every meeting. Today we issue five-paragraph statements after every meeting. Public communication from Federal Reserve officials has also increased substantially compared with prior decades. This increased transparency gives the public insight into the workings of the Fed, but it may not be costless if it is driving increased attention on each short-term decision the Fed makes. As an FOMC participant, I am going to focus my public comments on longer-term monetary policy issues and on explaining my own perception of the FOMC’s collective thinking rather than on predicting the next move we might make. A second possible explanation, especially in recent years, is that the lack of political consensus in Washington is leading to fewer policy actions by Congress and the executive branch. This next chart shows the decline in the number of bills passed by each Congress and signed into law by the president. From a policy perspective, we are having an extended slow news summer, and market participants are left to focus on where the action is: the FOMC’s short-term interest rate decisions. The truth is, whether the FOMC raises rates in June isn’t going to be what determines whether our children and grandchildren are better off than we are. Monetary policy objectives Now let me turn to how the Federal Reserve approaches its monetary policy responsibilities. Congress has given the FOMC a dual mandate: to promote “price stability” and “maximum employment.” In its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy , the FOMC explains the implications of this mandate for both the short run and the long run. In the short run, “ the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee’s assessments of its maximum level.” Although these objectives are often complementary, when they are not, the Committee “follows a balanced approach.” That is, the Committee puts weight on both objectives. In the longer run, the statement clarifies what the FOMC’s targets are (or are not). Specifically, the FOMC has interpreted its price stability mandate to mean keeping inflation close to 2 percent. This is a target, rather than a ceiling, which means persistent deviations above and below 2 percent are equally bad. However, the FOMC has not set a specific target for maximum employment. The lack of a specific target for employment reflects the limitations of monetary policy, a point to which I’ll return later. But first, let me turn to an assessment of current economic conditions and appropriate monetary policy. I’ll conclude that, while the recovery has been encouraging, I still see room for some improvement. Monetary policy outlook Let’s start with the Fed’s maximum employment mandate. The most widely known measure of labor market performance is the unemployment rate, which has largely recovered from its high level during and following the recession and, at 5.0 percent, is now close to the median FOMC participant’s assessments of its long-run value. Other indicators, however, suggest that the economy is not yet at maximum employment. Involuntary part-time employment remains elevated from its prerecession levels, and compensation growth remains subdued, though recent data and anecdotes suggest that it may finally be starting to pick up. Perhaps the most encouraging indication that further labor market improvements are feasible has been the sizable, and unexpected, recent increase in labor force participation. While the April employment data released last Friday showed a modest decline in labor force participation, the rate still rose from 62.4 percent last September to 62.8 percent in April, as the size of the labor force increased by almost 2 million people. Thus, although the unemployment rate edged down by only 0.1 percent over this period, the share of all adults who have a job increased from 59.3 percent to 59.7 percent. This is a very welcome development, especially given that some portions of our population—notably those with less education and certain minority groups such as African Americans and Hispanics—still have high unemployment rates. In recent years, conventional wisdom was that large numbers of people were permanently lost from the labor force due to the Great Recession, as the long-term unemployed became the permanently unemployable. Of course, we don’t know for sure, but the recent data suggest that is not necessarily true. The strong job market is bringing many back into the workforce, which is unquestionably a good thing for those workers, their families and society as a whole. Turning to the Fed’s “price stability” mandate, the inflation rate of personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, has remained persistently below the FOMC’s target of 2 percent for the past four years. This is true even when we set aside recent declines in oil prices and look at the core inflation rate, which excludes food and energy. Moreover, measures of inflation expectations provide little evidence that inflation is likely to increase above the 2 percent target in the near future. Inflation expectations measured in surveys of American families have remained generally stable, but tend to be in the lower part of their historical ranges. Measures based on financial market data also remain quite low. What does all of this imply for the stance of monetary policy? In short, given the lack of notable price and wage pressures and the possibility of drawing more people back into the labor market, I believe the current accommodative policy stance is appropriate. The usual cost of stimulating the labor market through accommodative monetary policy would be an undesired increase in inflation. But in the current circumstances, with inflation running below the Fed’s 2 percent target, an increase in inflation is actually desirable. Furthermore, while monetary policy’s influence on the labor market may not be enormous at this point, we can have at least some impact. If we can continue bringing displaced workers back into the labor force, we should. Fed watchers might conclude from these remarks that I am a so-called dove. But a year or two from now, if different economic conditions lead me to call for less accommodative policy, they might conclude that I have reversed myself and become a hawk. The truth is neither. The financial crisis taught me the limits of dogma. I learned humility and pragmatism the hard way. Limits to monetary policy’s influence on labor markets Although monetary policy plays an important role in promoting maximum employment, it does not play the most important role. The reason the FOMC has not specified a fixed goal for employment is that, while long-run inflation is primarily determined by monetary policy, nonmonetary factors largely determine the maximum level of employment and the long-run growth rate of the economy. Sustained efforts by the Fed to boost employment and output beyond levels consistent with nonmonetary fundamentals would ultimately lead only to higher inflation. There would be little benefit to the real economy, and there could be some harm. Thus the FOMC cannot achieve any employment level it wants. Instead, it must assess what the maximum level of employment is, and then set policy to achieve it. So, what are some of the nonmonetary factors that determine maximum employment? Rather than providing an exhaustive list, I will simply mention some factors that have been particularly relevant recently. First, demographics noticeably shape labor supply. For example, labor force participation and the employment-to-population ratio have fallen in part because the baby boomers are reaching retirement age. As the FOMC assesses how much slack is left in the labor market, we compare these measures not to their prerecession levels, but to their levels adjusted for structural demographic changes. Other factors, such as technological progress and the accumulation of physical capital, also affect the overall growth of the economy and labor demand, as firms will hire more workers when they are more productive. The recent low productivity growth is a development we are monitoring closely, which I will come back to in a moment. Another important factor is the ease with which potential employers and employees find each other and the incentives they have to form a relationship. Labor market policies, including minimum wage laws, income taxes, unemployment benefits and the ease with which a match can be terminated, all affect these incentives. The upshot of all of this is that, although monetary policy has contributed to the ongoing recovery in labor markets, it alone can get us only so far. Policy tools outside the Fed’s control can significantly influence many of the determinants of maximum employment. For example, in the longer run, policies that improve educational outcomes and skill development could increase “maximum employment.” So could policies that help all workers and firms to compete on a level playing field. Research conducted in part at the Minneapolis Fed has found that the government is requiring people to obtain a license to work in more occupations than ever. While the goal of such licensing is ostensibly consumer protection, often these requirements are really just barriers to competition. Relaxing unnecessary licensing requirements could help more people find jobs. In general, nonmonetary policy tools can have a larger, more direct impact on putting people back to work than monetary policy alone. In addition, the distribution of jobs within society is largely determined by nonmonetary factors. For example, one very important societal problem in America is the large gap between white and black unemployment. Here is a graph of unemployment rates by race compared with the national average. As you can see, in both good times and bad, African Americans tend to have a vastly higher unemployment rate than the national average. Analysis by our staff at the Minneapolis Fed has found that differences in education, age and other demographics explain very little of this gap. If we compare two otherwise identical workers, one white and one black, the black worker is significantly more likely to be unemployed. These differences in labor market opportunities are a tragedy for our country and a waste of the skills of many Americans. It is true that the Fed can in a small way help workers from disadvantaged groups, because when we provide monetary stimulus that raises employment nationwide, employment of all groups tends to rise. You can see that in the graph. But such stimulus has its limits because we must also maintain control of inflation. If we provided too much stimulus and lost control of inflation as in the 1970s, virtually all Americans would suffer. We might then have to raise interest rates aggressively to bring inflation back down—potentially causing a recession that could put out of work the very people we were trying to help. Nonmonetary policies are needed to address the root causes of the problems that unfairly leave some Americans behind. Limits to monetary policy’s influence on economic growth Finally, let me return to a recent example of an issue that I mentioned briefly at the beginning of my remarks: the financial markets’ obsession with the Fed’s actions in the short term and why this is suboptimal. The most notable economic development this year, in my view, has been the combination of rapid improvement in the labor market and very slow growth in output. The combination of slow output growth and rapid employment growth means that the average productivity of workers is growing slowly and sometimes even falling. Now, this weak productivity could be a statistical fluke, but it has gone on long enough that it is likely to at least partly reflect real economic developments. Moreover, it may be a troubling sign for the future of our economy. We don’t know. On the one hand, it may just be a cyclical effect of the workers rejoining the labor force now being much less productive than those already working. On the other hand, the weaker productivity may reflect long-term underlying trends in the use of capital or the pace of technological progress that could herald slower growth for many years to come, which would be very costly for society. At any rate, understanding what slower productivity growth means for economic growth is essential for policymakers, investors and the public. We must also remember that trend labor productivity is fundamentally outside the control of the Fed. An excessive focus on the next interest rate decision distracts us from important questions like this one. Conclusion In closing, I look forward to an era when the United States uses all of its policy tools to best achieve good economic outcomes for all members of our society. The Federal Reserve has a role to play, but we shouldn’t be the only player nor the most important one. Thank you, and I look forward to your questions. Note * I thank Ron Feldman, Terry Fitzgerald, Jim Lyon, Ben Malin, Danita Ng, Jenni Schoppers, Sam Schulhofer-Wohl, and David Wargin for assistance in preparing these remarks. Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
