FINAL 1 Is the Federal Reserve Contributing to Economic Inequality? Mary C. Daly, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco University of California, Irvine Virtual Event Irvine, CA October 13, 2020 5:00PM PT Remarks as prepared for delivery. * This speech is dedicated to the memory of Thomas Laubach, a devoted public servant and tireless advocate for crafting policy that works for everyone. Introduction Hello everyone. Thank you so much for the opportunity to join you today. It means more to me than you might expect. I’ve spent almost 25 years at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. And back in 2006, when I was working in our research department, I got a big opportunity. Our president at the time, Janet Yellen, was coming to UC Irvine to deliver a speech on economic inequality right before the midterm election.1 I had a chance to work on her remarks, and it was a defining moment in my career. So to be here again, at UC Irvine, as the current president of the San Francisco Fed, delivering a speech of my own on inequality, weeks before another important election, feels like a full-circle moment for me. And I thank you very much for the opportunity. 1 Yellen (2006). FINAL 2 Now, I’d like to say that we’ve made a lot of progress since Janet’s speech in 2006. But inequality is still a pressing issue for our nation—one that feels even more urgent in the wake of the health and economic hardships caused by COVID-19, and the social reckoning sparked by the deaths of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, and too many others. Not every American gets the same chance at life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. And this difference in opportunity translates into differences in outcomes. It leaves us with two Americas: one for those who have, and one for those who have not. This is our shared reality, a reality we have to acknowledge and confront—as individuals, as institutions, and as a nation. As a monetary policymaker and the leader of the San Francisco Fed, I’m regularly—and rightly—asked about how the Federal Reserve contributes to the inequality we observe. So today, I will take this on directly: inequality, the role of the Fed, and how we must collectively move toward a better, more inclusive economic future. But before I begin, I’ll remind you that the remarks I’m delivering are my own, and do not necessarily reflect the views of anyone else within the Federal Reserve System. The root of the question Let’s start by looking at a few recent facts that suggest the Federal Reserve might have a role in generating economic inequality. COVID-19 hit our shores in January. And by March, we saw severe impacts on health and economic activity. Both the Fed and Congress took immediate and unprecedented action. FINAL 3 The Federal Reserve cut the federal funds rate to close to zero and implemented a wide array of measures to facilitate the flow of credit in the economy.2 Congress provided almost $3 trillion in fiscal support to shore up households, businesses, and state and local governments. Together these measures were a bridge through the immediate economic hardships caused by COVID-19. But what has happened since then? As the economy has slowly reopened, employment growth has rebounded, exceeding most expectations. But this growth has erased only about half of the original losses. In September, employment was still down by almost 11 million people from its recent peak. Those are bigger losses than we saw during the Great Recession. In contrast, after dropping nearly one-third of their value in February and March, financial markets have completely recovered, with all major U.S. stock indexes retracing their declines. Looking at the two recoveries I have just described—the economic one and the financial one—it seems unfair. Another example of Wall Street winning and Main Street losing. Of a few advancing while so many others fall behind.3 So how do we alter this imbalance? What can we do to ensure the proceeds of economic growth are more equitably distributed in our society? This is the right question to ask of policymakers. And while I can’t provide a simple playbook or recipe, I will lay out the issues I see before us and discuss what the Federal Reserve, our fiscal agents, and each of us must do if we are going to create a more equitable future. 2 Board of Governors (2020a, 2020b). 3 Kuhn, Schularick, and Steins (2020). FINAL 4 This isn’t just a COVID-19 phenomenon First, it’s important to note that, while COVID-19 has spotlighted and magnified the inequities in our nation, these disparities have existed for decades. Income and wealth inequality in the United States have been rising almost without pause since 1980. Let me offer a few illustrations. Over the past 40 years, the income of households near the bottom of the distribution—the 10th percentile—rose by about 20 percent. In contrast, households near the top of the distribution—the 90th percentile—saw their incomes rise by 66 percent.4 These differences in returns have added up to more inequality. In 2019, the top 10 percent of adults in the United States took home almost half of the pretax income generated in the economy—nearly five times their share of population.5 Looking at wealth, the disparities are even wider. About one-quarter of Americans have essentially no wealth—near zero or even a negative net worth.6 The remainder of households have some wealth, but this is quite unevenly distributed. At the end of 2019, the top 10 percent of American households owned nearly 70 percent of all wealth held in the United States.7 We’re not the only country experiencing these trends. Inequality has increased in countries with economic systems similar to ours, like the United 4 Semega et al. (2020). 5 Based on data from the World Inequality Database, developed by Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel Saez, Gabriel Zucman, and collaborators. https://wid.world/ 6 Bhutta et al. (2020). 7 Calculated from the Federal Reserve Board’s Distributional Financial Accounts. https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/efa/efa-distributional-financial-accounts.htm FINAL 5 Kingdom. And it’s also happened, albeit to a lesser extent, in countries with economic systems very different from ours, like Denmark and Sweden.8 A range of structural factors have contributed to the worldwide increases in inequality we observe. These include automation, growing demand for college-educated workers, and globalized labor, product, and capital markets.9 But global trends alone can’t explain the severe run-up in economic inequality we’re experiencing in the United States. We have additional and unique challenges—struggles we see play out on the news every day. Systemic biases related to race, ethnicity, gender, and class have led to unequal access to education, jobs, income, and wealth.10 And these inequities have compounded over generations, as children born into poverty or low- income households carry that disadvantage through to adulthood and pass it on to their children.11 These trends—and their persistence over time—reflect fundamental choices we’ve made about public education, taxation, and the social safety net. Fundamental choices about how we manage our society. So if these are our choices, what can institutions like the Federal Reserve do to change the landscape? The answer is: quite a lot. 8 See the World Inequality Database. https://wid.world/ 9 See, for example, Autor (2019), Nolan, Richiardi, and Valenzuela (2019), and Dabla-Norris et al. (2015). 10 See, for example, relevant chapters in Nolan, Salverda, and Smeeding (2011); also Aliprantis and Carroll (2019), Butler, Mayer, and Weston (2020). 11 Bengali and Daly (2013), Chetty et al. (2014). FINAL 6 Inequality and monetary policy The Federal Reserve has a dual mandate—full employment and price stability. We achieve these goals primarily by adjusting the short-term interest rate.12 Our interest rate decisions make it more or less expensive for consumers and businesses to borrow money. This guides spending decisions, which impacts hiring, wages, and ultimately inflation. When it’s working well, our policies provide the foundation for a positive feedback loop—consumers spend, firms invest and hire more workers, and a wide range of households build income and wealth. This is the virtuous cycle of growth that ultimately delivers a strong, sustainable, and inclusive economy. But how do our policies work in practice? To get a sense of this, let’s consider the last expansion—the longest in recorded U.S. history. After taking significant measures to stabilize the economy in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, the FOMC committed to a period of sustained low interest rates to support the labor market and return inflation to 2 percent. The benefits were material. The length and strength of the expansion pushed the unemployment rate to near-historic lows. This created real opportunities for a large number of sidelined Americans, many of whom were thought to be permanently out of the labor force or lacking the right skills to work in an evolving job market.13 12 The Federal Reserve has a variety of additional tools beyond simple interest rate movements. These include forward guidance and asset purchases, along with lender-of- last-resort activities under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act. See the complete list here: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policytools.htm 13 Aaronson et al. (2019), Abraham and Kearney (2020). FINAL 7 The expansion also boosted the prospects of people of color and those without a college degree. By early 2019, employers were hiring African American and Hispanic workers at rates equal to or higher than those of white workers.14 This reduced long-standing unemployment gaps, narrowing them to historic lows. The same thing happened for those with a high school diploma: hiring rates rose, unemployment fell, and gaps narrowed relative to college-educated workers.15 By the end of the expansion, these improved employment outcomes were leading to faster growth in wages and income. Between 2016 and 2019, median wage growth for low-wage workers was more rapid than for high- wage workers, reversing a pattern that had dominated in previous years. This narrowed the relative gaps in wages between those in the lowest earnings quartile and all other groups.16 The better-than-average wage growth translated into better-than- average growth in household incomes. In 2019, median household income for Black and Hispanic households rose by more than 7 percent, compared to less than 6 percent for white households.17 Finally, these improvements also showed through to wealth. As the economy continued to expand, so did the value of assets, including housing, businesses, and stock market holdings. Gains on assets were especially rapid for those at the bottom of the wealth distribution.18 Between 2016 and 2019, families with the lowest net worth saw the largest growth in their holdings. 14 Petrosky-Nadeau and Valletta (2019). 15 Aaronson et al. (2019) 16 Robertson (2019). 17 Semega et al. (2020). 18 Bhutta et al. (2020). FINAL 8 This late-cycle pattern gave less-wealthy households a chance to reap some of the benefits that had been captured disproportionately by higher net-worth individuals earlier in the cycle. Now, these are a lot of numbers. But they all point to a single thing: nearly 11 years of uninterrupted growth helped a broad range of Americans get a foothold in the economy—finding work, gaining income, and building wealth. These are unequivocally good outcomes. But they are not enough. Simply chipping away at the mountain of inequality that has built up over the past several decades can only get us so far. Even with a historically long expansion, large differences in earnings, income, and wealth remain—especially for people of color. And these gaps are only being widened by COVID-19. A framework for the future So what more can we do? How can we build a society that delivers on the promise of equal opportunity and inclusive success? First, the Fed has a critical role to play. Full employment, the idea that everyone who wants a job can get a job, is the foundation for ensuring more equitable outcomes. To better achieve this goal, the Federal Reserve released a new strategic framework in August that lays out our approach to monetary policy for the next several years.19 A key component of this framework is the recognition that maximum employment is not a fixed target. It is a broad-based and inclusive goal that changes as the economy evolves. 19 Board of Governors (2020c). FINAL 9 We’ve committed to finding full employment experientially, by seeing it in wages and prices. When we’ve achieved 2 percent inflation on average, we will know that we have approached our maximum and that the economy is firmly on its sustainable path. In other words, in the absence of sustained 2 percent inflation or emerging risks, such as to financial stability, we will not take the punch bowl away while so many remain on the economic sidelines. But the most critical aspect of our new framework is not about specific policies. Rather, it is about commitment. The commitment to regularly review our strategy to ensure it continues meeting the needs of the American people. The ingredients of this ongoing review are simple. We need to listen, research, and engage. Keep our minds open to what we hear, bring the best data and analysis to the problems we find, and have hard, action-oriented conversations around the issues holding us back from achieving our full economic potential.20 A job for all But even with all of these actions, the Federal Reserve cannot fully solve the inequity problems before us. For that, we need everyone. Our social safety net was originally crafted in the wake of the Great Depression. It collectively recognized that, at any point, any one of us might 20 Recent Federal Reserve System efforts include the Fed Listens initiative, summarized at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy- tools-and-communications.htm, and the Racism and the Economy webinar sponsored by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Minneapolis, https://www.minneapolisfed.org/events/2020/racism-and-the-economy-series-kickoff- event. FINAL 10 need help. That safety net and its expansions over time have become integral to the stability of the economy.21 But a net that simply catches people when they fall is no longer sufficient. Too many people are left out from the start—without resources, without opportunity, without a fair chance. So we need a net that lifts. How do we build this? We invest in infrastructure—opportunity infrastructure—that includes health, education, and digital connectivity. Healthy people are productive people. Education is a lifelong asset. And digital access is a public good. Investing in this critical infrastructure will help level the playing field, reduce inequality, and boost the potential output of our nation.22 We are a rich enough country that we can afford to do this. We are a poor enough country that we can’t afford not to. The challenge Let me conclude with a reflection. I’ve been thinking a lot lately about the Pledge of Allegiance. I learned it in the first grade. I stood in the classroom with my hand over my heart, and I said the words, “with liberty and justice for all.” I believed those words. I cherished those words. But the world has disappointed. Change is hard. But our current situation is untenable. 21 McKay and Reis (2016); Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2016); Boushey, Nunn, and Shambaugh (2019); Lansing and Markiewicz (2018). See also the panel discussion including Janet Yellen and others at the 2020 American Economic Association Annual Meetings: https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2020/preliminary/1357 22 See Daly (2020) and citations therein. FINAL 11 It is up to us to make it right. Thank you. FINAL 12 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox. 2019. “Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference Draft, Spring. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/okun- revisited-who-benefits-most-from-a-strong-economy/ Abraham, Katharine G., and Melissa S. Kearney. 2020. “Explaining the Decline in the US Employment-to-Population Ratio: A Review of the Evidence.” Journal of Economic Literature 58(3, September), pp. 585–643. Aliprantis, Dionissi, and Daniel Carroll. 2019. “What Is Behind the Persistence of the Racial Wealth Gap?” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary 2019-03, February 28. https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/publications/economic-commentary/2019-economic-commentaries/ec- 201903-what-is-behind-the-persistence-of-the-racial-wealth-gap.aspx Autor, David H. 2019. “Work of the Past, Work of the Future.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 109(May), pp. 1–32. Bengali, Leila, and Mary Daly. 2013. “U.S. Economic Mobility: The Dream and the Data.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-06 (March 4). https://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2013/march/us-economic-mobility-dream- data/ Bhutta, Neil, et al. 2020. “Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2016 to 2019: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 106(5, September). https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/scf20.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2020a. “Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement.” Press release, March 15. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200315a.htm Board of Governors. 2020b. Monetary Policy Report. Washington, DC: Board of Governors, June 12. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/2020-06-mpr-summary.htm Board of Governors. 2020c. “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” August 27. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of- monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals- monetary-policy-strategy.htm FINAL 13 Boushey, Heather, Ryan Nunn, and Jay Shambaugh, editors. 2019. Recession Ready: Fiscal Policies to Stabilize the American Economy. Report, The Hamilton Project and Washington Center for Equitable Growth. Washington, DC: Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/multi-chapter-report/recession-ready-fiscal-policies-to- stabilize-the-american-economy/ Butler, Alexander W., Erik J. Mayer, and James P. Weston. 2020. “Racial Discrimination in the Auto Loan Market.” Manuscript, Southern Methodist University, June 25. Presented at the Conference on Racial Justice and Finance, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, and Bendheim Center for Finance at Princeton University, September 18. https://bcf.princeton.edu/event-directory/conference-on-racial-justice-and-finance/ Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129(4, November), pp. 1,553–1,623. Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. 2016. “Unemployment and Business Cycles.” Econometrica 84(4, July), pp. 1,523–1,569. Dabla-Norris, Era, Kalpana Kochhar, Nujin Suphaphiphat, Frantisek Ricka, and Evridiki Tsounta. 2015. “Causes and Consequences of Income Inequality: A Global Perspective.” IMF Staff Discussion Note 15/13, June. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2015/sdn1513.pdf Daly, Mary C. 2020. “We Can’t Afford Not To.” Speech to the National Press Club Virtual Event, June 15. https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/mary-c- daly/2020/june/we-cant-afford-not-to/ Kuhn, Moritz, Moritz Schularick, and Ulrike I. Steins. 2020. “Income and Wealth Inequality in America, 1949–2016.” Journal of Political Economy 128(9), pp. 3,469–3,519. Also Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Opportunity & Inclusive Growth Institute Working Paper 9 (June 2018). https://www.minneapolisfed.org/research/institute- working-papers/income-and-wealth-inequality-in-america-1949-2016 Lansing, Kevin J., and Agnieszka Markiewicz. 2018. “Top Incomes, Rising Inequality, and Welfare.” The Economic Journal 128(February), pp. 262–297. McKay, Alisdair, and Ricardo Reis. 2016. “The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Business Cycle.” Econometrica 84(1, January), pp. 141–194. Nolan, Brian, Matteo G. Richiardi, and Luis Valenzuela. 2019. “The Drivers of Income Inequality in Rich Countries.” Journal of Economic Surveys 33(4), pp. 1,285–1,324. Nolan, Brian, Wiemer Salverda, and Timothy M. Smeeding, editors. 2011. The Oxford Handbook of Economic Inequality. New York: Oxford University Press. FINAL 14 Petrosky-Nadeau, Nicolas, and Robert G. Valletta. 2019. “Unemployment: Lower for Longer?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2019-21 (August 19). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2019/august/unemployment-lower-for-longer/ Robertson, John. 2019. “Faster Wage Growth for the Lowest-Paid Workers.” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Macroblog, December 16. https://www.frbatlanta.org/blogs/macroblog/2019/12/16/faster-wage-growth-for- the-lowest-paid-workers Semega, Jessica, Melissa Kollar, Emily A. Shrider, and John F. Creamer. 2020. Income and Poverty in the United States: 2019. U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports P60- 270. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, September. https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2020/demo/p60-270.html Yellen, Janet L. 2006. “Economic Inequality in the United States.” Speech to the Center for the Study of Democracy, University of California, Irvine. November 6. https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/yellen- speeches/2006/november/economic-inequality-in-the-united-states/

FINAL 1 2020 Lessons, 2021 Priorities Mary C. Daly, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Arizona State University Economic Forecast Luncheon Virtual Event Tempe, AZ December 1, 2020 11:15AM MT Remarks as prepared for delivery. Introduction Hello everyone. Thank you for the invitation to join you today. It’s safe to say that 2020 has been a year to remember. Twelve months ago, we were in the midst of the longest economic expansion in U.S. history. Unemployment sat near historic lows, wages and incomes were rising, and inflation was moving gradually back toward our 2 percent target. Then COVID-19 hit our shores. And our fortunes changed almost overnight. To date, more than 250,000 Americans have died and countless others have been sick. People have lost jobs, businesses, and livelihoods, and the burden has fallen most harshly on those least able to bear it. This is an enormous human toll. Although we’ve retraced some of the initial economic losses, the economy remains far below the levels of employment and output we had prior to COVID-19. And coronavirus cases are once again surging. FINAL 2 So today, I will discuss two important questions. What lessons should we take from this difficult year? And what priorities should we focus on in 2021? But let me first remind you that the remarks I’m delivering today are my own, and do not necessarily reflect the views of anyone else within the Federal Reserve System. 2020 lessons Let’s begin by considering the lessons learned from 2020. There are many, but I will focus on those related to the economy and how it functions. Lessons that can help us build a more prosperous and resilient future. The first lesson is that we are all interconnected. Our fates are tied together — as individuals, as communities, as states, and as a nation. COVID-19 has exposed this connectivity in stark relief. I think about my own community, Oakland, California. So many businesses in my neighborhood have had to shutter to fight the virus. Without income, these businesses haven’t been able to pay their rent. This has passed through to landlords, who’ve then had trouble paying the mortgages on the buildings they own. This then spilled onto banks, who had to cover the forbearance or loss, leaving them with fewer funds to lend to other businesses looking for a lifeline. And on and on it goes. The circular flow we all learned about in Economics 101 is real. But while we are all interconnected, COVID-19 has reminded us that the impact of economic shocks does not fall equally. That’s the second important lesson from this year. Not everyone has the same experiences in our society. FINAL 3 And far too often these differences in outcomes trace back to race, ethnicity, gender, or socioeconomic position. You can see this in the data on COVID. A disproportionate share of pandemic job losses have occurred among men and women of color.1 Mothers with children at home have had to leave the labor force altogether to provide schooling and child care.2 And low and moderate income communities across the country have seen an outsized decline in income and wealth at the same time that the basic needs of their citizens have risen.3 Of course, these are not new issues. But the lens of COVID has vividly and painfully highlighted their costs. And this leads me to my third lesson of 2020. We are limiting our economic prosperity. Persistent and pervasive differences in outcomes repeatedly leave talent on the table and cost our economy.4 Looking only at differences in outcomes by race, a recent report found that aggregate economic output since 2000 would have been $16 trillion higher if Black and white Americans had more equal education and wages. To put this in growth terms, the U.S. economy would have grown about two- tenths of a percentage point faster every year since 2000 if these gaps had been closed. 5 And racial differences in education and wages are only some of the gaps in our society. Differences in credit, wealth, and occupational and investment opportunities by race, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status cumulate to mean 1 Gould and Wilson (2020), Kochhar (2020). 2 Edwards (2020). 3 Shrimali, Mattiuzzi, and Choi (2020). 4 Cook (2020), Bostic (2020), Hsieh et al. (2019), Daly (2019a). 5 Peterson and Mann (2020). FINAL 4 less innovation, lower productivity, and ultimately slower growth for everyone.6 2021 priorities So what do these lessons imply for policy priorities going forward? There are many to consider, but today I will focus on the ones related to monetary policy and the Federal Reserve. Sustain the bridge An important precondition for continued economic recovery is that the virus be well contained. Unfortunately, the public health trajectory is very worrisome, with COVID-19 cases, hospitalizations, and deaths trending higher across the country. So the Federal Reserve’s first priority is to use its tools to help bridge the economy across the disruptions caused by the virus. This means keeping the federal funds rate near zero and continuing to perform our lender of last resort responsibilities.7 Our commitment to maintaining this accommodative stance until the economy is back on stable footing lowers borrowing costs for households, 6 Cook (2014), Cook and Gerson (2019), Hsieh et al. (2019), Matthews and Wilson (2018), Peterson and Mann (2020). 7 The Federal Reserve established a broad set of emergency lending facilities in March 2020 (Powell 2020). Funding for these programs via the U.S. Department of the Treasury is slated to expire at the end of 2020, and the Federal Reserve has announced plans to return the unused portions of the funds allocated to the CARES Act facilities (https://www.federalreserve.gov/foia/letter-from-chair-powell-to-secretary-mnuchin- 20201120.htm). As noted there, the Federal Reserve retains additional financing options via the Exchange Stabilization Fund. FINAL 5 businesses, and state and local governments.8 And so far our policies are working. Interest rate-sensitive sectors, like housing and autos, have rebounded sharply in the past six months. Individuals and businesses have been able to refinance debt, initiate new loans, and make investments, which has kept more workers employed in the economy. This translates into stronger income and consumption growth for millions of Americans. But we must stay vigilant. So the Fed will be ready to respond with our full range of policy tools until COVID-19 is behind us. Return to full employment and sustainable 2 percent inflation Then the real work will begin. COVID-19 will leave a deep hole, and it will take ongoing monetary policy support to bring us back to full employment and average 2 percent inflation. So what will that look like? The fundamental road map can be found in the FOMC’s new monetary policy strategy announced in late August.9 That document acknowledged that maximum employment is not a fixed target. It is a broad-based and inclusive goal that changes as the economy evolves. The strategy also clarified that achieving our price stability goal—average inflation of 2 percent—requires a new regime: flexible average inflation targeting. In practice, this means we will be willing to accept periods of moderately above 2 percent inflation, in order to offset sustained periods of below 2 percent inflation. Using this strategy document, the FOMC released forward guidance in September, saying that we expect to keep the target range for the federal 8 Board of Governors (2020a, b). 9 Board of Governors (2020c). FINAL 6 funds rate at 0 to ¼ percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with maximum employment, and inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. This approach will support the economic recovery and the Fed’s dual mandate goals. Remember that our tools are powerful So what could get in our way? History points to one important thing: doubts that our tools are powerful enough to achieve our goals.10 A full and true recovery from COVID-19 will most likely be protracted. And it will be tempting, as time passes, to think that monetary policy has done all that it can. That we no longer have a role to play. We saw this in the last recovery. There were concerns among some that the Federal Reserve was overstepping its role and using monetary policy to influence long-standing structural problems like skills gaps and permanent job dislocation.11 But the data did not support those fears, and monetary policy remained accommodative. The result was the longest expansion in U.S. history, a historically low unemployment rate, and a significant narrowing of wage, income, and wealth gaps in the economy.12 The priority going forward will be to remember. To remember that workers and firms are flexible, people are resilient, and with a strong economy the labor market is more durable and elastic than we think. To remember that, by supporting strong and sustained growth, monetary policy can help deliver the full employment outcomes we desire. 10 Romer and Romer (2013). 11 Kocherlakota (2010), Lacker (2012), and Phelps (2008). Daly et al. (2012) provide an alternative view. 12 Aaronson et al. (2019), Robertson (2019), Semega et al. (2020), Bhutta et al. (2020). FINAL 7 Of course, the temptation to think we are powerless will be even greater for inflation. After all, we only occasionally brushed against our 2 percent target in a nearly 11-year expansion. But decades of research have repeatedly shown that inflation in the long run is primarily determined by monetary policy—and central banks have the ability to control where it settles. Our primary tool for achieving our inflation goal is our credibility. And here the move to flexible average inflation targeting is powerful. It tells households and businesses that we are fully committed to delivering 2 percent inflation over time and ensures that inflation expectations remain well-anchored around our target. Going forward, we will need to match these statements with our policies. Hitting or exceeding 2 percent inflation for a few months does not mean victory. To fully achieve the goal of price stability, we need to see a sustained period of moderately above-target inflation. Only then will the job be complete. So again, we will need to remember. Remember that inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.13 That even when progress is gradual the central bank can, with commitment, bring inflation sustainably to target. Ensure that we can finish Now the implications of my remarks thus far are that policy rates will likely be lower for longer. This naturally raises concerns about financial stability. In such a low rate environment, investors could reach for yield, asset 13 Friedman (1970), p. 24. FINAL 8 markets could inflate, and the banking and broader financial system might find itself ill prepared to cope should the economy falter. While these risks cannot be dismissed, it is not at all clear that conventional monetary policy is the best way to mitigate them. Interest rates are a blunt tool. Moving them to combat financial imbalances has limited upsides and potentially significant downsides, such as derailing an expansion and leaving us short of our maximum employment and price stability goals.14 Other, better methods include tools directly targeted on the financial system. Over the past decade, regulators around the globe have developed and strengthened a suite of micro and macro prudential programs designed to keep financial firms well capitalized over the business cycle.15 In the United States, these include capital and liquidity stress-testing and tools like the countercyclical capital buffer and the stress capital buffer. The Fed also has the power to restrict banks from paying dividends or doing share buybacks when capital could be at risk, as recently executed in response to the pandemic. All of these policies are built on the recognition that well-capitalized banks are critical to a healthy financial system and that the best capital banks can get is the capital that they already have. In coming years, we will need to continue to build out and strengthen our suite of tools to further mitigate risk. The financial system and the economy are constantly changing, and regulatory principles and supervisory approaches must evolve to keep pace. It’s easy to see where more may be needed. A growing share of financial intermediation in the U.S. takes place 14 Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2015), Bernanke (2015), Svensson (2015). 15 Yilla and Liang (2020), Williams (2015). FINAL 9 outside of the formal banking system. Understanding this evolution and how it impacts financial stability is critical.16 The rising frequency of devastating weather events also demands attention. It highlights the need for further work on climate risk and how it will affect the financial system and the broader economy.17 Ensure that our work helps everyone Finally, we will need to do more to ensure that the benefits of low interest rates and rising asset valuations can spread widely throughout the economy. The COVID-19 response made it clear that our interest rate policies and lending programs do not reach everyone equally. Many businesses and households are outside of the traditional banking system and do not have the same opportunities to refinance or initiate loans.18 We’ve heard repeatedly in the 12th District and across the country that these differences hampered the pandemic relief, slowing its delivery to many in need. To solve these issues, and increase the reach of the financial infrastructure, we will need to think outside of the traditional banking box. This could mean developing firmer partnerships with Community Development Financial Institutions and other nonprofit or small dollar lenders. These institutions are already connected to low- and moderate- income communities and are innovating to improve their reach among those most in need. It could also mean taking lessons from recent months and 16 U.S. Department of the Treasury (2020). 17 Brainard (2019) and Daly (2019b). 18 Shrimali, Mattiuzzi, and Choi (2020) and Liu and Parilla (2020). FINAL 10 developing blueprints for lending relief programs that can be more equitably deployed next time they are needed. The bottom line is clear. Building safe and sound ways to increase financial support to all Americans needs to be a top priority.19, 20 Summing up There is no doubt that 2020 has been a challenging year. It’s reversed so much of the economic progress we made in the last expansion, and highlighted and magnified the persistent and systemic barriers that prevent us from reaching our potential. But it’s also brought us clarity. Clarity of priorities and clarity of purpose. As we close this year and move on to the next, let’s bring that thread with us. The path will not be easy and the journey will not be short. But if we align together and use all of our tools, we will complete the job. And this is what 2021 demands of us. Thank you. 19 Hangen and Swack (2020). 20 Opportunity Fund (2018). FINAL 11 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox. 2019. “Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference Draft, Spring. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/okun- revisited-who-benefits-most-from-a-strong-economy/ Bernanke, Ben S. 2015. “Should Monetary Policy Take into Account Risks to Financial Stability?” Blog post, Brookings Institution, April 7. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2015/04/07/should-monetary- policy-take-into-account-risks-to-financial-stability/ Bhutta, Neil, et al. 2020. “Changes in U.S. Family Finances from 2016 to 2019: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances.” Federal Reserve Bulletin 106(5, September). https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/scf20.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2020a. “Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement.” Press release, September 16. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200916a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2020b. “Federal Reserve issues FOMC statement.” Press release, November 5. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20201105a.htm Board of Governors. 2020c. “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” August 27. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of- monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-statement-on-longer-run-goals- monetary-policy-strategy.htm Bostic, Raphael. 2020. “A Moral and Economic Imperative to End Racism.” Blog post, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, June 12. https://www.frbatlanta.org/about/feature/2020/06/12/bostic-a-moral-and- economic-imperative-to-end-racism Brainard, Lael. 2019. “Why Climate Change Matters for Monetary Policy and Financial Stability.” Speech at The Economics of Climate Change Conference,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 8. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20191108a.htm Cook, Lisa D. 2014. “Violence and Economic Growth: Evidence from African American Patents, 1870-1940.” Journal of Economic Growth 19 (2, June), pp. 221-257. Cook, Lisa D. 2020. “Racism Impoverishes the Whole Economy.” New York Times, November 18. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/18/business/racism-impoverishes-the- whole-economy.html FINAL 12 Cook, Lisa D., and Janet Gerson. 2019. “The Implications of U.S. Gender and Racial Disparities in Income and Wealth Inequality at Each Stage of the Innovation Process.” Issue Brief, Washington Center for Equitable Growth, July 24. https://equitablegrowth.org/the-implications-of-u-s-gender-and-racial-disparities-in- income-and-wealth-inequality-at-each-stage-of-the-innovation-process/ Daly, Mary C. 2019a. “Beyond Fairness: The Value of an Inclusive Economy.” Speech to the Los Angeles World Affairs Council & Town Hall, Los Angeles, CA. October 15. https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/mary-c- daly/2019/october/beyond-fairness-the-value-of-an-inclusive-economy/ Daly, Mary C. 2019b. “Why Climate Change Matters to Us.” Speech at “The Economics of Climate Change Conference,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 8. https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/mary-c- daly/2019/november/why-climate-change-matters-to-us/ Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta. 2012. “A Search and Matching Approach to Labor Markets: Did the Natural Rate of Unemployment Rise?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(3, Summer), pp. 3–26. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/jep.26.3.3 Edwards, Kathryn A. 2020. “Sitting It Out? Or Pushed Out? Women Are Leaving the Labor Force in Record Numbers.” Blog, Rand Corporation, October 23. https://www.rand.org/blog/2020/10/sitting-it-out-or-pushed-out-women-are- leaving-the.html Friedman, Milton. 1970. Counter-Revolution in Monetary Theory. Wincott Memorial Lecture, Institute of Economic Affairs, Occasional paper 33. Gould, Elise, and Valerie Wilson. 2020. “Black Workers Face Two of the Most Lethal Preexisting Conditions for Coronavirus—Racism and Economic Inequality.” Report, Economic Policy Institute, June 1. https://www.epi.org/publication/black-workers- covid/ Hangen, Eric, and Michael Swack. 2020. “CDFIs Can Make the SBA PPP Loan Program Work for Smaller, Minority-Owned, and Women-Owned Small Businesses.” Carsey Perspectives, University of New Hampshire Carsey School of Public Policy, April 7. https://carsey.unh.edu/publication/CDFIs-can-make-SBA-PPP-Loan-Program-Work Hsieh, Chang-Tai, Erik Hurst, Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow. 2019. “The Allocation of Talent and U.S. Economic Growth.” Econometrica 87(5, September), pp. 1,439–1,474. FINAL 13 Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2015. “Interest Rates and House Prices: Pill or Poison?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-25 (August 3). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2015/august/interest-rates-and-house-prices-central-bank-goals/ Kocherlakota, Naryana. 2010. “Inside the FOMC.” Speech at Northern Michigan University, Marquette, MI, August 17. https://www.minneapolisfed.org/speeches/2010/inside- the-fomc/ Kochhar, Rakesh. 2020. “Hispanic Women, Immigrants, Young Adults, Those with Less Education Hit Hardest by COVID-19 Job Losses.” Fact Tank, Pew Research Center, June 9. https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/06/09/hispanic-women- immigrants-young-adults-those-with-less-education-hit-hardest-by-covid-19-job- losses/ Lacker, Jeffrey M. 2012. “Maximum Employment and Monetary Policy.” Speech to the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, NY. September 18. https://www.richmondfed.org/press_room/speeches/jeffrey_m_lacker/2012/lacker_s peech_20120918 Liu, Sifan, and Joseph Parilla. (2020) “New Data Shows Small Businesses in Communities of Color Had Unequal Access to Federal COVID-19 Relief.” Report. Brookings Institution. September 17. https://www.brookings.edu/research/new-data-shows-small- businesses-in-communities-of-color-had-unequal-access-to-federal-covid-19-relief/ Matthews, Madison, and Valerie Wilson. 2018. “Separate is Still Unequal. How Patterns of Occupational Segregation Impact Pay for Black Women.” Working Economics Blog, Economic Policy Institute, Aug. 6. https://www.epi.org/blog/separate-is-still-unequal- how-patterns-of-occupational-segregation-impact-pay-for-black-women/ Opportunity Fund. 2018. “High-Tech, High-Touch: Evaluating the Customer Experience for the First Ever CDFI-Fintech Partnership.” Presentation, June 19. https://www.opportunityfund.org/blog/high-tech-high-touch-evaluating-the- customer-experience-for-the-first-ever-cdfi-fintech-partnership/ Peterson, Dana M., and Catherine L. Mann. 2020. “Closing the Racial Inequality Gaps. The Economic Cost of Black Inequality in the U.S.” CITI GPS: Global Perspectives & Solutions Report, Citigroup, September. https://www.citivelocity.com/citigps/closing-the-racial- inequality-gaps/ Phelps, Edmund. 2008. “U.S. Monetary Policy and the Prospective Structural Slump.” Speech to the 7th Annual BIS Conference on Monetary Policy, Luzern, Switzerland, June 26. https://www.bis.org/events/conf080626/phelps.pdf FINAL 14 Powell, Jerome H. 2020. “Coronavirus and CARES Act.” Testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, DC, May 19. https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/powell20200519a.htm Robertson, John. 2019. “Faster Wage Growth for the Lowest-Paid Workers.” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Macroblog, December 16. https://www.frbatlanta.org/blogs/macroblog/2019/12/16/faster-wage-growth-for- the-lowest-paid-workers Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2013. “The Most Dangerous Idea in Federal Reserve History: Monetary Policy Doesn’t Matter.” American Economic Review 103(3), pp. 55–60. Semega, Jessica, Melissa Kollar, Emily A. Shrider, and John F. Creamer. 2020. Income and Poverty in the United States: 2019. U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Reports P60- 270. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, September. https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2020/demo/p60-270.html Shrimali, Bina Patel, Elizabeth Mattiuzzi, and Laura Choi. 2020. “Coronavirus Compounds Challenges for Low-Income Communities and Communities of Color.” SF Fed Blog, April 24. https://www.frbsf.org/our-district/about/sf-fed-blog/covid19-coronavirus-low- income-disproportionate-impact-communities-color/ Svensson, Lars E.O. 2015. “Inflation Targeting and Leaning Against the Wind.” In Fourteen Years of Inflation Targeting in South Africa and the Challenge of a Changing Mandate:, South African Reserve Bank Conference Series 2014. https://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/inflation-targeting-and-leaning-against-the- wind-paper-sarb.pdf U.S. Department of the Treasury. 2020. “About FSOC.” Webpage. https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-markets-financial-institutions-and- fiscal-service/fsoc/about-fsoc Williams, John C. 2015. “Macroprudential Policy in a Microprudential World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-18 (June 1). https://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2015/june/macroprudential-policy-in-a- microprudential-world/ Yilla, Kadija, and Nellie Liang. 2020. “What are Macroprudential Tools?” Blog post, Brooking Institution, February 11. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up- front/2020/02/11/what-are-macroprudential-tools/
