1 Presentation to Town Hall Los Angeles Los Angeles, California By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on April 3, 2013 The Economy and the Federal Reserve: Real Progress, but Too Soon to Relax1 Thank you very much. It’s great to be with you in Los Angeles today. As you’ve just heard, I’m president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, one of 12 regional Banks in the Federal Reserve System. The district covered by our Bank is geographically the largest and the most populous in the Fed. And, of course, Los Angeles is the biggest city in the district, and an economic powerhouse and cultural trendsetter for people around the world. This is the second time I’ve spoken at a Town Hall Los Angeles event. In fact, two years ago, I gave my first speech as San Francisco Fed president before this group. The economic landscape has changed significantly since then. But some things remain the same. Most notably, despite substantial improvement in the economy, unemployment is still far too high. Things still have a way to go before we can say we’ve fully recovered from the worst financial crisis and recession since the 1930s. Today, I’ll talk about how I see the economy now and where I think it’s headed. I’ll offer my forecast for the next few years and discuss what the Federal Reserve is doing to boost the recovery. Of course, Fed speeches are not like Hollywood movies. That’s because I’ll tell you how it ends right here at the beginning. My message is that I’m hopeful that the economy has finally shifted into higher gear. There are still obstacles to our progress, including the effects of budget cuts coming out of Washington and the sluggish recovery plaguing many of our trading partners abroad, especially 1 I want to thank Bharat Trehan and Sam Zuckerman for their assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 in Europe. In this environment, continued progress depends critically on support from the Federal Reserve. Even before the recent recession began, the Fed started to put in place measures to stimulate the economy. These measures pushed interest rates down to exceptionally low levels and made buying a house, a car, or other big-ticket items more affordable. The Fed’s forceful policies helped avoid a repeat of the Great Depression. And now they’re an important reason why the economy may be picking up a head of steam. We can’t forget that the downturn we went through was unusually deep and the recovery has been disappointingly weak. It’s vital that we keep those extraordinary Fed measures in place for some time to make sure unemployment and inflation get back to healthy levels. And this is where I should say that I am expressing my own views and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Let’s start with a look at the economy. Since the recession ended nearly four years ago, economic growth has been discouragingly slow. Consider the broadest measure of economic activity: gross domestic product, or GDP, which includes the nation’s entire output of goods and services. Since the end of the recession, GDP has grown at an average rate of only about 2 percent per year, adjusted for inflation. Indeed, when you account for population growth, GDP per person is actually 1.5 percent lower now than five years ago. Southern California has done even worse. In 2011—the latest data available—output per person was more than 7 percent below the peak reached five years earlier. The harsh downturn and subpar recovery have hit the job market hard. The national unemployment rate is 7.7 percent. That’s down significantly from the recent peak of 10 percent registered three-and-a-half years ago. But it’s still higher than any reasonable estimate of full employment. 3 Given the extraordinary amount of monetary stimulus that the Fed has put in place, why hasn’t the economy bounced back more strongly? Four factors have played a key role in slowing the recovery. First, the recession was triggered by a housing crash and a financial crisis, and downturns caused by such events tend to be long lasting.2 In this case, lenders severely tightened the flow of credit to consumers and businesses. Meanwhile, homeowners saw the value of their houses plummet and could no longer tap into home equity. All this put a damper on consumer spending,3 which accounts for about 70 percent of all U.S. economic activity. A second reason for the slow recovery has been a weak global economy. Europe is a major market for U.S. goods and services, and the situation there has been particularly troubling. Among the countries that use the euro, financial crisis and economic stagnation have been intensified by concerns that some of them may eventually drop the common currency. Every time Europe’s cauldron of woes seems to be cooling a bit, something new happens to make it boil over again. Most recently, a banking crisis in Cyprus prompted panicky citizens to yank their money from that country’s financial institutions. I should stress that a full-fledged European financial collapse is unlikely. But economic weakness is likely to persist, and that affects us here in the United States as well. Cutbacks in state, local, and federal government spending represent a third obstacle to recovery. Over the past few years, state and local governments have had to cut spending and, in some cases, raise taxes to balance budgets. More recently, the federal government has also moved toward austerity. For example, the cut in the payroll tax that funds Social Security expired at the start of the year. And now, of course, we have sequestration. Over the next few years, government austerity means less income for consumers, smaller government payrolls, and 2 See Reinhart and Rogoff (2009). 3 See Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013). 4 less work for government contractors. A typical estimate is that sequestration spending cuts alone will trim about half a percentage point from economic growth this year. The factors I’ve just mentioned are related to a fourth thing holding the economy back— uncertainty, which might be called the “fear factor.” A deep recession, financial crises at home and abroad, and nagging disputes about tax and spending policies have eaten away at the confidence of consumers and businesses, making them hesitant to spend and invest. Researchers at the San Francisco Fed have found that heightened uncertainty slows economic growth and raises unemployment.4 They estimate that uncertainty has boosted the unemployment rate by one to two percentage points since 2008. I hear the same thing from business owners, who tell me they are nervous about the future and are postponing hiring. And they often wait for the perfect candidate to fill an opening. These four factors have been holding back the recovery over the past few years. Although all four continue to weigh on the economy today, we’re seeing encouraging signs of improvement. Households and financial institutions have made considerable progress in repairing their financial conditions, which had been tattered by the housing crash and crisis. The nation’s banking sector is much stronger today than it has been in years, and credit conditions have improved a lot. Uncertainty about the future is still elevated. But it appears to have receded from late last year when worries about the looming fiscal cliff shook confidence. Overall, the view ahead is definitely better than what we see through the rearview mirror. Take housing, for example. It’s one of the key sectors benefiting from the low interest rates the Fed has helped engineer. Nationwide, more-affordable mortgages have been a boon for the housing market. New home sales have climbed 10 percent over the past year and housing starts have soared more than 25 percent. Houses available for sale are in short supply. As a 4 See Leduc and Liu (2013) for estimates of the effects of uncertainty and references to the literature. 5 result, home prices are again on the upswing, rising over 8 percent last year. This rejuvenation of the housing market brings with it all kinds of happy effects. Fewer homeowners are under water, which is to say that fewer of them are carrying mortgages larger than the value of their properties. And fewer homes are going into foreclosure. Rising house prices also mean that more homeowners are able to refinance, freeing cash for other purposes. Lenders often require a loan-to-value ratio of 80 percent or less before they will make or refinance a mortgage. Let’s take L.A. County as an example. At the beginning of 2009, roughly one out of three first-lien mortgages in L.A. County were above this 80 percent level. But rising home values have been pushing loan-to-value ratios down. By the end of 2012, only about one out of four L.A. County mortgages were above the 80 percent threshold, which means that more homeowners qualify to refinance. Auto sales have also benefited from falling rates. They’re up more than two-thirds from the recession low point. Automakers have responded to increased demand by raising production. And the effects of gains in motor vehicles and housing are beginning to spill over into other sectors. Business confidence is rising, and that’s showing up in more hiring and increased business investment. All this helps fuel a virtuous cycle. Rising production and employment mean more household income, which should, in turn, raise consumer confidence, and lead to further spending increases, which leads to more hiring, and so on. When I throw everything into the mix, I expect the U.S. economy to grow steadily this year and for growth to pick up in 2014. To be specific, I see inflation-adjusted GDP expanding roughly 2½ percent this year and about 3¼ percent in 2014. Such growth should create enough jobs to gradually bring the unemployment rate down over the next few years. I expect the 6 unemployment rate to edge down to a little below 7 percent by late 2014 and fall below 6½ percent in the middle of 2015. Even with the unemployment rate continuing to come down, it will likely remain above “normal” levels for quite some time. My best estimate is that the longer-run “normal” rate of unemployment is around 5½ percent. I don’t expect the actual unemployment rate to reach that level until 2016. Slack in the labor market will probably keep wages and other cost pressures subdued for the next few years. In addition, prices of many commodities and other imports have been coming down. As a result, I anticipate that inflation will run at about a 1½ percent rate this year and next, according to the Fed’s preferred inflation index. That’s roughly the same as last year and below the Fed’s 2 percent long-run inflation target.5 Looking further out into the future, as the economy continues to improve and the unemployment rate returns to its longer-run normal level, I expect inflation to edge up to 2 percent. With all this as a backdrop, I’d like to describe what the Fed is doing to strengthen the recovery and keep inflation close to our 2 percent longer-run goal. Congress has assigned the Fed two objectives: maximum employment and price stability. As I’ve said, we’re still far from maximum employment. And inflation is below the level we believe consistent with our maximum employment and price stability objectives. In these circumstances, the appropriate direction of monetary policy is clear. We must carry out policies that will move us toward our two mandated goals. Normally, in a situation like this, we stimulate the economy by lowering our benchmark short-term interest rate, the federal funds rate. But we can’t lower the federal funds rate anymore 5 For more information, see the statement of longer-term goals and policy strategy released by the FOMC in the press release dated January 25, 2012 (Board of Governors 2012a). 7 because we already pushed it close to zero late in 2008, and it can’t really go much lower. So we’ve had to think outside the box to find other ways to boost the economy and keep inflation from sinking too low. The result is that we’ve come up with several unconventional monetary policy programs. Our unconventional initiatives come in two main types, both aimed at lowering longer-term interest rates. You can broadly think of them in terms of what we do and what we say. I’ll start with what we do. Since late 2008, we’ve carried out a series of programs in which we’ve bought well over $3 trillion—that’s trillion with a T—in longer-term Treasury and mortgage-related securities. You may have heard the financial press call these purchases QE1, 2, and 3, with the QE standing for quantitative easing. These purchases work through the law of supply and demand to lower longer-term interest rates. When we buy these securities on a large scale, it boosts demand, bids up their prices, and lowers their yields. In turn, lower yields on government securities spill over to private-sector borrowing markets and push longer-term interest rates down across the board.6 The second type of unconventional monetary policy involves what we say. We’ve adopted new ways of communicating with the public to let people know the direction our policy is likely to take in the future. We use the phrase forward guidance to describe this approach to policy communication. How does forward guidance work? Here’s an example: After our policy meeting in August 2011, we issued a statement saying we expected to keep the federal funds rate exceptionally low at least through mid-2013.7 That marked the first time the Fed had ever explicitly said just how long it expected to keep the federal funds rate at a certain level. When 6 See Williams (2011, 2012). 7 See Board of Governors (2011). 8 investors know short-term interest rates are likely to stay low for a set time, they’re willing to pay more for longer-term fixed-rate securities. And that pushes down longer-term interest rates. To get an idea of the effects of these unconventional policies, let’s compare the conventional mortgage rate today with what it was when the Fed first started them at the end of 2008. Since then, the mortgage rate has declined about 1½ percentage points. Not all this drop is due to Fed policies. But, by any measure, those policies have had a significant effect. And that 1½ percentage point reduction in mortgage rates makes a big difference for homebuyers. In Southern California, the median-priced house costs about $320,000. An 80 percent mortgage on that house would be $256,000. Given the decline in interest rates since January 2009, the annual interest payment on that mortgage today would be about $3,000 lower. That’s $3,000 people can use to spend on other things or save. Both our securities purchases and forward guidance programs have evolved as we’ve learned more and economic circumstances have changed. Our early securities purchase programs were for fixed dollar amounts. By contrast, we’ve linked the current program to economic developments. Specifically, we’ve stated that we expect to continue buying Treasury and mortgage-backed securities at a rate of $85 billion a month until the outlook for the job market improves substantially in a context of price stability. We still have a way to go before we pass this substantial-improvement test. I anticipate that our securities purchases will be needed well into the second half of this year. As for forward guidance, first we pushed back the date we expected to keep our benchmark rate exceptionally low until at least mid-2015. Then, at our December 2012 meeting, we took a different tack by dropping the reference to a specific calendar date. Instead, we spelled out economic thresholds to reach before beginning to raise interest rates. Specifically, 9 we said we expected to keep the rate exceptionally low at least as long as, one, “the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent”; two, “inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run goal”; and three, longer-term inflation expectations remain in check.8 This change improves the effectiveness of our forward guidance in an important way. The new language allows the public to adjust its expectations of future Fed policy based on its view of the economic outlook. In effect, the public is doing some of the work of stabilizing the economy. For example, if prospects for reaching a 6½ percent unemployment rate were to move further away in time, then people would most likely expect the Fed to keep its benchmark rate low for longer. Market interest rates would fall, providing a boost to economic growth, and thereby helping us achieve our monetary policy goals. These unconventional policies have been highly effective at reducing long-term interest rates and improving financial conditions more generally. In that way, they help us at the Fed work towards our price stability and maximum employment mandates. At the same time though, we want to be careful not to overstimulate the economy. Thus, we’ll need to dial down our monetary stimulus as the economy continues to improve. The situation we find ourselves in today is like driving a car up a long, steep hill. To keep the car moving at a reasonable speed, the Fed is pushing down hard on the accelerator. As the road gets flatter—as the factors holding back the recovery wane—we’ll need to lighten up on the accelerator a bit. And, eventually, if we find ourselves picking up too much speed, we may need to apply the brakes. Along the road, we’ll face important policy choices. When should we stop adding to our securities holdings? When, and how quickly, should we raise the federal funds rate? 8 See Board of Governors (2012b). 10 Let me start with the first question. In the statement issued following the March meeting, our policy committee, the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, stated that it would continue its securities purchases “until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability.” It also stated that “in determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, the Committee will continue to take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases as well as the extent of progress toward its economic objectives.”9 So, what does that mean? I see the benefits of our asset purchases continuing to outweigh the costs by a large margin. I expect that continued asset purchases will be appropriate well into the second half of this year. In making this assessment, I don’t have a specific unemployment or job-gain threshold in mind for cutting back or ending these purchases. Instead, I’m looking for convincing evidence of sustained, ongoing improvement in the labor market and economy. The latest economic news has been encouraging. But it will take more solid evidence to convince me that it’s time to trim our asset purchases. An important rule in both forecasting and policymaking is not to overreact to what may turn out to be just a blip in the data. But, assuming my economic forecast holds true, I expect we will meet the test for substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market by this summer. If that happens, we could start tapering our purchases then. If all goes as hoped, we could end the purchase program sometime late this year. It’s important to note that tapering our purchases and even ending the purchase program doesn’t mean that we are removing all the monetary stimulus that comes from our longer-term securities holdings. Instead, even as we cut back our purchases, we’re still adding monetary accommodation and exerting greater downward pressure on interest rates. Economic theory and 9 See Board of Governors (2013). 11 real-world evidence indicate that it’s not the pace at which we buy securities that matters for influencing financial conditions. Rather, it’s the size and composition of the assets we hold on our balance sheet. So, even when we stop adding to our portfolio, it doesn’t mean we’re tightening policy. Of course, eventually, it will be appropriate to tighten policy. The FOMC’s forward guidance that I discussed earlier provides a clear framework for when that process will start. When the time does come, I’m confident that the Fed has the tools to engineer a successful transition to more normal conditions. In my few remaining minutes, I would like to address a question that I often hear and read about in the media. Some commentators suggest that low interest rates are dangerous because they encourage investors to take too much risk. For instance, low yields on Treasury securities may lead to increased investment in riskier assets, such as junk bonds or stocks. That could potentially threaten financial stability. I want to emphasize that the Fed will not tolerate serious threats to financial stability. We’re constantly engaged in thorough and rigorous analysis of and discussions about potential risks to the financial system. Based on this analysis, I simply don’t see this as a serious risk now. There may be excesses in some isolated markets. For example, prices for farmland in the Midwest have gone through the barn roof. But we don’t face an economy-wide problem of land prices, or other bubbles, for that matter. Overall, markets are still more in a risk-averse mode than a risk-loving mode. To summarize, the economy is on the mend, helped in part by the very stimulatory stance of monetary policy. In making monetary policy, one has to weigh carefully the costs and benefits of actions, recognizing that we always operate in an uncertain world. I’m convinced we 12 have the right policies in place to lead us toward both maximum employment and price stability. Thank you. 13 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2011. “Press Release.” August 9. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20110809a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012a. “Press Release.” January 25. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120125c.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012b. “Press Release.” December 12. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20121212a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2013. “Press Release.” March 20. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20130320a.htm Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu. 2013. “Uncertainty Shocks Are Aggregate Demand Shocks.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-10 (January). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2012/wp12-10bk.pdf Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump.” Working paper, Princeton University and University of Chicago. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1961211 Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. “This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.” Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Williams, John C. 2011. “Unconventional Monetary Policy: Lessons from the Past Three Years.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-31 (October 3). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-31.html Williams, John C. 2012. “The Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Policies.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-34 (November 13). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012-34.html

Presentation to the Portland Business Journal CFO of the Year Awards Luncheon Portland, Oregon By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on May 16, 2013 The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy: Moving in the Right Direction1 Thank you. It’s great to be in Portland. If I can find time, I like nothing better than to savor a cup of the excellent coffee Portland is famous for and then head over to Powell’s to dig through the stacks. Today I’m going to talk about how the economy is doing and where I see it heading. I’ll highlight areas of strength, such as housing, and also some areas that have been holding us back, such as fiscal policy. I’ll offer my forecasts for economic growth, the job market, and inflation. And I’ll explain what the Federal Reserve is doing to keep the recovery on track and move toward the goals Congress has set for us, namely maximum employment and price stability. I should note that my remarks represent my own views and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Since there are a lot of CFOs here, let me go straight to the bottom line: The economy has been improving for nearly four years now. I expect this improvement to continue and to gradually gain momentum. This outlook reflects a mixture of healthy growth by households and businesses, and the dampening effects of public-sector restraint. Overall, if we were in a car, you might say we’re motoring along, but well under the speed limit. The fact that we’re cruising at a moderate speed instead of still stuck in the ditch is due in part to the Federal Reserve’s unprecedented efforts to keep interest rates low. We may not be getting there as fast as we’d like, but we’re definitely moving in the right direction. 1 I want to thank Bharat Trehan and Sam Zuckerman for their assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 There is indeed little doubt that the economy is on the mend. The clearest evidence can be found in housing, by far the sector hit hardest during the recession. Mortgage rates have fallen to levels rarely, if ever, seen before. Typical fixed-rate mortgages are around 3.5 percent, putting them in reach of millions of households. Affordable mortgages fuel demand for homes, and that pushes up sales and prices. Year-over-year, house prices are rising at around a double- digit rate. The recovery in home prices has all sorts of beneficial effects. Increasing numbers of underwater homeowners are finding themselves on dry land again. Their properties are now worth more than their mortgages, making them less likely to default. Meanwhile, other homeowners find their mortgages have dropped below the critical 80-percent-of-home-value barrier. That makes it easier to refinance at today’s low rates, freeing money to spend on other things. Homebuilders are responding to rising sales and prices. New housing construction starts have risen by more than 45 percent over the past year. As one of my business contacts put it, anything related to housing is doing well—furniture, appliances, even the pickup trucks workers drive to construction sites. That’s quite a turnaround from the past few years. If you own a home, you’re probably feeling a little better about things, even if you don’t refinance. The rising value of your property—and perhaps your 401(k) as well—may be making you feel wealthier. Many people have responded to their improved finances by spending more on a range of goods and services. When we put it together, housing-related demand, improved access to credit, and the effects of increased wealth all have spurred consumer spending. The latest data show that, on a per-person basis, consumer spending has fully rebounded from its steep decline during the recession. 3 Meanwhile, businesses are hiring and increasing production. Manufacturing of durable goods such as motor vehicles and appliances has regained its previous level after plunging more than 25 percent during the recession. The recovery in durable goods also reflects the effects of lower interest rates. Of course, many businesses are still cautious. But investment in plant and equipment continues to grow moderately and is on track for further gains. In sum, conditions in the private-sector part of the economy have improved quite a bit and continue to get better. So why then is the economy as a whole poking along instead of speeding ahead? To understand that, we need to look at what’s happening in the public sector. When the recession hit, state and local government tax revenue tumbled. Those governments responded by cutting spending and employment, which have still not recovered. Here’s one way to see the effect those cutbacks have had on the U.S. economy: On a per-person basis, production of goods and services is about 1 percent below its pre-recession peak. But if state and local government purchases today were what they were then, output per person would be roughly where it was before the recession. The federal government is a different story. In response to the recession, the federal government cut taxes and boosted spending substantially, and that was a big plus for the economy when it was reeling. The $800 billion tax and spending package passed in 2009 was extraordinarily expansionary, and fiscal policy overall was more stimulatory than at any time since the Great Depression.2 But that stimulus has been phasing out in recent years, leading to a substantial swing in the effects of federal fiscal policy. More recently, higher taxes have come into the picture. Income tax rates were raised on upper-income Americans, and the Social Security payroll tax cut was allowed to expire. Now, on top of that, we have sequestration. In 2 See Lucking and Wilson (2012). 4 the period ahead, as the federal deficit shrinks, fiscal policy is likely to weigh on the economy even more. The federal deficit will decline by a substantial amount, on average approximately 1½ percent of gross domestic product every year for the three years ending in 2015, according to the Congressional Budget Office. The United States is not the only country going through a period of budgetary restraint. In Europe, government spending has grown much slower than in other recent recoveries.3 Among countries that use the euro, recessions have caused tax revenue to tank, which widens budget deficits. In the face of those enormous deficits, governments have slammed the brakes on spending. But several of these economies are still contracting. Many analysts—and some policymakers as well—have begun to wonder if policies aimed at cutting deficits should be balanced with policies aimed at spurring growth. For the United States, Europe’s struggles are a real crimp on growth. That’s because Europe is one of our major trading partners. Europeans are buying fewer American products than they would otherwise, which damps demand at a time we need it. However, not all the news from overseas is bad. In Japan, the central bank has adopted a much more aggressive policy to promote growth. Specifically, the Bank of Japan has officially raised the level of inflation it is targeting from 1 to 2 percent, with a view to getting the country out of a prolonged deflationary spiral. That move may not seem like much. But in central banking circles, it’s stop-the-presses news. If the Bank of Japan succeeds in jump-starting growth, that should offset some of the economic drag coming from Europe. I’ve gone over some of the pluses and minuses influencing the U.S. economy so you can get a sense of what’s driving our moderate growth. What does this mean for the job market? 3 See Kose, Loungani, and Terrones (2013). 5 Well, things have been getting better there as well. Since the low point for employment following the recession, the economy has added over 6 million jobs. During the past six months alone, we’ve added 1¼ million jobs. The unemployment rate of 7.5 percent is down 2½ percentage points from its recession peak, with nearly half a percentage point of that decline occurring in the past six months. One reason the jobless rate has been dropping so much is that a large number of people are leaving the labor force. Many of them are reaching retirement age or going back to school. But part of this exodus appears to be people who are giving up looking for work. It’s hard to say how long these discouraged workers will stay out of the labor force. I expect many of them will return as jobs become more plentiful. Under these circumstances, I expect the unemployment rate to decline gradually over the next few years. My forecast is that it will be just below 7½ percent at the end of this year, and a shade below 7 percent at the end of 2014. I don’t see it falling below 6½ percent until mid-2015. This forecast of a gradual downward trend in the unemployment rate reflects the combined effects of expected solid job gains and a return of discouraged workers to the labor force. I also see a gradual pickup in overall economic growth. Growth of gross domestic product, which is the nation’s total output of goods and services, is likely to be relatively sluggish in the second and third quarters as sequestration begins to bite. But I expect the economy to gain momentum after that. I project that inflation-adjusted GDP will grow almost 2½ percent this year and 3¼ percent next year. For its part, inflation is quite low, with the Fed’s preferred measure of prices rising only 1 percent over the past year. Wages are increasing slowly and the labor market still has considerable slack, which should restrain future wage increases. In addition, increases in the 6 prices of imported goods and services have been subdued. And the public continues to expect low inflation. I expect that the decline in inflation will prove to be temporary, and that inflation will climb slowly, but stay below the Fed’s 2 percent longer-run target over the next few years. Earlier I noted that the economy’s improved performance stemmed in part from Federal Reserve policies. Let me describe what we’ve done and then shift to what we might do in the future. During the recession, the Fed acted quickly and aggressively. We pushed our benchmark short-term interest rate close to zero at the end of 2008. But that move was not nearly enough to offset the damage caused by the financial crisis and the housing collapse. We couldn’t push short-term interest rates any lower. So we had to devise new, unconventional ways to stimulate the economy. Broadly, our unconventional policies have fallen into two categories: The first involves what we say, the second, what we do. As far as what we say is concerned, our approach is centered on what is known as forward guidance. Under forward guidance, the Fed’s policy committee releases public statements about the likely stance of policy in the future. The aim is to reduce public confusion and uncertainty about future Fed policy, and thereby help us achieve our policy goals. For example, let’s take the federal funds rate, our benchmark short-term interest rate. If the Fed’s policy committee states that it expects the federal funds rate to remain exceptionally low for an extended period, that will also drive down longer-term interest rates right away. And those longer-term rates have a lot to do with whether a young family buys a house or a car, or a business builds a new factory. The Federal Reserve’s policy committee, the Federal Open Market Committee or FOMC, has issued forward guidance that spells out specific economic conditions that serve as thresholds for considering increases in the federal funds rate. In particular, the Committee’s policy 7 statements have specified that we expect to keep the federal funds rate exceptionally low at least as long as, one, “the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent”; two, “inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal”; and three, longer-term inflation expectations remain in check.4 With this forward guidance in place, members of the public can adjust their expectations for future Fed policy as new information on the economy becomes available. They don’t need to wait for the Fed to issue a new statement. For example, a slowdown in economic growth might cause the public to think that the prospect of reaching a 6½ percent unemployment rate was falling further back in time. They would then expect the Fed to wait longer to raise the federal funds rate, which would prompt them to push long-term interest rates down. And those lower long-term rates would help us achieve our monetary policy goals. The second major unconventional policy category involves what we do. Here I am speaking of our program to buy a total of $85 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities and longer-term Treasury securities each month, often referred to in the financial press as QE3. Under the current and earlier asset purchase programs, we’ve bought more than $3 trillion in longer-term Treasury and mortgage-related securities. Fed purchases boost demand for these securities, bidding up their prices and lowering their yields. Lower Treasury and mortgage yields spill over into other markets, lowering longer-term rates across the board.5 The lower rates that stem in part from forward guidance and quantitative easing have big benefits for the economy. Take a homeowner with a $250,000 mortgage. With the decline in 4 See Board of Governors (2012). 5 See Williams (2011, 2012). 8 longer-term interest rates since 2009, that homeowner might be paying around $3,000 less on a mortgage each year, if he or she is able to refinance. Similar to our forward guidance on the federal funds rate, the FOMC has linked our asset purchases to the outlook for the economy. Specifically, we’ve said we expect to continue buying longer-term Treasury and mortgage securities until the outlook for the job market improves substantially, provided inflation remains contained. In the statement issued by the FOMC after our meeting two weeks ago, we said we would adjust our securities purchases to ensure that monetary stimulus is at a level appropriate for economic conditions. That has been a principle of our ongoing open-ended securities purchase program since we started it in September. It means we will alter the size, pace, and composition of our purchases as necessary as the economy evolves. So, do economic conditions suggest we need to change the $85 billion in monthly securities purchases we’re currently making? To answer that, it’s useful to look at what conditions were when we launched the program last September. At that time, the economy was flashing warning signals. As Figure 1 shows, the pace of improvement in the labor market had slowed, with payroll growth declining. Moreover, the unemployment rate appeared to be stalled at about 8 percent, and we at the San Francisco Fed did not see the rate falling below that level till the final quarter of 2013, as shown in Figure 2. Since then, the labor market has improved considerably. The pace of job growth has picked up, averaging over 200,000 jobs per month over the past six months. And the unemployment rate has come down. Figure 3 shows that, in the seven months since our latest securities purchase program began, the unemployment rate has fallen faster than we had expected. 9 It’s clear that the labor market has improved since September. But have we yet seen convincing evidence of substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, our standard for discontinuing our securities purchases? In considering this question, I look not only at the unemployment rate, but also a wide range of economic indicators that signal the direction the labor market is likely to take. Economists at the San Francisco Fed have identified a very good set of indicators for this purpose that tell us what labor market conditions are likely to be six months in the future. They include well-known labor market measures, such as private payroll employment growth and initial unemployment insurance claims. But they also include measures that are not as well known, such as growth in temporary help employment and survey data on the share of households that find jobs hard to get. Consistent with the payroll and unemployment data I mentioned earlier, most of these indicators look healthier than they did in September. What’s more, nearly all of them are signaling that the labor market will continue to improve over the next six months. This is good news. But it will take further gains to convince me that the “substantial improvement” test for ending our asset purchases has been met. However, assuming my economic forecast holds true and various labor market indicators continue to register appreciable improvement in coming months, we could reduce somewhat the pace of our securities purchases, perhaps as early as this summer. Then, if all goes as hoped, we could end the purchase program sometime late this year. Of course, my forecast could be wrong, and we will adjust our purchases as appropriate depending on how the economy performs. It’s important to stress that even if we slow the pace of our purchases, it does not mean we would be tightening monetary policy or stepping back from our commitment to provide 10 strong monetary support as the economy recovers. The stance of monetary policy would still be extremely stimulatory. In terms of our asset purchases, the evidence shows that the stimulus we are providing depends on the size of our balance sheet, not the rate at which we’re buying assets. So even when we reduce or halt new purchases, we’ll still have trillions of dollars of longer-term securities on our balance sheet exerting downward pressure on interest rates. Of course, eventually we will adjust our policy stance back toward normal levels. When we do, it will be because changing circumstances have made an adjustment the best way to lead us toward our mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability. We recognize that much is uncertain when it comes to the economy, and we’ve thought a great deal about how best to manage our exit from these unconventional policies. I am confident that we will succeed in doing so. Thank you. 11 Job creation has picked up since September Figure 1 50 100 150 200 250 Source: Bureauof Labor Statistics Seasonally adjusted, monthly change Nonfarm Payroll Employment 6-Month Moving Average 2011 2012 Thousands Apr. 2013 Sept. 2012 Unemployment outlook was discouraging… Figure 2 6 7 8 9 10 2010 2011 2012 2013 Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and FRBSF staff Seasonally adjusted Unemployment Rate Percent FRBSF Forecast prior to Sept 2012 FOMC meeting 12 But has improved recently Figure 3 6 7 8 9 10 2010 2011 2012 2013 Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics and FRBSF staff Seasonally adjusted Unemployment Rate Percent FRBSF Forecast prior to Sept 2012 FOMC meeting Current FRBSF Forecast Data since Sept 2012 13 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012. “Press Release.” December 12. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20121212a.htm Kose, M. Ayhan, Prakash Loungani, and Marco E. Terrones. 2013. “The Great Divergence of Policies.” Box 1.1 in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, and Risks. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, pp. 32–35. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2013/01/pdf/c1.pdf Lucking, Brian, and Daniel Wilson. 2012. “U.S. Fiscal Policy: Headwind or Tailwind?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-20 (July 2). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012- 20.html Williams, John C. 2011. “Unconventional Monetary Policy: Lessons from the Past Three Years.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-31 (October 3). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-31.html Williams, John C. 2012. “The Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Policies.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-34 (November 13). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012-34.html

1 Commencement Address Economics Department University of California, Berkeley Berkeley, California By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on May 20, 2013 Life’s Unpredictable Arc Professor Powell, distinguished members of the faculty, parents, students, and, most of all, graduates—it’s truly an honor for me to return to my old stomping ground of the Berkeley Economics Department and this campus that’s so familiar. Standing here with you today, I’m transported back 28 years to my own graduation as an Econ major at Cal. It seems like yesterday. I vividly remember listening to Kenneth Arrow deliver the commencement address on means and ends in economic policies. I was saying good-bye to amazing teachers and classmates and, with less regret, the dreary windowless classrooms of Evans Hall. You all undoubtedly carry your own images from your time at Cal. For me, it’s the double cappuccinos at Caffe Strada and midnight runs to Top Dog to fuel up for a few more hours of study. And, of course, there’s The Play. I was a junior when Cal beat Stanford in the last seconds of the Big Game by executing the greatest play in the history of college football. I’m a big sports fan, and I’ve seen the Giants and the 49ers both win championships. But nothing has ever equaled Kevin Moen threading his way through the Stanford band and taking the ball into the end zone as time ran out. I tell you all this to let you know that I understand a little of what you’re feeling today. First and foremost, there’s enormous pride in having successfully completed one of the most demanding courses of study in American university life—a pride that’s shared by your professors, your friends and family, and, most importantly, your parents, who’ve worked so hard 2 to see this day come true. There’s excitement about ending one phase of your life and beginning another. And, with that naturally comes anxiety about leaving the cocoon of college life and making your way in a world that can sometimes seem daunting and unforgiving. As if that were not enough, many of you—perhaps even most of you—aren’t really sure where life’s journey will take you from here. After all, an economics degree is not like an engineering degree, where you can go out and get a job as an engineer. A bachelor’s in economics doesn’t often take you on a straight path like that. At my commencement, the student speaker summed it up honestly, if brutally: One of you will become the chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, he said. Another of you will become chairman of the Federal Reserve. As for the rest of you … good luck! You may be wondering then, should I go on to graduate school? Should I look for a promising job outside of my field? Or should I move to San Francisco and become a barista for a few years while I figure out the next step? You may have student loans to pay off. And you’re probably nervous about the economy, which is still recovering from the worst downturn since the Great Depression. By the way, on that economy thing … we’re on it. So here’s my message to you: If you don’t have a crystal ball to see your future, don’t worry. Embrace it! Follow the crooked path. To the extent that your circumstances allow, be open to new things, even if they don’t obviously lead in a straight line to your ultimate goal. When you’re in your early 20s—or for that matter your early 50s—you don’t have to know what you’re going to do with the rest of your life. Even those of you who have chosen what seems like a clear career path, rest assured that life will hand you plenty of surprises. Like Kevin Moen in the Big Game, you will encounter twists and turns you can’t possibly imagine, and they will 3 offer unexpected and rewarding opportunities. But you must be ready and willing to take advantage of them. I speak from personal experience. When I graduated, I didn’t know what I wanted to do with my life. I really liked studying economics, and I was pretty good at it. But I wasn’t sure I wanted to be an “economist”—whatever that meant—for the rest of my life. And my job prospects were daunting. Like today, the economy was recovering from a harsh recession. Finding a job was tough. Luckily, I had the good fortune of landing a job at a revered Berkeley institution, steeped in tradition. I’m talking, of course, about Blondie’s Pizza. Who would have thought, but working at Blondie’s turned out to be a life-changing experience. In fact, it helped prepare me for the job I have today. I soon became the general manager and found myself doing things I’d never done before, things that I’d never even thought about before. Hiring and firing, planning schedules, ordering supplies, you name it. If you’re running a business, you never know what’s going to get thrown at you next. When you’ve got a line of hungry people out the door, you’d better come up with something quick—even when you find yourself running out of flour or the pizza oven refuses to light. I thought the Econ 141 final was hard. But I was never tested in college like I was at Blondie’s. I knew that making pizza was probably not my long-term career goal. But, instead of seeing this as a distraction from my career, I chose to dive in and see where it took me. I was passionate about my work. I cared about my customers, my coworkers, and my pizza. I tried to be the best pizza store manager I could be. And, on top of everything else, I met my wife. After four years at Blondie’s, I was ready for the next step on life’s journey, which turned out to be a master’s degree at the London School of Economics. This was followed by a doctorate at Stanford, some teaching, and a professional life in the public sector, including the 4 Council of Economic Advisers, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, and the San Francisco Fed. Looking back, it may seem like I was following a plan. But it sure didn’t feel that way at the time. Your lives may not be so different. I have no doubt that the great majority of you will also have rewarding careers. You’ve had one of the best educations available. You’re smart and talented. The world is full of opportunities. You will find your niche in the world. But not necessarily by next week. So, as you leave the Greek Theatre and take one last stroll through the campus that’s been your home for the past several years, you are starting down your own path, however crooked or straight it may be. Here are some thoughts from someone who has walked a decidedly crooked, but very happy, path. First, be sure to use what you learned in your economics courses. It applies to all sorts of life situations. Carefully weigh the costs and benefits of decisions you make. When you make choices, take into account how they open or close options down the road. Suppose, for example, you’re thinking about graduate school, but you’re ambivalent. What’s the cost of postponing that decision for a few years? By then, you may be ready for graduate school. Or you may end up going in an entirely different direction. The point is, by carefully assessing costs—including opportunity costs—and benefits, and equating marginal costs to marginal benefits, you’re more likely to make wise decisions. Second, don’t be afraid to take risks along your journey. Now, I’m not talking about free climbing in Yosemite. I’m talking about reasonable risks, where the hazards to life and limb are small. That means, for example, when you reach a fork in the road, consider going down the road you haven’t traveled before. I am reminded of something Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke said 5 several years ago about the importance of lifelong learning. Speaking from his own experience as a professor who left academic life for public service, he said that when you’re in your comfort zone and have achieved many of your professional goals, that’s exactly the time to take on new challenges. Of course, that was before the financial crisis, and he just may have gotten more of a challenge than he bargained for. But he rose to the occasion, rewrote the monetary policy playbook to respond to an extreme crisis, and will be remembered as one of the great Fed chairmen. Third, don’t be afraid to fail. Failure is an inevitable part of a life well lived and a necessary prelude to success. In this regard, college is bad preparation for life because we all want to get straight As. But, when you’re out of college, it’s not about grades. It’s about what you contribute. In my career, I’ve messed up more times than I care to count. But I learned from those experiences. In fact, I learned far more on days when everything seemed to go wrong than when things went smoothly. And, fourth, look for ways to give back to society through public service. The people of California invested in your education. Your knowledge of economics means you have a skill that can be of great use. It’s vital that our state and our country pursue good economic policies—policies that put us on sound fiscal and environmental paths, that promote the general welfare, address the shameful gap between rich and poor, and offer the prospect of a decent life to everybody. Even if you don’t stay in economics, I hope that building a better society and a better world will be an integral and substantial part of your lives. In closing, I can tell you that Berkeley will always be with you. It will be with you in the things you’ve learned and the skills you’ve acquired. It will be with you in your memories of 6 friends and teachers, and in what you’ve learned about yourself. And it will be with you in your values, in the way you see the world, and in your ability to think critically and independently. Treasure those things. Go out from here confidently. And enjoy your journey down whatever path life takes you. Good luck. And Go Bears!
