Why I Dissented Again President Kashkari explains his vote at the June 2017 FOMC meeting. June 16, 2017 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Why I Dissented Again Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter This essay is also available on Medium . I have been focused on looking for signs that the labor force participation story of the past year or so is coming to a conclusion: The economy had been creating a lot of jobs, but there was little movement downward in the headline unemployment rate. More people than we had expected were interested in working when jobs became available. We knew this couldn’t go on forever, and indicators that this trend was reaching its eventual conclusion would include a significant move downward in the unemployment rate, a move upward in core inflation and/or a move upward in inflation expectations. 1 We have seen a meaningful drop in the unemployment rate since the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) voted to increase rates in March, from 4.7 percent to 4.3 percent. That drop in unemployment suggests that we are getting closer to maximum employment, which by itself would have supported an increase in rates this week. But at the same time the unemployment rate was dropping, core inflation was also dropping, and inflation expectations remained flat to slightly down at very low levels. We don’t yet know if that drop in core inflation is transitory. In short, the economy is sending mixed signals: a tight labor market and weakening inflation. For me, deciding whether to raise rates or hold steady came down to a tension between faith and data. On one hand, intuitively, I am inclined to believe in the logic of the Phillips curve: A tight labor market should lead to competition for workers, which should lead to higher wages. Eventually, firms will have to pass some of those costs on to their customers, which should lead to higher inflation. That makes intuitive sense. That’s the faith part. On the other hand, unfortunately, the data aren’t supporting this story, with the FOMC coming up short on its inflation target for many years in a row, and now with core inflation actually falling even as the labor market is tightening. If we base our outlook for inflation on these actual data, we shouldn’t have raised rates this week. Instead, we should have waited to see if the recent drop in inflation is transitory to ensure that we are fulfilling our inflation mandate. When I’m torn between faith and data, I look at decisions from a risk management perspective. The risk of raising rates too soon is a continuation of the FOMC’s track record of coming up short of our inflation objective. As this Atlanta Fed survey 2 recently indicated, many people already believe that our 2 percent inflation goal is a ceiling rather than a symmetric target. Raising rates will just further strengthen that belief. And if inflation expectations drop, as we’ve seen in some other countries (and there are signs it might be happening here in the United States), it can be very challenging to bring them back up. The risk of not moving soon enough generally doesn’t appear to be large. If inflation does start to climb, that will actually be welcome. We will move toward our target, and I believe the FOMC will respond appropriately. And if it leads to a moderate overshoot of 2 percent, that shouldn’t be concerning since we say we have a symmetric target and not a ceiling. So what’s the downside risk of waiting to see if the recent inflation moves are transitory? I can only think of one really concerning downside risk: a sudden, rapid unanchoring of inflation expectations. A slow drift upward of inflation expectations doesn’t concern me too much, because I believe the FOMC will respond and keep them in check. The scenario to worry about is that somehow we break inflation expectations: We wake up one morning and instead of 2 percent, they jump to 4 percent. The FOMC would have to respond very powerfully to re-anchor them at 2 percent. I believe we would do what was necessary, but the short-term economic costs might be large. Policymakers are concerned about this risk, but it is a risk based on faith in a sudden return of the Phillips curve and not a risk that we can detect in economic, financial or survey data. Because it is based on faith and not on data, it is a difficult risk to quantify. Though inflation expectations became unanchored during the Great Inflation of the 1960s and 1970s, that episode is not particularly useful to help us understand this risk. As I’ve looked at data from those decades, I see wage and price inflation climbing, but the FOMC lacking the conviction to bring inflation back down. They cut rates first in 1967 and then again in 1970 without having brought inflation back under control. Some reasons why they didn’t maintain aggressive monetary policy were that they put too much emphasis on the Phillips curve and underappreciated the role of inflation expectations: High unemployment would help bring inflation down—reducing the need for monetary policy to do the job. The outcome that the current FOMC is so focused on avoiding, high inflation of the 1970s, may actually be leading us to repeat some of the same mistakes the FOMC made in the 1970s: a faith-based belief in the Phillips curve and an underappreciation of the role of expectations. In the 1970s, that faith led the Fed to keep rates too low, leading to very high inflation. Today, that same faith may be leading the Committee to repeatedly (and erroneously) forecast increasing inflation, resulting in us raising rates too quickly and continuing to undershoot our inflation target. This balance of risks led me to believe we should rely on the data to guide us. And that means we should have waited to see if the recent drop in inflation is transitory and if inflation is actually moving toward our 2 percent target. My Analysis (An Update to the Framework Published in February 2017) Let me acknowledge up front that the analysis that follows is somewhat detailed and complex; yet it is still not comprehensive: FOMC participants look at a wider range of data than I capture in this piece. I am focusing on the data that I find most important in determining the appropriate stance of monetary policy. I always begin my analysis by assessing where we are in meeting the dual mandate Congress has given us: price stability and maximum employment. Price Stability The FOMC has defined its price stability mandate as inflation of 2 percent, using the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) measurement. Importantly, we have said that 2 percent is a target, not a ceiling, so if we are under or over 2 percent, it should be equally concerning. We look at where inflation is heading, not just where it has been. Core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, is one of the best predictors we have of future headline inflation, our ultimate goal. For that reason, I pay attention to the current readings of core inflation. The following chart shows both headline and core inflation since 2010. The rebound in energy prices lifted headline inflation earlier this year, but it has since moved back down below 2 percent. You can see that both inflation measures have been below our 2 percent target for several years. Twelve-month core inflation has fallen in recent months to 1.5 percent and shows no sign of consistently trending upward. It is still below target and, importantly, even if it met or exceeded our target, 2.5 percent should not be any more concerning than the current reading of 1.5 percent, because our target is symmetric. Since the March FOMC meeting, when the Committee last raised the target federal funds range, both headline and core inflation have declined notably; headline inflation has fallen from 1.9 percent to 1.7 percent, while core inflation dropped from 1.8 percent to 1.5 percent. This is concerning. Some have attributed the recent decline in core inflation to transitory factors. That is possible, but I need to see more data before I am convinced that it is only transitory. Next let’s look at inflation expectations—or where consumers and investors think inflation is likely headed. Inflation expectations are important drivers of future inflation, so it is critical that they remain anchored at our 2 percent target. Here the data are mixed. Survey measures of long-term inflation expectations are flat or trending downward. (Note the Michigan survey, the black line, is always elevated relative to our 2 percent target. What is important is the trend, rather than the absolute level.) The Michigan survey has been trending downward over the past few years and is now near its lowest-ever reading. In contrast, professional forecasters seem to remain confident that inflation will average 2 percent. While the professional forecast ticked upward slightly earlier this year, these readings are essentially unchanged since the March FOMC meeting. Market-based measures of long-term inflation expectations jumped a bit immediately after the election. I’ve argued that the financial markets are guessing about what fiscal and regulatory actions the new Congress and the Trump Administration will enact, and markets seem to be less confident of those changes now than they were a few months ago. The markets’ inflation forecasts have come down in recent months and remain at the low end of their historical range. But perhaps inflationary pressures are building that we aren’t yet seeing in the data. I look at wages and costs of labor as potentially early warning signs of inflation around the corner. 3 If employers have to pay more to retain or hire workers, eventually they will have to pass those costs on to their customers. Ultimately, those costs must show up as inflation. But we aren’t seeing a lot of movement in these data. The red line is the employment cost index, a measure of compensation that includes benefits and that adjusts for employment shifts among occupations and industries. It has been more or less flat over the past six years, though it ticked up modestly since the March FOMC meeting. The blue line is the average hourly earnings for employees. The growth rate of hourly earnings has fallen since the March meeting—from 2.8 percent to 2.5 percent—and remains low relative to the precrisis period. In short, the cost of labor isn’t showing signs of building inflationary pressures that are ready to take off and push inflation above the Fed’s target. Now let’s look around the world. Most major advanced economies have been suffering from low inflation since the global financial crisis. It seems unlikely that the United States will experience a surge of inflation while the rest of the developed world suffers from low inflation. Since the March FOMC meeting, headline inflation has increased in the United Kingdom due to last year’s sterling depreciation resulting from Brexit, but headline inflation has been roughly flat in other advanced economies. With the exception of the U.K., core inflation rates in advanced economies continue to come in below their inflation targets. In summary, inflation has moved further below our target, and market-based measures of inflation expectations have fallen from already low levels. Some argue that the recent decline in inflation is transitory, but we don’t know that for certain. Maximum Employment Next let’s look at our maximum employment mandate. One of the big questions I have been wrestling with is whether the labor market has fully recovered or if there is still some slack in it. Over the past couple of years, some people repeatedly declared that we had reached maximum employment and no further gains were possible without triggering higher inflation. And, repeatedly, the labor market proved otherwise. The headline unemployment rate has fallen from a peak of 10 percent to 4.3 percent, below the level it was at before the financial crisis. But we know that measurement doesn’t include people who have given up looking for a job or are involuntarily stuck in a part-time job. So we also look at a broader measure of unemployment, what we call the U-6 measure, which includes those workers. The U-6 measure peaked at 17.1 percent in 2010 and has fallen to 8.4 percent today, which is close to its precrisis level. One of the big surprises during late 2015 through early 2017 was how strong the job market was (creating an average of 200,000 net jobs per month, which is much higher than the 80,000 to 120,000 jobs per month needed to keep up with (trend) labor force growth); yet the unemployment rate remained fairly flat near 5 percent. This surprised us a bit because it suggests that there were many more people who were interested in working than historical patterns predicted. That storyline has lost some steam in recent months: Job gains have slowed to 121,000 per month over the past three months, while the unemployment rate has fallen to 4.3 percent as labor force growth has declined. Some other measures we look at are the employment-to-population ratio and the labor force participation rate, which capture what percentage of adults are working or in the labor force. We know these are trending downward over time due to the aging of our society (as more people retire, a smaller share of adults are in the labor force). To adjust for those trends, I prefer to look at these measures by focusing on prime working-age adults. The next chart shows that in both measures, there still appears to be more labor market slack than before the crisis. The bottom line is the job market has improved substantially, and we are getting closer to maximum employment. But we still aren’t sure if we have yet reached it. In 2012, the midpoint estimate among FOMC participants for the long-term unemployment rate was 5.6 percent—the FOMC’s best estimate for maximum employment. We now know that was too conservative—many more Americans wanted to work than we had expected. If the FOMC had declared victory when we reached 5.6 percent unemployment, many more workers would have been left on the sideline. Since the March FOMC meeting, the headline unemployment rate has fallen from 4.7 percent to 4.3 percent. The labor force participation rate for prime working-age adults fell from 81.7 percent to 81.5 percent, while the employment-population ratio increased slightly to 78.4 percent. The story of a growing labor force, either by workers re-entering or choosing not to leave, has clearly slowed, but with few signs of pushing wages higher. We also know that the aggregate national averages don’t highlight the serious challenges individual communities are experiencing. For example, today while the headline unemployment rate for all Americans is 4.3 percent, it is still 7.5 percent for African Americans and 5.2 percent for Hispanics. The broader U-6 measure, mentioned above, is roughly double the headline rate for each group. Current Rate Environment OK, so we are still coming up short on our inflation mandate, and we are closer to reaching maximum employment. Let’s have a look at where we are now: Is current monetary policy accommodative, neutral or tight? I look at a variety of measures, including rules of thumb such as the Taylor rule, to determine whether we are accommodative or not. There are many versions of such rules, and none are perfect. One concept I find useful, although it requires a lot of judgment, is the notion of a neutral real interest rate, sometimes referred to as R*, which is the rate that neither stimulates nor restrains the economy. Many economists believe the neutral rate is not static, but rises and falls over time as a result of broader macroeconomic forces, such as population growth, demographics, technology development and trade, among others. There are a range of estimates for the current neutral real rate. Having looked at them, I tend to think it is around zero today, or perhaps slightly negative. The FOMC raised rates by 0.25 percent in March, moving the target range for the nominal federal funds rate to between 0.75 percent and 1.00 percent. With core inflation around 1.5 percent, the real federal funds rate was between -0.75 percent and -0.50 percent. Combined with a neutral rate of zero, that means monetary policy was only about 50 to 75 basis points, or 0.50 percent to .75 percent, accommodative going into this week’s FOMC meeting. Monetary policy has been at least this accommodative for several years, including the effects of the Federal Reserve’s expanded balance sheet, without triggering increasing inflation. This further confirms my view that monetary policy has been only moderately accommodative over this period. Financial Stability Concerns Please see my recent essay on how I think about monetary policy and financial stability. 4 In short, while some asset prices appear elevated, I don’t see a correction as being likely to trigger financial instability. Investors would face losses from a stock market correction, but it’s not the Fed’s job to protect investors from losses. Our jobs are to achieve our dual mandate and to promote financial stability. Fiscal Outlook I didn’t adjust my economic outlook when the markets made optimistic assumptions about future fiscal and regulatory policy changes following the election. Markets seem less optimistic than they were a few months ago about those future actions. Until we know more from Congress and the White House, I believe it is prudent to assume no change in the fiscal outlook. Global Environment The world is large and complex. There is virtually always something concerning going on somewhere. But, overall, global economic and geopolitical risks do not seem more elevated than they have been in recent years. In fact, some global risks appear to have diminished, and the outlook for global growth is somewhat stronger than it was a few months ago. The world economy is expected to grow at 3.5 percent in 2017. Developing economies are expected to grow at 4.5 percent and advanced economies at 2.0 percent. 5 While the dollar has declined modestly this year, it has increased about 20 percent over the past three years. The strong dollar will likely continue to put some downward pressure on inflation. Overall, the global environment doesn’t seem to be sending a strong signal for a change in U.S. interest rates. Policy Tools I have been calling for the FOMC to put out detailed plans for when and how we will begin to normalize our balance sheet. I supported releasing the details that we published following this week’s meeting. It was an important, positive step. I would have liked us to go further and also announced a start date for the balance sheet roll-off later this year. This would give markets as much advanced notice as possible so that when the roll-off actually begins, it is as close to a non-event as possible. What Might Be Wrong? What might my analysis be missing? Some economic or financial shock could hit us, from within the U.S. economy or from outside. That is always true, and we need to be ready to respond if necessary. In addition, if we are surprised by higher inflation than we currently expect, we might need to raise rates more aggressively. Some argue that gradual rate increases are better than waiting and having to move aggressively. It isn’t clear to me that one path is obviously better than the other. Conclusion The labor market has tightened since we raised rates in March, but inflation has fallen. It doesn’t appear that we are moving closer to our inflation target. Inflation expectations appear flat or may even be drifting lower. Monetary policy is currently only somewhat accommodative. There don’t appear to be urgent financial stability risks at the moment. The global environment seems to have a fairly typical level of risk. From a risk management perspective, we have stronger tools to deal with high inflation than low inflation. Looking at all of this together led me to vote against a rate increase. We should have waited for more data to see if the recent drop in inflation is transitory. Endnotes 1 The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee. 2 See the April 2017 question . 3 The truth is there is not much of a correlation between high wage growth and future inflation but, intuitively, they must be linked. 4 See Monetary Policy and Bubbles . 5 See the International Monetary Fund’s April 2017 World Economic Outlook . More On Inflation Monetary Policy Policy More On Inflation Monetary Policy Policy Related Content Initially delayed, the pass-through of tariffs to consumer prices has arrived Article Inquiring minds: Q&A with Laura Castillo-Martínez Article Regional Economic Indicators Data Related Content Initially delayed, the pass-through of tariffs to consumer prices has arrived Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Houghton, Mich. Watch the event livestream here from 4:30-5:30 pm CST. June 27, 2017 | 4:30 p.m. CT Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Houghton, Mich. | Great Lakes Research Center Houghton , Michigan Neel Kashkari President and CEO Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Houghton, Mich. Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Do you have a hard question about the economy? Or about the Fed’s recent interest rate hikes? Curious about what the Minneapolis Fed does within the Federal Reserve System? Here is your chance to join a dynamic, no-holds-barred conversation with Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari about these very topics and more. President Kashkari is a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, where the Fed sets interest rates. He will give brief remarks, followed by an open-mic Q&A with the audience, moderated by Dr. Jacqueline Huntoon, Provost of Michigan Tech. This town hall forum with President Kashkari was a public event and discussion held in Houghton, Michigan on June 27, 2017 . Video: Event in full Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

WSJ Op-Ed: New Bailouts Prove ‘Too Big to Fail’ Is Alive and Well Regulators keep insisting bondholders will take losses, but then they’re reluctant to impose them. July 9, 2017 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO WSJ Op-Ed: New Bailouts Prove ‘Too Big to Fail’ Is Alive and Well Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Three strikeouts in four at bats would be barely acceptable in baseball. For a policy designed to prevent taxpayer bailouts, it's an undeniable defeat. In the past few weeks, four European bank failures have demonstrated that a signature feature of the postcrisis regulatory regime simply cannot protect the public. There's no need for more evidence: "bail-in debt" doesn't prevent bailouts. It's time to admit this and move to a simpler solution that will work: more common equity. Bail-in debt was envisioned as an elegant solution to the "too big to fail" problem. When a bank ran into trouble, regulators could trigger a conversion of debt to equity. Bondholders would take the losses. The firm would be recapitalized. Taxpayers would be spared. The idea, adopted both in the U.S. and Europe following the 2008 financial crisis, has its share of supporters, including JPMorgan Chase CEO James Dimon. "Essentially, too big to fail has been solved," Mr. Dimon insisted in a shareholder letter earlier this year. "Taxpayers will not pay if a bank fails." Wall Street also prefers this debt funding rather than equity because it is better for bank share prices. In theory, taxpayers and stockholders both win. The problem is that it rarely works this way in real life. On June 1, the Italian government and European Union agreed to bail out Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena with a €6.6 billion infusion, while protecting some bondholders who should have taken losses. Then on June 24, Italy decided to use public funds to protect bondholders of two more banks, Banca Popolare di Vicenza and Veneto Banca, with up to €17 billion of capital and guarantees. The one recent case in which taxpayers were spared was in Spain, when Banco Popular failed on June 6. The largest of these four banks was less than one-tenth the size of $2.5 trillion JPMorgan. Think about that: If bail-in debt couldn't protect taxpayers from a midsize bank failure when the global economy is stable, what are the odds it will work if a Wall Street giant runs into trouble when the economy looks shaky? Or how about when several giants are in trouble at the same time, as in 2008? Don't hold your breath. Why are governments so reluctant to force losses on bondholders? Sometimes they fear financial contagion. The argument holds water in the case of too-big-to-fail banks: If creditors at one large institution face losses, creditors at others may fear the same and try to pull their funding. Once the dominoes start falling, they are very hard to stop. This is why the Federal Reserve and the Treasury Department, with the support of Congress through the Troubled Asset Relief Program, intervened so dramatically to arrest the 2008 crisis. When systemic risk isn't an issue, governments may worry that bondholders are politically important constituents. In the recent Italian examples, the banks weren't considered too big to fail, but the bondholders were retail investors. Regulators claimed that this was a unique circumstance, but there always seem to be unique circumstances when bailouts are concerned. What will happen if an important pension fund faces losses? This is one more reminder that only equity can be counted on to protect taxpayers—and it needs to be raised in advance of economic distress. Although capital standards for America's largest banks are higher now than before the last crisis, they are not nearly high enough. The odds of a bailout in the next century are still nearly 70%. Large banks need to be able to withstand losses of around 20%, according to a 2015 analysis by the Federal Reserve. But they have only about half that amount in equity because regulators have generously assumed bondholders would take losses. Italy demonstrates that this is wishful thinking. Too big to fail is alive and well, and taxpayers are on the hook. There is bipartisan support for fixing the problem, but it will require forcing large banks to raise much more equity. They won't do it on their own, because their stock prices benefit when the public takes the risk. Indeed, banks are now moving in the wrong direction by increasing their dividends and stock buybacks. As a country, we must decide what's more important: protecting taxpayers or bank investors. Mr. Kashkari is president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis and a participant in the Federal Open Market Committee. See Neel Kashkari's Op-Ed in the Wall Street Journal. More On Too Big to Fail Monetary Policy Policy More On Too Big to Fail Monetary Policy Policy Related Content Doubling Down on Wisdom Is an Illusory Solution Article Large bank stress test tool Data Is the COVID-19 financial shock a good measure of bank strength? Article Related Content Doubling Down on Wisdom Is an Illusory Solution Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Healthy Children, Healthy Nations July 12, 2017 Minneapolis , Minnesota Mark L. J. Wright Senior Vice President and Director of Research Healthy Children, Healthy Nations Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Thank you, Patrice, for that very kind introduction. It is my pleasure to be with you all today to recognize your work on early childhood nutrition and development in Minnesota’s American Indian communities. I would especially like to thank the Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community and the Better Way Foundation for the leadership and support they have provided to this Healthy Children, Healthy Nations initiative. I plan to talk a bit about how the work of the initiative aligns with what we do at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, starting with some of the origins of our work in Indian Country and on early childhood development. Before I do, I should note that my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis or the Federal Reserve System. The Healthy Children, Healthy Nations initiative sits at an intersection of decades of work at the Minneapolis Fed on both Indian Country and on early childhood development. Our work in Indian Country, which today occurs under the umbrella of the Center for Indian Country Development, in fact dates back to at least the 1970s and has been a high-profile effort since the early 1990s. Our work in this area is driven by the fundamental regional structure of the Federal Reserve System as defined in the Federal Reserve Act, which created 12 Federal Reserve Districts across the country, each with its own independent Federal Reserve Bank responsible for understanding its District’s economy. In our Ninth Federal Reserve District, the 44 federally recognized American Indian reservations are prominent features of the regional economy. In addition, our Indian Country work is based on the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, which directs us to monitor how banks are meeting the needs of low- and moderate-income communities; American Indian reservations figure prominently on our list of these areas. Our work on early childhood development also dates back decades and is tied to our concerns about low- to moderate-income communities. You might be surprised to learn, however, that the initial source of this work lies in our regional economic policy analysis. More than 20 years ago, one of my predecessors as Director of Research at the Minneapolis Fed, Art Rolnick, and others took a hard look at regional development policies in which state governments directed subsidies to individual corporations and found that they produced meager returns for the local economy and were harmful from a national perspective. 1 When asked to offer a better regional economic development alternative, Art teamed with Rob Grunewald, another economist at the Minneapolis Fed, to document the long-lasting benefits and social returns from investing in high-quality early childhood programs. Given this history, we are delighted to support the Healthy Children, Healthy Nations initiative. The work that you do to provide high-quality early childhood experiences is especially important in light of evidence that many of Minnesota’s American Indian mothers and children remain at risk. The statistics are striking: only 47 percent of Minnesota’s American Indian mothers received adequate prenatal care in 2015. 2 The Minnesota Department of Human Services recently reported that about 1 in 10 pregnancies on reservations is affected by prenatal opiate use. 3 These factors partly explain why American Indian infant mortality is twice as high as white infant mortality in Minnesota. 4 In 2016, 23 percent of American Indian children ages two to five participating in the Minnesota Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children were considered obese, compared with 16 percent of white non-Hispanic children in the program. 5 The percentage of American Indian children involved with Minnesota’s child protection system is 5 times higher than the percentage for white children, 6 and placement in foster care is almost 20 times higher. 7 Outcome gaps like these have persisted for decades, as shown by the fact that Minnesota’s Native American adults are significantly more likely than adults of other races to have experienced at least one of nine categories of adverse childhood experiences; 23 percent have had five or more adverse childhood experiences, compared with 7 percent among white adults. 8 The disadvantages experienced by too many of Minnesota’s American Indian children transfer into gaps in educational outcomes. American Indian test scores are much lower than those of white children; for example, only 30 percent of Native American elementary and middle school students meet or exceed standards in math, compared with 68 percent of white students. 9 Only about 52 percent of American Indian youth complete high school within four years in Minnesota, far below the 87 percent graduation rate for white teenagers. 10 The gaps in outcomes that prevail in Minnesota’s American Indian communities point to gaps in the opportunities available within these communities. Understanding and removing these opportunity gaps is the aim of the Minneapolis Fed’s new Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute . 11 The design of the Institute reflects the limits on what the Fed can and cannot do. The Fed is not Congress; we cannot pass laws. Nor does the Fed have the power to appropriate funds in order to write checks to support specific programs. As the Fed is an independent nonpartisan organization, we cannot advocate in favor of specific pieces of legislation. However, there is still much that the Fed can do: The Fed can listen to and learn from the people in our communities. We can use our analytical capacity to isolate the causes of opportunity gaps and to identify promising policies to close them. And, we can partner with groups on the ground, bringing interested parties together to help forge coalitions to tackle these problems directly. Reflecting these capabilities, the Institute’s aim is to conduct and promote basic research into the forces that limit opportunity and inclusion. We recognize that these forces are complex and that opportunity gaps have persisted for decades in spite of the devoted efforts of many talented people. But this is not a reason for moving slowly. We have already assembled a group of world-class experts drawn from economics, sociology, law, and political science as our Board of Advisors, 12 and at an Institute conference at the end of May we listened to their ideas about where the Fed should focus its efforts. 13 Informed by their advice, we established a visiting scholars program to facilitate the interaction of outstanding researchers while they are in residence in Minneapolis. 14 We also established a new working paper series that has already released more than 20 titles highlighting work on opportunity gaps by researchers throughout the Fed system. 15 Just as importantly, we are listening to and learning from people outside of academia, including community leaders and community development professionals. The Healthy Children, Healthy Nations initiative is an excellent example of how cutting-edge research and a community participatory process can be combined to address key social and economic issues. Research by the Minneapolis Fed has found that the returns on investments in young children are enormous. After taking into account the effect on future school performance, increased earnings, decreased crime, and decreased welfare expenditures, this research has found that an extra $1 spent on the education of vulnerable children returns between $4 and $16. 16 Research also shows large positive returns to investments in health and nutrition programs for families with pregnant women and young children. For example, the Michigan Maternal Infant Health Program finds $1 spent on prenatal health education aimed at reducing use of tobacco, alcohol, and drugs reduces preterm births by 3 percentage points, yielding returns of $1.38 in the first month of life alone. 17 It is important to pause for a moment to reflect upon just how large these returns are. To put them in context, note that we live in a time when a 1 percent return annually on our savings accounts looks very attractive and where our federal government can borrow for 30 years at a rate under 3 percent. In such a world, investments that pay for themselves within a few years—and, in some cases, only a few months—and that can accumulate returns over an entire lifetime of more than 500 percent—and, in some cases, possibly more than 1,500 percent—are staggering. They are, quite simply, investments that make both dollars and sense. As an economist, I’ve been trained to apply hard-headed analytical techniques to the evaluation of public policy programs. In return, I am sometimes called hard-hearted. But the application of hard-headed analytics to the policies advocated by well-meaning, compassionate people occasionally uncovers unintended adverse consequences, while at other times it reveals that, although a policy may work as intended, it returns far too little to justify the expense involved. While I sympathize with the motivations of these policy advocates—I self-identify as soft-hearted—it is important to recognize that every dollar spent on one policy program is a dollar that is unavailable for another. It is therefore important that we work to weed out ineffective policies (if I were being uncharitable, I might call them “soft-headed” policies) and direct expenditures toward those policies that do the most good. What makes the work of the Healthy Children, Health Nations initiative so exciting is that it champions soft-hearted policies that survive the test of hard-headed analysis. Thank you. Endnotes 1 See Economic Bidding Wars , Minneapolis Fed website. 2 Minnesota Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System, Minnesota Department of Health. Prenatal Care: What are the Barriers? Funding for MN PRAMS is made possible by grant number: 5U01DP006217-02 from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 3 Minnesota Department of Human Services. Minnesota State Targeted Response to the Opioid Crisis. Project Narrative. April 2017. 4 Minnesota Department of Health. 2012 Minnesota Infant Mortality Data Book . January 2014. 5 Minnesota Department of Health, WIC Program. Overweight and Obesity Status in Children Ages 2 to 5 Years of Age Participating in Minnesota WIC by Year and Race/Ethnicity . February 2017. 6 Minnesota Department of Human Services. Minnesota’s Child Maltreatment Report 2015 . October 2016. 7 Minnesota Department of Human Services. Minnesota’s Out-of-Home Care and Permanency Report 2015 . January 2017. 8 Minnesota Department of Health. Adverse Childhood Experiences in Minnesota. Findings & Recommendations Based on the 2011 Minnesota Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. February 2013. 9 Minnesota Department of Education. 2017 Minnesota Assessment Results: Reading, Mathematics and Science . August 2017. 10 National Center for Education Statistics. Public high school 4-year adjusted cohort graduation rate (ACGR), by selected student characteristics and state: 2010-11 through 2014-15 . 11 See Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute , Minneapolis Fed website. 12 See Institute’s Board of Advisors, Minneapolis Fed website. 13 See Inaugural Spring 2017 Institute Conference , Minneapolis Fed website. 14 See Visiting Scholar Program , Minneapolis Fed website. 15 See System Working Papers , Minneapolis Fed website. 16 Rob Grunewald. “Investments in Young Children Yield High Public Returns.” Cascade . Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. No. 93, Fall 2016. 17 C. Peters, P. McKane, and C. Meghea. Michigan Department of Community Health. “Return on Investment: Cost Savings to Medicaid from Maternal Infant Health Program due to Reduction in Preterm Birth Rate.” ROI Fact Sheet Series Volume 1, Issue 1, 2015. Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
