Central Bank Balance Sheets: Misconceptions and Realities By Eric S. Rosengren March 26, 2019 Hong Kong, China Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Federal Reserve Bank of Boston President Eric Rosengren explored misconceptions about the Fed’s balance sheet – the assets the central bank holds, and the liabilities and capital used to finance those assets – in a speech in Hong Kong. Rosengren disagreed with the view that the market turbulence at the end of 2018 was caused by the Fed’s ongoing balance sheet reduction. He also said “it is unrealistic to expect the Fed’s balance sheet to return to the size it was before the financial crisis,” as some have suggested, because factors not related to monetary policy impact the balance sheet’s growth. Rosengren also emphasized that central banks may need to turn to balance sheet tools to stimulate the economy during the next recession, given a low-rate environment with limited room to reduce rates before they reach zero. He described the Fed’s post-crisis approach to monetary policy implementation as requiring a larger balance sheet. Rosengren said there seems to be little correlation between equity market movements and the relatively small and steady decline in the Fed’s balance sheet. Markets recovered in early 2019 despite little change in the magnitude of the balance sheet’s “still quite gradual” run-off. “In my view, concerns about the international economy, potential trade disputes, and a U.S. government shutdown are much more plausible explanations for the financial market turbulence.” Growth in the Fed’s balance sheet, said Rosengren, is not solely related to monetary policy actions, as many assume. Growing liabilities not primarily determined by monetary policy are important too – such as currency, and Treasury deposits. “Part of the expansion of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet occurs as a normal consequence of a growing economy with a growing need for currency, a factor not related to monetary policy action.” Simply put, “the change in currency holdings alone highlights that the Fed’s balance sheet will not be able to shrink to earlier levels.” He also noted that relative to GDP, the U.S. balance sheet is actually small compared to those of central banks in many other developed countries. Overall, “it is a mistake to focus primarily on the size of the balance sheet, with much less attention placed on the quantity of bank reserves and the duration of the assets being held.” Looking ahead, Rosengren explored how the balance sheet could be used to stimulate the economy in a hypothetical downturn. It may well be that many central banks have little room to reduce short-term rates. This will likely generate an increased need to utilize the balance sheet as a stimulative tool. “In my view, monetary policymakers should give more consideration to structuring the balance sheet to provide more leeway for policy measures to be taken when the next economic downturn occurs.” To that end, he said that lowering the duration of securities held as assets may be an important goal as part of the normalization process, and “would give the Federal Reserve the flexibility to take the policy step of lengthening the maturity of its balance sheet assets the next time a significant economic downturn occurs.” Rosengren also noted the Federal Reserve’s recent statements on policy implementation and balance sheet normalization. The Fed anticipates an ample supply of reserves (which are a balance sheet liability) to avoid volatility, and a floor system of administered rates controlling the level of the Federal Funds Rate. Rosengren concluded by saying it is important for policymakers to continue to study how balance sheet operations influence the economy – “and I dare say it is important for market observers, lawmakers, and the public to become more comfortable with the benefits of central banks using their balance sheet tools to pursue the public interest.” Rosengren was speaking at the Credit Suisse Asian Investment Conference, in Hong Kong. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords monetary policy , Balance sheet , interest rates , financial stability , Economic outlook , Markets

Monetary Policymaking in Today’s Environment: Finding "Policy Space" in a Low-Rate World By Eric S. Rosengren April 15, 2019 Davidson, NC Cornelson Distinguished Lecture Davidson College Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren spoke Monday at Davidson College in North Carolina. Key takeaways from Rosengren’s remarks: The economy is doing well, but the inflation rate remains below the Fed’s 2 percent target. Below-target inflation and a low interest rate environment limit policymakers’ “room to maneuver” in the event of an economic downturn. A more firmly ingrained inflation target would help – for example, the Fed could aim to achieve its inflation target on average over the economic cycle. In addition to the limited room for short-term rate cuts, an alternative tool – influencing long-term rates – is also constrained. With the economy doing well, it’s a good time to consider if changes to the Fed’s policy framework could provide “policy space” for action in a hypothetical future downturn. In hindsight, Rosengren said, the Fed’s 2 percent target has acted more like a ceiling than a symmetric target. Still, below-target inflation factors into current policy: “One reason for the policy committee’s decision to be patient in determining future rate adjustments, despite tight labor markets, is waiting to see more convincing evidence that inflation will achieve and sustain the 2 percent inflation target.” Rosengren said the below-target inflation and low interest rate environment would give monetary policy-makers little space to maneuver in a hypothetical next recession. In each of the last three downturns, the Fed has lowered short-term rates by more than 5 percentage points. Today, rates are well below that level, which implies policymakers today “now have much less latitude to use short-term rates to counter a recession.” Rosengren said there are various ways the inflation target could be more firmly ingrained. One would be for the Fed to “aim to achieve its inflation target on average over the economic cycle. This would allow the inflation rate to move within a rangecentered around its target.” The Fed could offset an undershoot of the inflation target during recessions by overshooting the target during recoveries. By keeping inflation expectations stable and creating space for policy to act, in sum, inflation averaging would “make the extent of recessions less severe.” Policymakers aren’t limited to cutting short-term rates as their only policy tool: Central banks can purchase longer-term assets to reduce their rates, using the central bank’s balance sheet. But Rosengren noted that long-term yields are already close to zero in Germany and Japan. The U.S. 10-year Treasury rate provides policymakers with more space to act, but it’s still low by historical standards. “So this other monetary policy tool – influencing long-term rates – would also have limited power to respond to a hypothetical economic downturn,” Rosengren said. He added, “if we want to have more capacity to lower long-term rates in recessions without increasing the size of the Fed’s balance sheet, policymakers may wish to hold more short-term securities in good times.” “Now is a good time to reflect on the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy framework,” Rosengren concluded, referring to a process that is underway. “Both the U.S. and many developed economies are likely to be challenged by the implications of a low interest rate environment for our ability to offset recessions.” Rosengren was speaking at Davidson College in Davidson, North Carolina, delivering the 33 rd Cornelson Distinguished Lecture sponsored by the economics department. His talk was streamed live at https://davidson.edu/livestream . collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords monetary policy , interest rates , financial stability , fiscal policy , Markets , Economic outlook

Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation and Low Unemployment Economy By Eric S. Rosengren May 21, 2019 New York, NY Economic Club of New York Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share In remarks on Tuesday, Boston Fed president Eric Rosengren explored the current economic environment, characterized by low unemployment and lower-than-target inflation – which are somewhat opposing signals for monetary policymakers. “The Fed’s dual mandate from Congress had not posed this type of conflict in the early years after the global financial crisis, as unemployment had been undesirably high and inflation somewhat low. Both implied the need for monetary stimulus. But today, the two elements of the Fed’s mandate are sending opposing signals for monetary policy, with low unemployment perhaps suggesting a bit tighter policy, and low inflation the opposite.” Rosengren described the economy as displaying a sounder footing than it was at the start of 2019. He expects the unemployment rate to fall even further. “Equity markets declined significantly in the fourth quarter of last year, but had largely recovered prior to recent events. Other concerns – for example, worries about foreign growth slowing as a result of Brexit, and about the Chinese economy faltering – appear to have subsided since the beginning of the year. And first-quarter growth in the U.S. was stronger than many forecasters expected.” Rosengren believes there is no clear need to alter the current stance of monetary policy in the near term. “I see no clarion call to alter current policy in the near term. I view current policy as slightly accommodative and likely to be consistent with inflation returning to the Fed’s 2 percent inflation target over time.” Clearly there are challenges associated with regularly undershooting inflation, including a resulting decline in inflation expectations that have proven difficult to reverse in other areas, said Rosengren. “While policy should not overreact to temporary inflation misses from the Fed’s target, it would not be desirable to continue consistently undershooting inflation. Regularly undershooting could cause inflation expectations to decline, a process that has been shown to be difficult to reverse in other developed areas, including Japan and Europe.” A prominent downside risk – more disruptive trade negotiations – is another reason for policymaker patience, although Rosengren’s forecast assumes resolution of the U.S.-China trade dispute and projects the uncertainly it has created will be temporary and have only a modest effect on the economy. “For now, I am optimistically assuming that both sides in the trade negotiations will work to reach an agreement. I am also assuming that while the uncertainty is not helpful, it will be transitory, and thus have only a modest effect on the forecast for the U.S. economy overall.” Rosengren says it’s worth discussing whether the Fed should aim for somewhat above-target inflation during recoveries, knowing it will likely undershoot the target during downturns. “Such an approach would not change the Fed’s inflation target over the cycle. Rather, it might reinforce the notion that policymakers aim to achieve 2 percent inflation on average, not allowing long periods of below-2 percent inflation to reset inflation expectations below the 2 percent inflation goal.” collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures (pdf) Site Topics In the Region , Monetary Policy & Economic Research Keywords tariffs , Dual mandate , fed policy , monetary policy , Economic outlook , interest rates , inflation , trade , Markets
