Governor Lael Brainard At the Northwestern Kellogg Public-Private Interface Conference on "New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research & Practice" Share Watch Live We can learn a lot from the evolution of smartphones as we try to envisage where the fintech ecosystem--and banks' role within it--might be heading in the future. Smartphones have ushered in an age when different companies can easily work with each other's products to seamlessly provide services to consumers. Today I want to reflect on what we might learn from that model about the increasingly interconnected world of financial services. On the 10th anniversary of the iPhone, a Wired.com article revealed that even Steve Jobs hadn't predicted the smartphone's potential as a platform. 1 Apple was just trying to design an iPod that made phone calls. Today, the average American spends five hours a day on their phone, unlocking it an average of 80 times daily. 2 Even the Supreme Court has noted that smartphones are now "such a pervasive and insistent part of daily life that the proverbial visitor from Mars might conclude they were an important feature of human anatomy." 3 Of course, we aren't using these appendages primarily to make phone calls. Instead, we mainly use our smartphones to access applications (apps). 4 In June of last year, Apple announced that over 2 million apps were available on its App Store. 5 For the most part, these apps were not created or even envisaged by Apple. These apps have been downloaded 130 billion times, generating over $50 billion in revenue for third-party developers. 6 The iPhone is a key platform on which that app ecosystem operates. How did that happen? Apple essentially made the smartphone a toolkit for third-party developers to experiment, innovate, build, and scale new apps. It did so by investing heavily in developing open application programming interfaces (APIs) that provided third-party developers clear instructions and open access to the iPhone platform. This strategy enabled those outside developers to build new applications that delivered Apple's customers additional value by taking advantage of the existing functionality of the iPhone. Specifically, this open architecture makes available to outside developers clear instructions that enable them to use the iPhone's various sensors, processors, displays, and other interfaces in combination with their own code to develop new products. On top of that, a robust secondary layer of developers use the APIs of other developers in their technology stacks to quickly assemble new business models. Take ride-sharing services, for instance. They have built multibillion-dollar businesses that are, in large part, dependent on combinations of APIs from different companies. They may use Google Maps' APIs for location services, Stripe or Braintree's APIs for payments, Twilio's APIs for text messaging, and Amazon Web Services' or IBM's APIs for computing power. All of these products, and more, work seamlessly together in real time to provide products that are so ubiquitous that we now use them as verbs for how we navigate the world. We "Uber" to the store or "Snapchat" a friend. Risks and Opportunities in an Increasingly Interconnected World There is every reason to expect financial services to make a similar transition to an increasingly interconnected digital world. By now, we've all heard estimates of the thousands of fintech companies that have launched in the past few years and the billions of investment dollars that are flooding into this sector. 7 But for all of the talk of "disruption," I want to underscore an important point: More often than not, there is a banking organization somewhere in the fintech stack. Just as third-party app developers rely on smartphone sensors, processors, and interfaces, fintech developers need banks somewhere in the stack for such things as: (a) access to consumer deposits or related account data, (b) access to payment systems, (c) credit origination, or (d) compliance management. 8 For instance, account comparison services rely on access to data from consumers' bank accounts. Savings and investment apps analyze transactions data from bank accounts to understand how to optimize performance and manage the funds consumers hold in those accounts. Digital wallets draw funds from payment cards or bank accounts. Marketplace loans most often depend on loan origination by a bank partner. And payment innovations often "settle up" over legacy payment rails, like the automated clearinghouse system. 9 In short, the software stacks of almost all fintech apps point to a bank at one layer or another . So as fintech companies and banks are catching up to the interconnected world, the various players are sorting out how best to do the connecting. Much of the work so far has been focused on the technical challenges, which are notable. Most banks' core systems are amalgams of computing mainframes built decades ago before the Internet or cloud computing were widely available and, in many cases, stitched together over the course of mergers and consolidations. 10 It takes a lot of investment to securely convert that infrastructure to platforms that can operate in real-time with ready access for Internet-native third-party developers. But important policy, regulatory, and legal questions also demand attention. And that is where the smartphone analogy loses its power. On balance, bank activities are much more highly regulated than smartphones. Those regulations enable consumers to trust their banks to secure their funds and maintain the integrity of their transactions. While "run fast and break things" may be a popular mantra in the technology field, it is ill suited to an arena where a serious breach could undermine confidence in the payments system. Indeed, some of the key underpinnings of consumer protection and safety and soundness in the banking world--that consumers should be exceptionally careful in granting account access, that in certain conditions banks could be presumed to bear liability for unauthorized charges, and that banks can be held responsible for ensuring that service providers and vendors do right by their customers--sit uneasily alongside the requisites of openness, connectivity, and data access that enable today's app ecosystem. 11 For instance, before entering an outsourcing arrangement, a bank is expected to consider whether the service provider's internal processes or systems (or even human error at the outside party) could expose the bank and its customers to potential losses or expose the bank's customers to fraud and the bank to litigation; whether the service provider complies with applicable laws and regulation; and whether poor performance by that outside party could materially harm the bank's public reputation. The smartphone app ecosystem developed without the regulations or associated guardrails pertaining to institutions that people trust to hold their life savings. For instance, when Pokémon Go was first launched, its creator, Niantic, used an outdated Google API to verify consumer identities. This created confusion about whether millions of consumers had unwittingly granted Niantic full access to their e-mails, contact lists, and calendars. 12 However, it did not stand in the way of Pokémon Go subsequently being downloaded a half billion times. 13 In contrast, these kinds of mistakes in the banking sector could raise grave concerns about consumer data privacy and security and the integrity of consumer transactions data. That's why banks are expected to conduct extensive risk assessments and due diligence of their service providers, extending even to operations and internal controls, among other requirements. 14 While that helps ensure a safe and sound banking system, that also makes it more challenging for both the banks and fintech companies to harness safely the interconnectivity that has powered other parts of the digital world. Different Approaches to the Fintech Stack Because of the high stakes, fintech firms, banks, data aggregators, consumer groups, and regulators are all still figuring out how best to do the connecting. There are a few alternative approaches in operation today, with various advantages and drawbacks. A number of large banks have developed or are in the process of developing interfaces to allow outside developers access to their platforms under controlled conditions. Similar to Apple opening the APIs of its phones and operating systems, these financial companies are working to provide APIs to outside developers, who can then build new products on the banks' platforms. 15 It is worth highlighting that platform APIs generally vary in their degree of openness, even in the smartphone world. If a developer wants to use a Google Maps API to embed a map in her application, she first must create a developer account with Google, agreeing to Google's terms and conditions. This means she will have entered a contract with the owner of the API, and the terms and conditions may differ depending on how sensitive the particular API is. Google may require only a minimum amount of information for a developer that wants to use an API to display a map. Google may, however, require more information about a developer that wants to use a different API to monitor the history of a consumer's physical locations over the previous week. And in some cases, the competitive interests of Google and a third-party app developer may diverge over time, such that the original terms of access are no longer acceptable. 16 The fact that it is possible and indeed relatively common for the API provider--the platform--to require specific controls and protections over the use of that API raises complicated issues when imported to the banking world. As banks have considered how to facilitate connectivity, the considerations include not only technical issues and the associated investment, but also the important legal questions associated with operating in a highly regulated sector. The banks' terms of access may be determined in third-party service provider agreements that may offer different degrees of access. These may affect not only what types of protections and vetting are appropriate for different types of access over consumers' funds and data held at a bank in order to enable the bank to fulfill its obligations for data security and other consumer protections, but also the competitive position of the bank relative to third-party developers. There is a second broad type of approach in which many banks have entered into agreements with specialized companies that essentially act as middlemen, frequently described as "data aggregators." These banks may lack the budgets and expertise to create their own open APIs or may not see that as a key element in their business strategies. Data aggregators collect consumer financial account data from banks, on the one hand, and then provide access to that data to fintech developers, on the other hand. 17 Data aggregators organize the data they collect from banks and other data sources and then offer their own suite of open APIs to outside developers. By partnering with data aggregators, banks can open their systems to thousands of developers, without having to invest in creating and maintaining their own open APIs. This also allows fintech developers to build their products around the APIs of two or three data aggregators, rather than 15,000 different banks and other data sources. And, if agreements between data aggregators and banks are structured as data aggregators performing outsourced services to banks, the bank should be able to conduct the appropriate due diligence of its vendors, whose services to those banks may be subject to examination by safety and soundness regulators. 18 Some banks have opted for a more "closed" approach to fintech developers by entering into individual agreements with specific technology providers or data aggregators. 19 These agreements often impose specific requirements rather than simply facilitating structured data feeds. These banks negotiate for greater control over their systems by limiting who is accessing their data--often to a specific third party's suite of products. Likewise, many banks use these agreements to limit what types of data will be shared. For instance, banks may share information about the balances in consumers' accounts but decline to share information about fees or other pricing. While recognizing the legitimate need for vetting of third parties for purposes of the banks fulfilling their responsibilities, including for data privacy and security, some consumer groups have suggested that the standards for vetting should be commonly agreed to and transparent to ensure that banks do not restrict access for competitive reasons and that consumers should be able to decide what data to make available to third-party fintech applications. 20 A third set of banks may be unable or unwilling to provide permissioned access, for reasons ranging from fears about increased competition to concerns about the cost and complexity of ensuring compliance with underlying laws and regulations. At the very least, banks may have reasonable concerns about being able to see, if not control, which third-party developers will have access to the banking data that is provided by the data aggregators. Accordingly, even banks that have previously provided structured data feeds to data aggregators may decide to limit or block access. 21 In such cases, however, data aggregators can still move forward to collect consumer data for use by fintech developers without the permission or even potentially without the knowledge of the bank. Instead, data aggregators and fintech developers directly ask consumers to give them their online banking logins and passwords. Then, in a process commonly called "screen scraping," data aggregators log onto banks' online consumer websites, as if they were the actual consumers, and extract information. Some banks report that as much as 20 to 40 percent of online banking logins is attributable to data aggregators. They even assert that they have trouble distinguishing whether a computer system that is logging in multiple times a day is a consumer, a data aggregator, or a cyber attack. For community banks with limited resources, the necessary investments in API technology and in negotiating and overseeing data-sharing agreements with data aggregators and third-party providers may be beyond their reach, especially as they usually rely on service providers for their core technology. Some fintech firms argue that screen scraping--which has drawn the most complaints about data security--may be the most effective tool for the customers of small community banks to access the financial apps they prefer--and thereby necessary to remain competitive until more effective broader industry solutions are developed. Clearly, getting these connectivity questions right, including the need to manage the consumer protection risks, is critically important. It could make the difference between a world in which the fintech wave helps community banks become the platforms of the future, on the one hand, or, on the other hand, a world in which fintech instead further widens the gulf between community banks and the largest banks. Tradeoffs The different approaches to integrating banks into the fintech stack represent different risks and tradeoffs. Connectivity solutions that require intermediaries such as data aggregators and rely on screen scraping potentially create repositories of consumer credentials for hackers to target. Banks argue that if such a repository is breached, thousands of banks could be impacted. 22 Further complicating things, because screen scrapers operate without contractual relationships with the banks from which they pull information, banks have little leverage or ability to vet the security of the screen scrapers' systems and methods or their overall risk. In these circumstances, some commentators have noted that if a data aggregator or third-party developer is breached, it may not be clear who would bear responsibility for any losses--the bank, the data aggregator, the fintech developer, or the consumer. Some third-party developers have included terms and conditions that specifically limit their liability to consumers. 23 It is not clear the extent to which many consumers understand the risks involved with sharing their banking credentials, the more limited liability accepted by many third-party developers relative to their bank or credit card issuer, and the fact that the third-party developers may in turn provide those credentials to others in some instances. On the other side of the debate, fintech companies are concerned that banks could use their control over consumer data access in the context of bilateral contracts with data aggregators to leverage their position in order to impede competition elsewhere in the stack. This argument about access and competition echoes similar concerns in the smartphone arena. 24 Further, third-party developers argue that open standards for data access can help banks meet consumers' expectations for mobile banking by providing access to the fintech apps that best serve their needs. The relatively open architecture of the iPhone platform means that Apple profits from outside developers' products without having to design or invest in them directly. For instance, Apple didn't include a home-grown mapping app during the first few years of the iPhone. 25 Instead, it relied on Google to provide that important function for its smartphones before trying to build its own mapping tool--a process that took a number of iterations before getting it right. Open platform strategies may mean that banks can essentially outsource product development to fintech firms. 26 This could be a boon--particularly for small community banks that would not have to worry about developing the best consumer interface, mobile app, digital wallet, or lending product. The bank would only have to worry about getting the connections to an open API right and then reap the benefits of the innovation by third parties. Regulatory Developments As regulators, we have a responsibility to ensure that the institutions subject to our supervision are operated safely and soundly and that they comply with applicable statutes and regulations. More broadly, we have a strong interest in permitting socially beneficial innovations to flourish, while ensuring the risks that they may present are appropriately managed, consistent with the legal requirements. We do not want to unnecessarily restrict innovations that can benefit consumers and small businesses through expanded access to financial services or greater efficiency, convenience, and reduced transaction costs. Nor do we want to drive these activities away from regulated banks and toward less governed spaces in the financial system. Regulators in the United Kingdom and continental Europe have recently outlined new approaches to facilitate connectivity in financial services, while attempting to mitigate the associated risks. In August 2016, the UK Competition & Markets Authority (CMA) released a package of mandates aimed at increasing competition for consumer and small business current accounts (akin to U.S. checking accounts). 27 This year nine of the country's largest banks were required to create open APIs to share nonsensitive, non-consumer-specific information, like pricing, fees, terms, and conditions as well as branch and automated teller machine locations. 28 This initial limited sharing of information has started communication and collaboration across the industry on areas like data standards and organizational governance, which will facilitate work on more contentious questions. Before March 2018, the CMA is scheduled to enforce a broader package of reforms, including mandating that the nine banks create APIs that allow third-party banks and nonbanks to access consumer accounts for reading transaction data and payment initiation. In the European Union, beginning in 2018, member states will be required to start implementing the European Parliament's revised Payment Services Directive (PSD2). 29 Among other elements, PSD2 created licensing regimes for third parties that access bank accounts for purposes of initiating payment orders or consolidating information with consumers' consent. 30 The directive mandates that banks allow these licensed third parties to access their consumer accounts (with consumer permission) without premising such access on contractual agreements with the banks. Indeed, PSD2 requires that credit institutions not block or hinder access to payment accounts and that licensed third parties have access to credit institutions' payment accounts services in an objective, nondiscriminatory, and proportionate manner. When credit institutions do reject access, they are required to provide the relevant authorities detailed reasoning for the rejection. The directive attempts to mitigate the attendant data-security and consumer-protection risks with a number of measures that, by and large, are not readily available policy options in the United States. Importantly, third parties that access bank accounts will be subject to licensing and registration requirements, as well as associated capital and insurance requirements. Moreover, the directive envisions that electronic payments will be authorized by two-factor authentication--for example "something you know" and "something you are." 31 The United States is likely to address these issues in a different way, at least initially, given that regulatory authorities are more broadly distributed, and the relevant statutory language predates these technological developments. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) issued a Request for Information last fall to explore issues surrounding consumers' granting access to account information to third parties. 32 Of course, safety and soundness regulation--and with it, concerns about data security, cyber security, and vendor risk management--is distributed among a number of regulators. For instance, there may be value to examining the vendor risk management guidance so that it facilitates banks connecting more securely and efficiently with the fintech apps that consumers prefer. 33 Similarly, it could be useful to periodically assess whether and how authority under the Bank Service Company Act might pertain to developments in the fast evolving fintech sector. In addition, the private sector is continuing to actively experiment with a variety of different approaches to the connectivity question and may itself move toward one or more widely accepted standards. Accordingly, efforts to craft approaches that enhance connectivity while mitigating the associated risks will likely benefit from the engagement of multiple agencies, along with input from the private sector and other stakeholders. Separately, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which is responsible for administering national bank charters, has announced that it is exploring offering "special purpose national bank charters" to fintech companies. 34 As envisioned by the OCC, obtaining a special purpose charter would have the practical effect of allowing certain fintech companies (companies that make loans, make payments, or accept deposits) to potentially bypass the need for connecting to a bank for certain purposes in favor of becoming licensed as banks themselves. The OCC's proposal raises interpretive and policy issues for the Federal Reserve regarding whether charter recipients would become Federal Reserve members or have access to Federal Reserve accounts and services, such as direct access to payment systems. If the OCC proposal is finalized, the Federal Reserve would have to closely analyze these issues with respect to any fintech firms that express an interest in moving forward with an application. When Apple launched the iPhone in 2007, who could have predicted that it would net billions from a game like Pokémon Go, which involved no investment, development, or advertising on Apple's part beyond opening its platform to developers? It is still too early to have any confidence that we know which fintech innovations will prove to be the most long-lasting or widely adopted. By the same token, the fintech industry is still figuring out the fundamental questions of the best ways to make the necessary connections to the banking platforms to facilitate consumers' ability to better monitor and manage their financial lives, while providing the level of data security and protection they have come to rely on from their banks. 35 Change is surely coming, as financial products and services move onto interconnected platforms. As the sector evolves, it's important that all parties involved pay close attention not only to the technical questions, but to the requisite regulatory, policy, and legal considerations to ensure continued trust and confidence in the financial system. I am grateful to Kelvin Chen for his assistance in preparing this text. 1. David Pierce, "Even Steve Jobs Didn't Predict the iPhone Decade," Wired, January 9, 2017, www.wired.com/2017/01/apple-iphone-10th-anniversary/. Return to text 2. Mary Meeker, Internet Trends 2016—Code Conference, June 1, 2016, www.slideshare.net/kleinerperkins/2016-internet-trends-report/109-KPCB_INTERNET_TRENDS_2016_PAGE109Average (slide 109); and Ben Bajarin, "Apple's Penchant for Consumer Security," TechOpinions, April 18, 2016, https://techpinions.com/apples-penchant-for-consumer-security/45122. Return to text 3. See Riley v. California, 134 S. Ct.2473, 2484 (2014), www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/13pdf/13-132_8l9c.pdf . Return to text 4. For instance, the average American now spends nearly an hour a day on Facebook's mobile platforms alone. See, e.g., James B. Stewart, "Facebook Has 50 Minutes of Your Time Each Day. It Wants More," New York Times, May 5, 2016, www.nytimes.com/2016/05/06/business/facebook-bends-the-rules-of-audience-engagement-to-its-advantage.html. This count includes Facebook, Messenger, and Instagram, but not WhatsApp. Return to text 5. See, e.g., Jordan Golson, "Apple's App Store Now Has over 2 Million Apps," The Verge, June 13, 2016, www.theverge.com/2016/6/13/11922926/apple-apps-2-million-wwdc-2016. Return to text 6. See, e.g., Sarah Perez, "Apple's App Store hits 2M apps, 130B downloads, $50B paid to developers," TechCrunch June 13, 2016, https://techcrunch.com/2016/06/13/apples-app-store-hits-2m-apps-130b-downloads-50b-paid-to-developers/. On August 3, 2016, Apple CEO Tim Cook noted on Twitter that the $50 billion figure had been surpassed. Tim Cook, Twitter, Aug. 3, 2016, https://twitter.com/tim_cook/status/760929629226041345 (last accessed April 4, 2017). Return to text 7. In 2015 KPMG estimated that global investment in fintech had risen six-fold in the prior three years. KPMG, "'Fintech 100'--Announcing the World's Leading Fintech Innovators for 2015," December 2015, https://home.kpmg.com/xx/en/home/media/press-releases/2015/12/fintech-announcing-the-world-leading.html. In the lending sector alone, Goldman Sachs estimates that $11 billion of annual profit is at risk of leaving the banking system. Ryan M. Nash and Eric Beardsley, The Future of Finance Part 1: The Rise of the New Shadow Bank (New York: Goldman Sachs, March 3, 2015), www.betandbetter.com/photos_forum/1425585417.pdf. McKinsey & Company estimates that there are over 2,000 fintech startups, which have attracted nearly $23 billion of venture capital and growth equity over the past five years. See Miklos Dietz, Somesh Khanna, Tunde Olanrewaju, and Kausik Rajgopal, "Cutting Through the Noise around Financial Technology," McKinsey & Company, February, 2016, www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/cutting-through-the-noise-around-financial-technology. Return to text 8. See Miklos Dietz, Somesh Khanna, Tunde Olanrewaju, and Kausik Rajgopal, "Cutting Through the Noise around Financial Technology," McKinsey & Company, February, 2016, www.mckinsey.com/industries/financial-services/our-insights/cutting-through-the-noise-around-financial-technology. Return to text 9. While Bitcoin is a notable exception, many consumers still rely on connecting their bank accounts with Bitcoin exchanges to convert their fiat currency to virtual currency and vice-versa. Return to text 10. See, e.g., Bryan Yurcan, "Is a Turning Point Near for Core Systems?" American Banker, April 20, 2016, www.americanbanker.com/news/is-a-turning-point-near-for-core-systems (noting survey findings that 70 percent of U.S. bankers do not feel that their current processes can quickly adapt to market changes, and that 53 percent of survey respondents identified new products/innovation as the top benefit of investing in new core systems); Tom Groenfeldt, "Updating, Replacing, Surrounding Core Banking System," Forbes, July 21, 2015, www.forbes.com/sites/tomgroenfeldt/2015/07/21/updating-replacing-surrounding-core-banking-system/#2e019cd61282. Return to text 11. See, e.g., 12 CFR §1005.1(b); appendix C to 12 CFR part 1005, comment 2(m)-2 ("If a consumer furnishes an access device and grants authority to make transfers to a person (such as a family member or co-worker) who exceeds the authority given, the consumer is fully liable for the transfers unless the consumer has notified the financial institution that transfers by that person are no longer authorized."); Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation and Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk (PDF) ," December 5, 2013. Return to text 12. See, e.g., Olivia Solon, "Have You Given Pokémon Go Full Access to Everything in Your Google Account?" Guardian, July 12, 2016, www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/pokemon-go-privacy-security-full-access-google-account. ("The discovery sparked a wave of fear that playing the game might allow its developers, Niantic Labs, to read and send email, access, edit and delete documents in Google Drive and Google Photos, and access browser and maps histories. In fact, both Google and Niantic Labs, say that 'full access' counterintuitively means nothing of the sort, a claim backed up by independent security researchers. The issue appears to stem from the fact that Niantic Labs uses an outdated version of Google's shared sign-on service.") Return to text 13. See, e.g., Ben Gilbert, "Pokémon Go Has Been Downloaded over 500 Million Times," Business Insider, September 7, 2016, www.businessinsider.com/pokemon-go-500-million-downloads-2016-9. Return to text 14. See, e.g., Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation and Division of Consumer and Community Affairs, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk (PDF) ," December 5, 2013. Return to text 15. See, e.g., Citigroup, "Citi Launches Global API Developer Hub to Enable Open Banking," press release, November 10, 2016, www.citigroup.com/citi/news/2016/161110b.htm; BBVA, "BBVA API Market, the Platform for Financial Innovators," press release, May 4, 2016, www.bbva.com/en/news/general/bbva-api-market-platform-financial-innovators/; Mark Boyd, "Capital One Launches First True Open Banking Platform in U.S., Programmable Web," March 11, 2016, www.programmableweb.com/news/capital-one-launches-first-true-open-banking-platform-us/2016/03/11; Penny Crosman, "Fintech Glasnost: Why U.S. Banks are Opening Up APIs to Outsiders," American Banker, July 8, 2015, www.americanbanker.com/news/fintech-glasnost-why-us-banks-are-opening-up-apis-to-outsiders; see also Pymnts.com, "Mastercard Turns Up the API Volume," September 28, 2016, www.pymnts.com/mastercard/2016/mastercard-turns-up-the-api-volume/; Visa Inc., "Visa Opens its Global Network with Launch of Visa Developer," press release, February 4, 2016, www.businesswire.com/news/home/20160204006175/en/Visa-Opens-Global-Network-Launch-Visa-Developer. Indeed, over five years ago, French bank Credit Agricole used open APIs to launch an app store of its own. The bank even connects its customers with developers, using message boards so that customers (or even other banks) can post ideas for developers to build. See, e.g., Karen Epper Hoffman, "Open API for Bank Apps: Can Credit Agricole's Model Work Here?" American Banker, July 29, 2013; CA Store, www.creditagricolestore.fr/catalogue-d-applications.html (last visited April 4, 2017) (as of April 2017, the site features 47 apps and 62 ideas); Mary Wisniewski, "Will Banks Become App Stores? This De Novo Wants To," American Banker, February 18, 2016, www.americanbanker.com/news/will-banks-become-app-stores-this-de-novo-wants-to. Return to text 16. The Financial Times reported that Uber will invest half a billion dollars into developing its own mapping software as it continues its push into driverless cars, thereby reducing its reliance on Google Maps. Leslie Hook, "Uber to Pour $500m into Global Mapping Project," Financial Times, July 31, 2016, www.ft.com/cms/s/0%2Fe0dfa45e-5522-11e6-befd-2fc0c26b3c60.html?ft_site=falcon&desktop=true#axzz4G0M5oyu8. Return to text 17. For example, one major data aggregator reports that about 70 percent of the data it collects from over 15,000 sources is collected via "structured feeds" under contractual agreements with financial institutions. See Envestnet, Inc., 2016 Annual Report, at 28, March 24, 2016. Return to text 18. See, e.g., 12 USC §§ 1861-67; Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation and Division of Consumer and Community Affairs Federal Reserve System, " Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk (PDF) ," December 5, 2013; Steven Boms, " Yodlee Response to Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Request for Information Regarding Consumer Access to Financial Records ," Docket No. CFPB 2016-0048, February 21, 2017. ("Yodlee . . . has complied with hundreds of bank audits and with examinations by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency throughout its history.") Return to text 19. See, e.g., "Finicity and Wells Fargo Ink Data Exchange Deal," press release, April 4, 2017, www.finicity.com/press-release-finicity-wells-fargo-ink-data-exchange-deal/; Wells Fargo & Co., "Intuit Signs New Data-Exchange Agreement with Wells Fargo," press release, February 3, 2017, www.wellsfargo.com/about/press/2017/intuit-agreement_0203/; Intuit, "Chase, Intuit to Give Customers Greater Control of Their Information," press release, January 25, 2017, www.intuit.com/company/press-room/press-releases/2017/Chase-Intuit-to-Give-Customers-Greater-Control-of-Their-Information/; Wells Fargo & Co., "Wells Fargo, Xero Agree on New Data-Exchange Method," press release, June 7, 2016, www.wellsfargo.com/about/press/2016/new-dataexchange-method_0607/; Silicon Valley Bank, "Xero and Silicon Valley Bank Partner to Offer Innovative Companies Next-Generation Financial Management," press release, July 16, 2014, www.svb.com/News/Company-News/Xero-and-Silicon-Valley-Bank-Partner-to-Offer-Innovative-Companies-Next-Generation-Financial-Management/. Return to text 20. See, e.g., Center for Financial Services Innovation, " Consumer Data Sharing Principles: A Brief on the Framework for Industry-Wide Collaboration ," October 20, 2016. Indeed, many of the developers that make use of the bank data obtained by data aggregators are actually other banks. Steven Boms, " Yodlee Response to Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Request for Information Regarding Consumer Access to Financial Records ," Docket No. CFPB 2016-0048, February 21, 2017. ("Over our almost two-decade history, Yodlee has built a client base that includes 12 of the 20 largest banks in the United States and the largest banks in more than 20 countries.") Return to text 21. See, e.g., Envestnet, Inc., 2016 Annual Report, March 24, 2016. ("[O]ne or more of our current customers could decide to limit or block our access to the data feeds we currently have in place with these customers due to factors outside of our control such as more burdensome regulation of our or our customers' industry, increased compliance requirements or changes in business strategy. If the sources from which we obtain information that is important to our solutions limit or restrict our ability to access or use such information, we may be required to attempt to obtain the information, if at all, through end user-permissioned data scraping or other means that could be more costly and time-consuming, and less effective or efficient. . . . The legal environment surrounding data scraping and similar means of obtaining access to information on third-party websites is not completely clear and is evolving, and one or more third parties could assert claims against us seeking damages or to prevent us from accessing information in that manner.") Return to text 22. According to one banking trade organization, "[t]his is a rich reward for a single hack, either of an aggregated database of personally identifiable information or of a single consumer's multiple accounts, makes data aggregators an attractive target for criminals. [Hackers would] obtain the key not to just a single room, but the key ring with keys to all the rooms." The Clearing House, " Comment Letter to Bureau-2016-0048 Request for Information Regarding Consumer Access to Financial Records (PDF) ," February 21, 2017. Return to text 23. See, e.g, "Personal Capital Terms of Use" (last updated February 22, 2017), www.personalcapital.com/content/terms-of-use/ (last visited April 16, 2017). ("TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE LAW, THE LIABILITY OF PERSONAL CAPITAL, ITS AFFILIATES, LICENSORS AND AGENTS TO YOU SHALL NOT EXCEED ONE HUNDRED U.S. DOLLARS ($100).") Further, Personal Capital requires that consumers submit to pre-dispute arbitration agreements and waive any rights to pursue relief in a class action proceeding as part of its terms of use. This would mean that if a data breach were to occur, each affected consumer would have to seek relief on his own, with a maximum possible recovery of $100. In addition, Personal Capital's terms and conditions specify that the arbitrator can require that the consumer pay Personal Capital's legal fees, if Personal Capital is to prevail. Return to text 24. When the iPhone first launched, for instance, one phone provider paid a premium for exclusive access to the smartphone. This meant that, for several years, consumers that wanted the iPhone also had to enter relationships with the only Internet service provider platform that offered the phone. See, e.g., Saul Hansell, "Why AT&T Wants to Keep the iPhone Away from Verizon," New York Times, April 22, 2009, https://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/04/22/why-att-wants-to-keep-the-iphone-away-from-verizon/ ("AT&T is paying Apple an unusually high subsidy on top of the $199 and $299 paid by iPhone buyers. But it appears to be getting quite a return on that investment.") At the same time, Apple has used its own iPhone platform to affect the development of products further up the stack. While much of the iPhone is an open platform for third-party developers, developers do not have access to the iPhone's secure element and Near Field Communication (NFC) antenna--key components of digital wallet technologies. This means that Apple Pay is the only "tap-to-pay" NFC digital wallet available for iPhones--and that Apple Pay competitors, like Android Pay and Samsung Pay, are unable to access 40 percent of the smartphones in the United States. See, e.g., Philip Elmer-DeWitt, "About Apple's 40% Share of the U.S. Smartphone Market," Fortune, February 11, 2016, http://fortune.com/2016/02/11/apple-iphone-ios-share/. When a group of Australia's largest banks recently petitioned the country's antitrust authority to allow them to band together to require Apple to unlock access to the NFC antenna, for use by their digital wallets, their request was denied. See, e.g., Simon Sharwood, "Banking Group Denied Access to iPhones' NFC Chips for alt.Apple.Pay," Register, April 3, 2017, www.theregister.co.uk/2017/04/03/banking_group_denied_access_to_iphones_nfc_chips_for_altapplepay/. Return to text 25. See, e.g., Chance Miller, Apple Maps Now Used 3x as Often as Google Maps on iOS, Serving 5B Requests per Week, 9to5Mac, December 7, 2015, https://9to5mac.com/2015/12/07/apple-maps-usage-numbers/. Return to text 26. For example, small business lender Kabbage, Inc. has entered agreements with large banks, where Kabbage licenses its data analysis-heavy customer acquisition platform to banking partners who then go on to originate, fund, and service the underlying loans. See, e.g., Kabbage Inc., "Kabbage and Santander UK Partner to Accelerate SMB Growth," press release, April 3, 2016, www.kabbage.com/blog/kabbage-santander-uk-partner-accelerate-smb-growth/. Return to text 27. UK Competition & Markets Authority, " CMA Paves the Way for Open Banking Revolution ," press release, August 9, 2016. ("[O]lder and larger banks do not have to compete hard enough for customers' business, and smaller and newer banks find it difficult to grow. This means that many people are paying more than they should and are not benefiting from new services. To tackle these problems, the CMA is implementing a wide-reaching package of reforms. Central to the CMA's remedies are measures to ensure that customers benefit from technological advances and that new entrants and smaller providers are able to compete more fairly."); UK Competition & Markets Authority, " Retail Banking Market Investigation: Final Report (PDF) ," August 9, 2016. Return to text 28. The nine banks include the five largest banks in Great Britain (Lloyd's Banking Group, Royal Bank of Scotland, HSBC Group, Barclays, and Santander UK plc); three leading banks in Northern Ireland (Allied Irish Bank, Bank of Ireland, and Danske Bank) and the largest UK building society, Nationwide Building Society. Return to text 29. Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of the European Parliament and of the Council, November 25, 2015, http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32015L2366 (last visited Feb. 1, 2017). Return to text 30. Specifically, Payment Initiation Service Providers (PISPs) initiate payment orders at the request of a user with respect to funds held in another entity's bank account; Account Information Service Providers (AISPs) are online services that consolidate information, with consumers' consent, from those consumers' accounts at other entities. Return to text 31. With limited exceptions, such as for de minimis transactions. Return to text 32. Richard Cordray, " Prepared Remarks of CFPB Director Richard Cordray " at the Lendit USA Conference, March 6, 2017; Richard Cordray, " Prepared Remarks of CFPB Director Richard Cordray " at Money 20/20, October 23, 2016; Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, " Request for Information Regarding Consumer Access to Financial Records ," Federal Register, November 22, 2016. Return to text 33. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, " The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech " at the Conference on Financial Innovation at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2, 2016. Return to text 34. See Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, " Exploring Special Purpose National Bank Charters for Fintech Companies (PDF) ," December 2016. Return to text 35. See, e.g., Jennifer Booton, "Apple Will Make $3 Billion Playing Pokémon Go," MarketWatch, July 21, 2016, www.marketwatch.com/story/apple-stands-to-make-billions-from-pokemon-go-2016-07-20 (citing report by analyst Lauren Martin). Return to text Last Update: July 19, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Share Watch Live I want to thank Neel Kashkari for launching the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute and for inviting me to join the deliberations of this distinguished group today. This new Institute is another great example of how individual Reserve Banks are taking the initiative in illuminating key dimensions of our work and shaping the agenda of the Federal Reserve System. 1 While it has long been understood that opportunity is central to the strength of America's social fabric, it is now increasingly clear that opportunity and inclusion are central to the strength of America's economy. I will touch on the key ways that opportunity and inclusion matter for policymaking at the Federal Reserve, ranging from our dual-mandate goal of maximum employment to our monitoring of household financial health to our engagement in low- and moderate-income communities all over the country. I will focus on how our work intersects with the groundbreaking work of the accomplished group of researchers assembled here. In the original design of the Federal Reserve, it was recognized that the American economy is not monolithic; that is why the Congress created our system of 12 Federal Reserve Districts. We are present in communities all across America through our Reserve Banks and Branches and their boards and advisory councils. This local presence, by design, gives us valuable perspectives on how Americans are experiencing the economy in different communities around the country and critical insights about the varied challenges that lie beneath the aggregate numbers. In turn, our local engagement helps stakeholders in these communities partner to improve opportunity and inclusive growth. Inclusion and Maximum Employment Inclusion is an enduring goal of public policy that is embodied in our maximum-employment mandate. The Employment Act of 1946 charges the federal government with creating "conditions under which there will be afforded useful employment for those able, willing, and seeking to work, and to promote maximum employment, production, and purchasing power." 2 Maximum employment is inherently an inclusive goal. In 1977, the Congress amended the Federal Reserve Act to make achieving maximum employment an explicit objective of monetary policy, along with stable prices. In fulfilling its dual mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has set a target of 2 percent for inflation but does not have a similarly fixed numerical goal for maximum employment. That is because the level of maximum employment depends on "nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market," which can change in important ways over time. 3 The recognition that maximum employment evolves over time to reflect changes in the economic landscape serves us well. It puts the onus on members of the FOMC to analyze the changing features of the labor market and develop a nuanced understanding of the different margins of slack. This approach to maximum employment has allowed the FOMC to navigate the current recovery in a way that has likely brought more people back into productive employment than might have been the case with a fixed, aggregate unemployment-rate target based on pre-crisis norms, in effect, achieving more inclusive growth. This is especially true at a time when the traditional Phillips curve relationship between unemployment and inflation is extremely flat for reasons we do not fully understand. When we disaggregate the economy-wide labor market statistics, we often find significant and persistent racial disparities. 4 For many decades, the unemployment rate of African Americans has been nearly double the national unemployment rate, with little indication that the relative difference is narrowing or that it can be fully accounted for by education or sectoral mix; the unemployment rate for Hispanics also has consistently been higher than the national unemployment rate. 5 Similarly, during the Great Recession, the unemployment rates of African Americans and Hispanics rose more sharply and rapidly than for workers as a whole. 6 Even though the unemployment rates of these groups are back around their pre-recession levels, they remain higher than the national average. We can also see persistent disparities by gender, such as the well-known wage premium earned by men relative to women with similar experience and expertise. 7 With its focus on inclusive growth, this Institute could give us important insights on how far the overall economy is from full employment, as well as the barriers that could be limiting the economy's potential, by studying labor market outcomes of men and women of different racial and ethnic backgrounds in more depth. 8 Research on the drivers of disparities in labor market outcomes can also help the Federal Reserve better assess potential tradeoffs in monetary policy. In meetings with community groups, we often hear from advocates who point to the stark discrepancy they see between the economy's aggregate U-3 unemployment rate, which many forecasters estimate to be at or approaching full employment, and the much higher rates of unemployment among the people in their neighborhoods. For instance, Rod Adams, a neighborhood advocate here in Minneapolis, noted the unemployment rate for African Americans locally was still almost 9 percent late last summer and observed that "if the labor market were truly healthy, people in my community would all be able to find full-time jobs at decent wages." 9 While the policy tools available to the Federal Reserve are not well suited to addressing the barriers that contribute to persistent disparities in the labor market outcomes of different groups, understanding these barriers and efforts to address them is vital in assessing maximum employment as well as potential growth. The Federal Reserve's community development work is invaluable in supporting our efforts to understand and improve the labor market experiences of different groups. 10 For instance, during the Great Recession, workforce development organizations in Atlanta found themselves overwhelmed by the sharp rise in unemployment, which highlighted the need for a better connected and stronger network of job training and placement services. I recently spent time with these organizations, along with community members and some of our Atlanta staff, who have been working on the creation of the Metro Atlanta eXchange (or MAX) for Workforce Solutions, the region's only comprehensive directory for workforce development services. Just as there is a connection between maximum employment and inclusive growth, so, too, there is an important connection between potential output and opportunity. If there are large disparities in opportunity based on geography or race or gender, such that households' enterprise, exertion, and investments are not rewarded commensurately, then families and small businesses will invest less in the future and potential growth will fall short. 11 Indeed, one worrisome trend is the decline in the labor force participation of prime-age workers with less education, a trend that has been going on for decades among men and that has more recently begun to be mirrored in the participation rate of women. 12 Understanding this growing detachment from work is important to improving both opportunity and potential growth. In visits to Detroit, Milwaukee, North St. Louis, and Baltimore, I have heard from residents and community organizations about the challenging barriers standing between the many workers seeking jobs and the many jobs seeking workers. The local barriers separating jobs from job seekers can be as concrete as the physical isolation created by major traffic arteries or poorly designed transit systems. 13 I have visited Los Angeles, where our staff have been actively engaged with businesses, transit authorities, and community groups in efforts around "equitable transit-oriented development" so that public transit systems are designed to enhance access for low- and moderate-income residents. 14 Household Financial Health Inclusion and opportunity also figure prominently in our work on financial resilience. While the resilience of the financial system has long been central to Federal Reserve policy, in recent years we have come to more fully appreciate that a resilient financial system rests on the foundations of financially resilient households and businesses. The ability to manage the ups and downs in family income and expenses without hardship and the ability to make sound investments for the future are both crucial to financial health. Yet we see from the latest edition of the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) that a strikingly high 40 percent of American households with high school degrees or less report that they are struggling financially. 15 And the in-depth research in the U.S. Financial Diaries Project provides insights into the large amount of time and effort these families with thin financial buffers must devote to managing their volatile cash flows. 16 A seemingly modest mismatch between income and expenses can threaten to send the finances of some families into a downward spiral from which it can be expensive and difficult to recover. The results of the 2016 SHED show that nearly one-fourth of all households are unable to pay their current month's bills in full, nearly one-third would rely on borrowing or selling something to cover a $400 emergency expense, and one in eight would not be able to cover a $400 emergency expense by any means. Over half of households lack savings to cover three months' expenses if they lost their main source of income. 17 This finding corroborates the evidence found in the financial diaries of low- to moderate-income families that show it is all too common for households to have no short-term savings to cover emergencies. According to the Survey of Consumer Finances, on average from 1989 to 2013, about 80 percent of households in the bottom quintile of the income distribution had less than $3,000 adjusted for inflation in liquid assets (cash, checking, or savings accounts). Even among households in the middle quintile of income, about half do not meet this threshold for liquid assets. In addition, the financial crisis demonstrated that household financial imbalances can have important consequences for overall financial stability in extreme circumstances. The rapid and widespread rise in poorly underwritten mortgage debt prior to the Great Recession is widely viewed as a key contributor to the financial crisis. 18 This suggests the potential value of better understanding the specific patterns in household finances that would give an early warning of a crisis. In carrying out our responsibilities to monitor and safeguard the stability of the financial system, although much of the work has focused on marketwide risks, core financial institutions, and macro-level shocks, we are also developing a more granular understanding of the distribution and strength of household balance sheets. 19 Progress on this frontier is being aided by greater access to timely, account-level, and geographically specific data on consumer credit, mortgages, and spending, although more research in this area would be valuable. Slower income growth, as well as substantial volatility in income, has raised the financial stress faced by low- and moderate-income families and may be limiting absolute mobility across generations. Over time, the "American Dream" that each generation can expect to be better off than their parents' generation has gone from being widespread to increasingly out of reach for much of the population. 20 Researchers have found that the reduction in economic mobility has been driven primarily by a more unequal distribution of economic growth, with slower overall gross domestic product (GDP) growth a secondary factor. 21 Many households had been contending with volatile incomes even before the large negative shocks of the Great Recession and the increase in contingent work arrangements (and the "gig" economy). 22 23 Unpredictable income and dangerously low emergency savings raise the strain on households and, over time, have pushed them to rely on other means, such as borrowing and government transfers, to try to meet their spending needs. 24 Education and homeownership have long been key paths to opportunity, but the Great Recession has raised some important questions about asset building strategies. The sharp decline in house prices and the substantial rise in student loan debt have made it clear that investments in homeownership and education are not without risk, and the payoff can vary depending on the circumstances. 25 Homeownership for many has been a way to turn a regular expense into an asset-building investment in the future, which is especially important given the wide and persistent disparities in wealth by race and ethnicity. But the experience of the past decade suggests that owning a home can, in some circumstances, exacerbate financial difficulties for vulnerable families in a downturn. The lesson that even a moderate decline in house prices can erase home equity applies broadly, along with the importance of sound underwriting and servicing, but the painful consequences in the recession were greater among minority and low-income homeowners. 26 The fact, discussed earlier, that African American and Hispanic homeowners households are more likely to lose their jobs in a recession and are also more likely to live in neighborhoods with concentrated job loss led to even larger house price declines and more foreclosures among these households. 27 Indeed, there are many low-income neighborhoods in which many homeowners remain "underwater" on their mortgages even today. Community development organizations are putting this more nuanced view of asset building into practice and thereby increasing opportunities for individuals to make smart investments in their future. Better Family Life, a community group I visited in North St. Louis, provides would-be homebuyers with education and counseling on how to manage the costs of homeownership, tools to navigate real estate markets, and information on lending. 28 There is ample research demonstrating that housing counseling makes a notable improvement in the likelihood that asset building through homeownership will pay off for first-time buyers in low- to moderate-income communities. 29 Similarly, under the right circumstances, education can be a critical investment in the future and a path to opportunity, leading to higher wages and improved financial outcomes. Over the past several decades, the earnings premium for those with a college degree relative to those with a high school education has risen substantially, making higher education, on average, even more valuable. 30 Nonetheless, even though education is a sound investment for most students, the benefits can vary with the quality and type of education received. 31 The SHED finds that fewer than 40 percent of nongraduates or graduates from for-profit institutions say their education was "worth the cost," compared with two-thirds of graduates from public or nonprofit institutions. 32 The downsides from such low-return education are compounded for those who took out student loans, in some cases leaving them worse off than before. As an indication of this problem, nearly three-fourths of recent borrowers who attended for-profit schools failed to make progress on paying off their student loans in the first few years, and almost half were in default within five years. 33 Investments in education that do not pay off can set these individuals back on asset building as well as on other life goals they may have. To advance more inclusive growth and opportunity, it is essential to help people, especially first-time and nontraditional college students, access smarter educational investments with more reliable and better returns. 34 Communities of Opportunity The connection between the conditions in a community and individual opportunity has been demonstrated in powerful research that many of you have pioneered, and we see this connection every day in our work in communities around the country. The neighborhood where a family lives can have profound implications for their economic opportunities and their children's prospects. Families living in neighborhoods with high concentrations of poverty and low economic or demographic diversity are more likely to experience a range of negative outcomes, including exposure to crime and violence, physical and mental health problems, and weak academic performance. 35 Low-skilled workers who live far from potential employers or accessible transportation networks have more difficulty finding and keeping jobs. 36 These effects of geography on opportunity can stretch from one generation to the next. Raj Chetty and his collaborators have shown that upward mobility varies immensely across the country and even within a single metro area. 37 Taken together, this research underscores the urgency of understanding how we can make communities work better for all their members. Since communities play a central role in determining opportunity, policy to promote inclusion often focuses on improving local conditions. With our presence in communities around the country and our efforts under the Community Reinvestment Act, the Federal Reserve is a source of high-quality research and region-specific expertise as well as a trusted convener and catalyst on community development approaches for lenders, community groups, and local and regional governments. One important area of focus is housing, which connects families concretely to place and can be a source of strength or fragility. Last year, I met with Milwaukee community development groups and residents in one of the more racially segregated residential markets in the country. They highlighted the challenges facing the highly insecure rental population in Milwaukee, which were brought alive by Matthew Desmond's careful research. 38 Other communities across the nation face similar challenges. In the recently released SHED, we found that among renters who had recently moved, 12 percent of African Americans, 16 percent of Hispanics, and 8 percent of whites had moved because of eviction or the threat of eviction. 39 The barriers to safe and affordable housing often take on a different form in rural areas, where ownership of manufactured housing is often coupled with insecure land ownership. The geographic footprint of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts gives us a valuable presence in rural America as well as in towns and cities of all sizes and economic fortunes. Near El Paso, our team has developed important analysis of housing challenges in the colonias neighborhoods, where the lack of basic infrastructure and costly financing of warranty deeds pose special hurdles for local families. 40 We have also seen successful models of providing affordable and safe housing when community development organizations and financial institutions, along with banks and local residents, work together collaboratively. On a recent visit in El Paso, I saw the value of these approaches, as a single mother with significant health challenges received the keys to a new home in a stable community, after many long years. While the densely wooded hills and hollers of Eastern Kentucky are a sharp contrast to the desert and floodplain expanses of the southwest, the keys to affordable housing in a healthy community can bring just as great an improvement in opportunity. These successes would not be possible without the ingenuity and collaboration of community development financial institutions, local officials, banks, and community members. As I have witnessed, whether it be for a retiree in Helena, Arkansas; a single mom in El Paso, Texas; or a dad on disability in Emlyn, Kentucky, the keys to affordable housing in a stable community can unlock opportunity for future generations. 41 In some parts of the country, rural residents and small businesses also face increasing challenges in accessing financial services as small community banks close and larger banks close branches in low-population areas. Consequently, as I learned from the Mayors of Itta Bena and Moorhead, Mississippi, some rural residents, small businesses, and even municipalities have to drive long distances to reach a bank. 42 In the Mississippi Delta, Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) such as HOPE Credit Union and Southern Bancorp are acquiring bank branches earmarked for closing in order to maintain financial services for some rural communities. 43 Although both pockets of opportunity and of persistent poverty are found in large metro and rural areas alike, 44 a greater share of the new jobs and business establishments created in the recovery following the Great Recession have been in larger metro areas than was the case in previous recoveries. 45 In countless communities, especially in rural towns and small to midsize cities, we have seen how a deep setback can leave a profound and long-lasting mark. These experiences challenge common assumptions about the ability of the economy to recover from an economic setback. This could be the legacy of concentrated reliance on an industry that experiences decline due to trade or technology or the byproduct of lack of connectivity-whether by highways or broadband. Technological change, globalization, and other shifts in demand and costs are not new to the U.S. economy, but there are troubling signs that less diversified or more isolated localities have diminished ability to recover. And there is increasing evidence that such concentrated economic shocks can also lead to severe labor market stress, as well as broader consequences for health and mortality. 46 Over the past 30 years, the convergence in income across regions of the country has slowed dramatically. 47 Even so, some localities fare better than others in establishing new paths to opportunity and inclusive growth, and their successes provide actionable lessons. The Boston Fed's Working Cities Challenge undertook an in depth study of 25 medium-sized cities nationwide that had experienced a post-industrial decline and identified 10 that experienced an economic resurgence. The critical determinant of success was the ability of leaders in those cities to collaborate across sectors around a long-term vision for revitalization. To encourage such collaboration in other cities, the Boston Fed facilitated competitions that reward effective public-private collaboration in developing plans to reach community-wide goals. For example, Holyoke, Massachusetts, proposed a plan to simplify the city's permitting and licensing systems in order to raise the presence of Latino-owned businesses. On economic revitalization, as in other areas of community development, effective solutions start with the community setting its own goals, are powered by broad collaboration, and rely on evidence to drive results. Conclusion We all have our work cut out for us in helping to understand the state of opportunity and inclusion for different groups and communities across our country, and ensuring that policy is informed by those important insights. At the Federal Reserve, we will continue to navigate the recovery to ensure we reach and sustain our long-term goals of maximum employment and price stability. We will remain attentive to the financial health of vulnerable households. And we will remain committed to helping illuminate the specific challenges faced by low- and moderate-income communities around the country and to supporting banks and other financial institutions as they partner in strengthening these communities. In all of these efforts, our work will be greatly strengthened by the cutting-edge research and policy insights of the outstanding group gathered here tonight. References Aaronson, Daniel, Luojia Hu, Arian Seifoddini, and Daniel G. Sullivan (2014). " Declining Labor Force Participation and Its Implications for Unemployment and Employment Growth ," Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Economic Perspectives , vol. 38 (Fourth Quarter), pp. 100-38. Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino (2016). "Loan Originations and Defaults in the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle Class," Review of Financial Studies, vol. 29 (July), pp. 1635-70. Altonji, Joseph G., and Rebecca M. Blank (1999). "Race and Gender in the Labor Market," in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3. New York: North-Holland. Autor, David H. (2014). "Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality among the 'Other 99 Percent,'" Science, May 23. Autor, David H., David Dorn, and Gordon H. Hanson (2013). "The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review, vol. 103 (October), pp. 2121-68. Barnichon, Regis, and Geert Mesters (2017). " How Tight Is the U.S. Labor Market? " FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-07. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March. Bhutta, Neil and Daniel Ringo (2015). " Assessing the Community Reinvestment Act's Role in the Financial Crisis. " FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 26. Bhutta, Neil (2015). "The Ins and Outs of Mortgage Debt during the Housing Boom and Bust," Journal of Monetary Economics , vol. 76 (November), pp. 284-298 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). Monetary Policy Report . Washington: Board of Governors, June. -------- (2017). Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2016 . Washington: Board of Governors, May. Boshara, Ray (2017). "Black College Graduates Are Losing Wealth. Here's What Can Help," Washington Post, April 12. Brainard, Lael (2015). " Coming of Age in the Great Recession ," speech delivered at "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy" conference, Washington, April 2. -------- (2016). " The "Gig" Economy: Implications of the Growth of Contingent Work ," speech delivered at "Evolution of Work" conference, New York, November 17. Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos (forthcoming). "Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle," Finance and Economics Discussion Series. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Celik, Sule, Chinhui Juhn, Kristin McCue, and Jesse Thompson (2012). "Recent Trends in Earnings Volatility: Evidence from Survey and Administrative Data," B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy, vol. 12 (June), pp. 1-24. Chetty, Raj, David Grusky, Maximilian Hell, Nathaniel Hendren, Robert Manduca, and Jimmy Narang (2017). "The Fading American Dream: Trends in Absolute Income Mobility since 1940," Science, April 24. Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014). "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States," Quarterly Journal of Economics , vol. 129 (December), pp. 1553-1624. Chou, Tiffany, Adam Looney, and Tara Watson (2017). "Measuring Loan Outcomes at Postsecondary Institutions: Cohort Repayment Rates as an Indicator of Student Success and Institutional Accountability," NBER Working Paper Series 23118. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Collins, J. Michael and Maximilian D. Schmeiser (2013). "The Effects of Foreclosure Counseling for Distressed Homeowners," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management , vol. 32 (January), pp. 83-106. Council of Economic Advisers (2016). The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation (PDF) . Washington: Executive Office of the President of the United States, June. Desmond, Matthew (2016). Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City. New York, N.Y.: Crown Publishers. Dynan, Karen (2012). " Is a Household Debt Overhang Holding Back Consumption? (PDF) " Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 299-362. Dynan, Karen, Douglas Elmendorf and Daniel Sichel (2012) . " The Evolution of Household Income Volatility." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy , vol. 12 (December). Economic Innovation Group (2016). The New Map of Economic Growth and Recovery. (PDF) Washington: EIG, May. Emmons, William R., and Bryan J. Noeth (2015). " Why Didn't Higher Education Protect Hispanic and Black Wealth? (PDF) " In the Balance: Perspectives on Household Balance Sheets, no. 12. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, August. Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Community Development Department (2015). Las Colonias in the 21st Century: Progress along the Texas-Mexico Border. (PDF) Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, April. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and Center for Popular Democracy (2016). " Federal Reserve and the Center for Popular Democracy Listening Session ," August 25. Ganong, Peter, and Daniel Shoag (2015). " Why Has Regional Income Convergence in the U.S. Declined? (PDF) " working paper. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Web Publishing, January. Goetz, Stephen, Mark Partridge, and Heather Stephens (2017). " The Economic Status of Rural America in the Trump Era ," MPRA Paper 77830. Munich: Munich Personal RePEc Archive, March. Gorbachev, Olga (2011). "Did Household Consumption Become More Volatile?" American Economic Review, vol. 101 (August), pp. 2248-70. Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark, and Melissa McInerney (2008). "Spatial Mismatch or Racial Mismatch?" Journal of Urban Economics, vol. 64 (September), pp. 464-79. Kain, John F. (1968). "Housing Segregation, Negro Employment, and Metropolitan Decentralization," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 82 (May), pp. 175-97. Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman (2001). "Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 116 (May), pp. 607-54. Katz, Lawrence F., and Alan B. Krueger (2017) . " Documenting Decline in U.S. Economic Mobility," Science, April 24. Koo, Kyong Hyun (2016). "The Evolution of Earnings Volatility during and after the Great Recession," Industrial Relations, vol. 55 (October), pp. 705-32. Looney, Adam, and Constantine Yannelis (2015). " A Crisis in Student Loans? How Changes in the Characteristics of Borrowers and in the Institutions They Attended Contributed to Rising Loan Defaults (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. Marrero, Gustavo A., and Juan G. Rodríguez (2013). "Inequality of Opportunity and Growth," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 104 (September), pp. 107-22. Mayer, Christopher, Karen Pence, and Shane M. Sherlund (2009). "The Rise in Mortgage Defaults," Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 23 (Winter), pp. 27-50. Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi (2013). "Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 128 (November), pp. 1687-1726. Palumbo, Michael G. (forthcoming). "Assessing the Contribution of Household Leverage to Systemic Risk in the U.S.," Finance and Economics Discussion Series. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Parker, Jonathan A. (2014). "LEADS on Macroeconomic Risks to and from the Household Sector," in Markus Brunnermeier and Arvind Krishnamurthy, eds., Risk Topography: Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 183-203. Pierce, Justin R., and Peter K. Schott (2016). "Trade Liberalization and Mortality: Evidence from U.S. Counties," NBER Working Paper Series 22849. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November. Rajan, Raghuram G. (2010). Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World Economy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Sampson, Robert J. (2016). " Individual and Community Economic Mobility in the Great Recession Era: The Spatial Foundations of Persistent Inequality ," in Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, eds., Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, pp. 259-87. Smith, Marvin M., Daniel Hochberg, and William H. Greene (2014). " The Effectiveness of Pre-Purchase Homeownership Counseling and Financial Management Skills. (PDF) " Philadelphia, PA: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Steelman, Aaron (2011). " The Federal Reserve's 'Dual Mandate': The Evolution of an Idea (PDF) ," Economic Brief EB11-12. Richmond, Va.: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, December. Sufi, Amir (2014). "Detecting 'Bad' Leverage," in Markus Brunnermeier and Arvind Krishnamurthy, eds., Risk Topography: Systemic Risk and Macro Modeling. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 205-212. Thornton, Daniel L. (2012). " The Dual Mandate: Has the Fed Changed Its Objective? (PDF) " Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review , vol. 94 (March/April), pp. 117-33. Winship, Scott (2017). Economic Mobility in America. Washington: Archbridge Institute, March. Yellen, Janet L. (2017a). " So We All Can Succeed: 125 Years of Women's Participation in the Economy ," speech delivered at "125 Years of Women at Brown Conference," sponsored by Brown University, Providence, R.I., May 5. -------- (2017b). " Addressing Workforce Development Challenges in Low-Income Communities ," speech delivered at "Creating a Just Economy," the 2017 annual conference of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, March 28. I am grateful to David Buchholz, Jeff Larrimore, Amanda Roberts, Claudia Sahm, and Jenny Schuetz for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See the Employment Act of 1946, Pub. L. No. 79-304, § 2, 60 Stat. 23, 23 (1946). Return to text 3. The FOMC's inflation target was adopted in January 2012 in the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. It was amended in January 2017 to clarify that the target is symmetric around 2 percent; the most recent Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (in which the quoted text appears in paragraph 3) is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf . For the interim period, Thornton (2012) and Steelman (2011) document the evolution of views among FOMC members on the dual mandate. Return to text 4. Board of Governors (2016) discusses some recent trends. See also Altonji and Blank (1999) and references therein for research on racial and gender differences in the labor market. Return to text 5. Cajner and others (2017) find that the higher, more cyclical unemployment of African Americans than whites cannot be fully accounted for by differences in education, age, marital status, and state of residence. Return to text 6. See the box "Have the Gains of the Economic Expansion Been Widely Shared?" in Board of Governors (2016). Return to text 7. See Yellen (2017a) and the studies referenced therein. Return to text 8. Aaronson and others (2014) and Barnichon and Mesters (2016) are examples of using details from demographic groups to assess overall labor market trends. In September, the Board of Governors is hosting a conference, " Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing? ' Return to text 9. On August 25, 2016, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City hosted a listening session with the Center for Popular Democracy for members of the Federal Reserve; a video of the session is available at https://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/symposiums/escp-event . Return to text 10. See Yellen (2017b) for an overview. In October, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas will host a conference, " Investing in America's Workforce: Improving Outcomes for Workers and Employers. " Return to text 11. See Marrero and Rodriquez (2013). Return to text 12. See Council of Economic Advisers (2016) and the studies cited therein. Return to text 13. The information is from community development visits in 2015 (Baltimore and North St. Louis) and 2016 (Detroit and Milwaukee). Return to text 14. The information is from community development visits in 2014. Return to text 15. The SHED is an annual survey, representative of the U.S. population, conducted at the Board of Governors since 2013. It is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm . Return to text 16. The U.S. Financial Diaries project, led by Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider, is a detailed, ethnographic study of financial conditions among low- and moderate-income households. More information is available on the project's website at www.usfinancialdiaries.org . Return to text 17. See Board of Governors (2017). Return to text 18. See, for example, Rajan (2010); Dynan (2012); and Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2013) on how high levels of mortgage debt may have made the Great Recession more severe and slowed the recovery. While low-income households were particularly vulnerable to the consequences of the collapse in house prices, rise in unemployment, and tightening of credit in the Great Recession, the preceding rise in mortgage debt was widespread, also including higher-income households, as documented by Bhutta (2015) and Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2016). Return to text 19. See, for example, Parker (2014) and Sufi (2014) for useful, research-founded ideas for assessing and monitoring the potential for financial fragility among households in the context of the financial system; see also Palumbo (forthcoming) for a particular application. The Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which draws on its Consumer Credit Panel, is another example of new monitoring efforts on household finances in the Federal Reserve System. More information is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/microeconomics/hhdc.html . Return to text 20. Chetty and others (2017) estimate that rates of absolute mobility fell from about 90 percent for children born in 1940 to 50 percent for children born in the 1980s. Some research, such as Winship (2017), reaches different conclusions on the magnitude of the change, although not on the direction. Return to text 21. Chetty and others (2017) estimate that the slower overall GDP growth experienced by the 1980 birth cohort relative to the 1940 birth cohort can account for about 10 percentage points of the decline in absolute mobility, while the less equal distribution of income can account for about 30 percentage points of the decline. Commenting on this work, Katz and Krueger (2017) underscore that stagnant growth of median household income since the 1970s has been central to the decline in absolute mobility. Return to text 22. See Brainard (2016) on the gig economy and the growth of contingent work. Return to text 23. Dynan, Elmendorf, and Sichel (2012) documented a rise in household income volatility from the early 1970s to late 2008. In contrast, studies such as Celik and others (2012) do not find a rise in household income volatility in the 2000s. Koo (2016) shows a rise in earnings volatility in the Great Recession. Studies of annual income may even understate the volatility, as the financial diaries showed considerable month-to-month fluctuations in income among low- and middle-income households. Return to text 24. See Gorbachev (2011). Return to text 25. See Brainard (2015). Return to text 26. Bhutta and Ringo (2015) and the studies discussed therein argue that the Community Reinvestment Act, and its encouragement of lending in low- and moderate-income communities, was not a significant contributor to the financial crisis. Well-serviced and correctly-structured mortgages performed well for low-income borrowers even during a decline in house prices. Return to text 27. See research by Emmons and Noeth (2015) and the related symposium; more information is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's website at https://www.stlouisfed.org/household-financial-stability/events/past-events/does-college-level-the-playing-field . Boshara (2017) provides an overview of the conference findings. Return to text 28. The information is from community development visits in 2015. Return to text 29. See, for example, Collins and Schmeiser (2013) and Smith, Hochberg, and Greene (2014). Return to text 30. See Autor (2014). Return to text 31. See Brainard (2015). Return to text 32. See Board of Governors (2017). Return to text 33. See Looney and Yannelis (2015). Return to text 34. See Chou, Looney, and Watson (2017) as an example of research on policy tools that could improve educational choices. Return to text 35. In an early evaluation of the Moving to Opportunity program, Katz, Kling, and Liebman (2001) find improvements of better neighborhoods on children's health and safety. Sampson (2016) summarizes much of the recent evidence. Return to text 36. Kain (1968) first advanced the "spatial mismatch" hypothesis. More recently, Hellerstein, Neumark, and McInerney (2008) find evidence for a "spatial-racial mismatch"--namely, that employment among low-skilled black men depends on proximity to employers who hire black workers. Return to text 37. In one of many studies on opportunity, Chetty and others (2014) use Internal Revenue Service tax return data from 40 million adult children to estimate the relative upward mobility across the 741 commuting zones (both metro and rural) in the United States. Return to text 38. See Desmond (2016). Return to text 39. See Board of Governors (2017). Return to text 40. See Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Community Development Department (2015). Return to text 41. Community visits in El Paso (2016), Mississippi Delta (2016), and Eastern Kentucky (2017), Return to text 42. Discussions with Mayor Collins of Itta Bena, Mississippi and Mayor Holland of Moorhead, Mississippi (2016). Return to text 43. Community Development visit in Mississippi Delta (2016). Return to text 44. See Goetz, Partridge, and Stephens (2017). Return to text 45. See Economic Innovation Group (2016). Return to text 46. See Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016). Return to text 47. See Ganong and Shoag (2015) and references therein. Return to text Last Update: July 19, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the New York Association for Business Economics, New York, New York Share For the first time in many years, we are seeing signs of synchronized economic expansions at home and abroad, and the balance of risks globally has become more positive. Recent data suggest that the underlying momentum of the domestic expansion remains solid. While U.S. consumption was weak in the first quarter of 2017, the data so far are consistent with a rebound in the current quarter. Moreover, financial conditions remain supportive of continued economic expansion despite some recent volatility. 1 The ongoing progress in bringing Americans back into productive employment is especially heartening. With continued strength in the labor market, economic activity regaining momentum, and a brighter outlook abroad, it would be appropriate soon to see the federal funds rate moving closer to its neutral level. If the economy evolves in line with the March Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) median path, normalization of the federal funds rate is likely to be well underway before too long, setting the stage for a gradual and predictable running off of the balance sheet. Even so, I see some tension between signs that the economy is in the neighborhood of full employment and indications that the tentative progress we had seen on inflation may be slowing. If the tension between the progress on employment and the lack of progress on inflation persists, it may lead me to reassess the expected path of the federal funds rate in the future, although it is premature to make that call today. Different Signals from the Labor Market and Inflation Let me start by reviewing the conflicting readings we are getting from the labor market and from inflation. The labor market has continued to strengthen. Payroll growth has averaged 175,000 over the past three months, more than sufficient to absorb new entrants into the labor market. Although earlier in the recovery, it appeared that the U-3 unemployment rate was running ahead of broader indicators of slack, more recently, it has been encouraging to see other margins of slack being drawn down. The labor force participation rate has held stable, against what many believe to be a downward trend based on demographics, and the employment-to-population ratio has reached a new post-recession high. Moreover, the share of employees who work part time for economic reasons has recently moved down close to its pre-crisis level, after a long period of remaining at elevated levels. The most commonly used U-3 measure of the unemployment rate moved down to 4.4 percent in April. This happens to be the cyclical low reached in 2006-07, although unemployment was at or below this level much of the time from the middle of 1998 to the middle of 2001. Relative to recent decades, the unemployment rate is now quite low. In fact, some have voiced concerns that the economy has proven unable to sustain its expansion when the unemployment rate has fallen below these levels. With that in mind, it is worth asking whether we should be worried that history will inevitably repeat itself. The truth is, we cannot know for sure. Although rising inflation often heralded the death knell of economic expansions in earlier decades, inflation expectations have been well anchored and rising inflation has presented less of a risk in the most recent business cycles. 2 From 1998 to 2001, for instance, core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation never exceeded 2 percent on a four-quarter basis. Core PCE inflation did reach as high as 2.4 percent in the period from 2006 to 2007, but, at the time, this higher inflation was viewed as reflecting the pass-through of a significant run-up in energy and non-energy import prices. 3 Today, there is little indication of an outbreak of inflation--rather, the latest data on inflation have been lower than expected. If anything, the puzzle today is why inflation appears to be slowing at a time when most forecasters place the economy at or near full employment. Even wage inflation, which is most tightly connected to labor market slack, shows little sign of heating up by most measures. Overall, wages are increasing a bit more rapidly than they were a few years ago, but the latest data on wages do not show much progress over the past year. Average hourly earnings rose only 2-1/2 percent in the 12 months through April, the same as a year earlier. Similarly, the employment cost index was up only 2-1/4 percent in the 12 months through March. While that is up from a year earlier, it is lower than two years ago. The Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker tells a similar story: Upward movement in wage gains was observed until about a year or so ago, but there has been little acceleration recently. Turning to overall inflation, earlier this year, reports indicated that the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) preferred measure of inflation--the headline measure of consumer price inflation on a national accounts basis--had, on a 12-month change basis, risen close to the FOMC's objective, but the latest figures have edged down somewhat as the rebound in energy prices has abated. I tend to place greater weight on the core measure of inflation, which abstracts from the transitory movements in energy prices and is a better predictor of future inflation. In the April report, the core measure--that is, excluding food and energy prices--had increased only 1.5 percent on a 12-month change basis. That reading marks a considerable shortfall from the Committee's 2 percent objective. And there does not seem to have been any progress over the past year or so: Core PCE inflation is about the same over the past 12 months as over the preceding period. Although the past two monthly readings of core inflation have been held down in part by idiosyncratic factors, including upgrades to cell-phone plans, the apparent lack of progress in moving core inflation back to 2 percent is a source of concern. Traditionally, economists assessed that as labor market slack diminished and the economy approached full employment, upward pressure on inflation would result, in the statistical relationship known as the Phillips curve. But I am not confident we can count on the Phillips curve to restore inflation to target in today's economy. Since 2012, inflation has tended to change relatively little--both absolutely and relative to earlier decades--as the unemployment rate has fallen considerably. 4 At a time when the unemployment rate has fallen from 8.2 percent to 4.4 percent, core inflation has undershot our 2 percent target for 58 straight months. 5 In other words, the Phillips curve appears to be flatter today than it was previously. This is also true in a number of advanced foreign economies, where declines in unemployment rates to low levels have failed to generate significant upward pressures on inflation. With the Phillips curve appearing to be a less reliable guidepost than it has been in the past, the anchoring role of inflation expectations remains critically important. Here, recent developments are mixed. The May reading of the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers' measure of longer-term inflation expectations remained near its all-time low, while the New York Fed's measure of three-year inflation expectations edged up in its latest reading to the highest level in more than a year. And although market-based measures of inflation compensation have improved relative to their lows in the middle of last year, they are still below the average level in the period from 2010 to 2014. Attaining the Committee's symmetric target for inflation on a sustainable basis is especially important in the current environment, with the neutral real interest rate at historically lower levels, in order to ensure conventional policy has room to respond to unexpected adverse developments. Underlying fundamentals, such as import prices and diminishing slack, should lead inflation to resume moving closer to its goal. Nonetheless, currently I see more signs that progress on inflation is slowing than of a breakout of inflation to the upside, as might be the case with a nonlinearity in the relationship between inflation and unemployment when unemployment is very low. 6 But as noted earlier, a breakout in inflation also was not a primary concern following the past two times the unemployment rate dropped as low as it is now, in 1998 and 2006, when recessions followed within two or three years. One notable feature of both episodes was that they were preceded by sharply elevated financial imbalances. In the late 1990s, equity prices had reached very high levels, according to common measures of stock market valuations. And the period from 2006 to 2007 coincided with a house price bubble, along with extreme leverage at a number of large financial institutions and widespread use of exotic financial products. Broadly speaking, financial conditions today appear to be more balanced: In most markets, house prices seem fairly well aligned with rents. Large banks are much better capitalized than before the crisis and appear to be managing their risk exposures and liquidity much more carefully. While today's equity market valuations appear somewhat elevated, they do not seem to be near the dizzying heights reached in 1999 and 2000. Moreover, for a variety of reasons, importantly including critical financial reforms as well as changes in risk appetite, leverage and maturity transformation are at much lower levels than they were before the crisis. One area that merits ongoing vigilance is corporate indebtedness, which remains at a high level and where investor appetite still seems strong. Another area of concern is auto lending--particularly in the subprime segment--where underwriting appears to have become quite lax last year and, consequently, delinquency rates indicate more borrowers struggling to keep up with their payments. Eight years into the recovery, it is important to recognize that financial conditions can change rapidly and bear special vigilance. Nonetheless, risks to the U.S. financial system do not appear to be flashing red in the way they did in the run-up to previous downturns. It is also possible that the natural rate of unemployment has moved lower or that the unemployment rate still may be overstating the strength of the labor market. While it is encouraging that the share of employees who work part time for economic reasons has continued to move down, there may well be slack remaining along this margin. And another key measure--the prime-age employment-to-population ratio--remains more than 1 percentage point below pre-crisis levels, and further improvement there would be welcome. The Outlook Looking at economic activity more broadly, although first-quarter gross domestic product (GDP) was soft, the data so far suggest a rebound in the second quarter. The weak Q1 reading follows a recurring pattern in recent years, with the first quarter of the year often weaker than subsequent quarters. Moreover, below the top-line number, there were some encouraging signs of strength: Residential construction posted a double-digit increase and contributed 1/2 percentage point to first-quarter GDP growth. Drilling for oil and natural gas is rebounding sharply, and nonresidential construction contributed 3/4 percentage point to first-quarter GDP growth. Business spending on equipment and intangibles, which fell slightly in 2016, rebounded to a 7 percent annualized increase in the first quarter and contributed another 3/4 percentage point to the overall increase. A key reason overall GDP was so weak last quarter was consumer spending, which rose only 0.6 percent at an annual rate. Nonetheless, there are good reasons to think that the first-quarter weakness in consumer spending will not persist. Household incomes should continue rising with the continued strengthening in employment and wages, home prices should be contributing through improved household balance sheets, and consumer sentiment remains upbeat. Recent changes in financial conditions have, overall, been supportive of further gains in the real economy. The S&P 500 index is up almost 8 percent since the start of the year. At the same time, a broad measure of the exchange value of the dollar is down about 4 percent so far this year, which should help boost net exports. After moving up sharply late last year, long-term interest rates have moved down somewhat so far this year. In addition, the balance of risks has shifted over the past two quarters, with a number of downside risks receding and some upside risks emerging. In particular, the latest international economic data have suggested waning downside risks from abroad, while continued labor market strength and the prospect for fiscal stimulus in the United States present a possible upside risk to domestic demand. Importantly, we are seeing synchronized global growth for the first time in many years. Growth forecasts for both advanced and emerging market economies are being marked up, breaking a pattern of repeated downward revisions from 2013 to 2016. Recent political developments significantly enhanced the prospects for policy continuity in the euro area, and there has been continued growth in euro-area employment and economic activity. While Italy continues to face political, economic, and financial risks, recent developments augur well for the resilience of the broader euro area. China's first-quarter growth came in above 7 percent at an annual rate, although there appears to have been some moderation since then, and capital outflows slowed notably. China's economy bears watching in the medium term, especially given financial-sector risks and elevated debt levels. Although Mexico's growth may moderate this year, both the Mexican equity market and the exchange rate have strengthened, along with confidence, following sharp falls late last year. Along with the favorable shift in foreign risks, recent announcements on fiscal policy suggest some upside risk to U.S. aggregate demand. The Administration has proposed deep tax cuts, which, if implemented, could amount to about 2 percentage points of GDP in the first few years according to independent estimates. Most estimates suggest that the supply-side effects of these policies would be fairly small, so, if enacted, the net effect could well be a boost to U.S. aggregate demand at a time when the economy could be at full employment. Nonetheless, there is considerable uncertainty about the magnitude and timing of any policy changes. There is also important uncertainty about the deliberations over the debt limit, which are likely to garner increasing attention in the early fall and will factor into my considerations of risks to the outlook. The Path of Policy On balance, when assessing economic activity and its likely evolution, it would be reasonable to conclude that further removal of accommodation will likely be appropriate soon. As I noted earlier, the unemployment rate is now at 4.4 percent, and we are seeing improvement in other measures of labor market slack, such as participation and the share of those working part time for economic reasons. There are good reasons to believe that the improvement in real economic activity will continue: Financial conditions remain supportive. Indicators of sentiment remain positive. The balance of risks at home has shifted favorably, downside risks from abroad are lower than they have been in several years, and we are seeing synchronous global growth. The time for a change in balance sheet policy is coming into clearer view as normalization of the federal funds rate approaches the range that can be considered "well under way." If the outlook and the expected federal funds rate path evolve in line with the median projection of FOMC participants reported in the March SEP, the federal funds rate will soon approach midway to its expected long-run equilibrium value. I shared my framework for thinking about the change in balance sheet policy in early March, and today I will elaborate on the approach that seems most appropriate to achievement of our goals. 7 Consideration that normalization of the federal funds rate is well underway was the criterion the Committee adopted in its December 2015 decision to continue to reinvest principal payments. In my view, that "well under way" standard has served an important purpose. 8 With asymmetry in the scope for conventional monetary policy to respond to shocks, maintaining reinvestments provided an important benefit by enabling the federal funds rate to rise more quickly than would have been possible with a shrinking balance sheet and sooner reach a level that allows for reductions if conditions deteriorate. This approach has ensured that our most proven tool, the federal funds rate, will have reached a level at which it can be cut if needed to buffer adverse shocks, thus helping to guard against the asymmetric risks associated with the effective lower bound. With the federal funds rate projected to be in the range that is midway to the Committee's projection of the long-run value of the federal funds rate later this year, I would consider it reasonable to assess that this threshold will have been attained before too long. As we shrink the size of our balance sheet, the public's holdings of Treasury securities will rise, and that will tend to boost longer-term interest rates. In particular, most studies conclude that increases in central bank holdings of longer-maturity assets chiefly affect interest rates by reducing the quantity of longer-term securities held by the public and putting downward pressure on the term premium--that is, the difference between the yields on longer-dated assets and the path of expected short-term interest rates over the holding period. By some estimates, the effect is modestly above 90 basis points currently. 9 Thus, balance sheet normalization should be associated with higher term premiums, which in turn, other things held equal, should be associated with higher long-term Treasury yields. Most studies find that higher Treasury yields also affect yields and prices of other securities: increasing interest rates faced by private-sector borrowers, making dollar-denominated assets more attractive, which tends to boost the exchange value of the dollar, and making fixed-income assets more attractive relative to stocks, tending to depress share prices. Together, these channels contribute to a tightening in financial conditions. 10 These effects are, of course, in many respects, similar to the effects of increases in short-term interest rates. 11 Thus, away from the zero lower bound, the two tools are, to a large extent, substitutes for one another. As a result, the FOMC will be in the unfamiliar posture of having two tools available for adjusting monetary policy. It is, therefore, important to clarify how they will be used in relation to each other. While, under most circumstances, the two tools are largely substitutes for one another in terms of their effects on the economy the federal funds rate is the tool with which we have the most experience. And using two tools at once could easily foster confusion. Thus, in my view, predictability, precision, and clarity of communications all argue in favor of focusing policy on the federal funds rate as the single active tool. In this framework, the balance sheet essentially would remain subordinate to the federal funds rate. Under the subordinated balance sheet approach, once the change in reinvestment policy is triggered, the balance sheet would essentially be set on autopilot to shrink passively until it reaches a neutral level, expanding in line with the demand for currency thereafter. I favor an approach that would gradually and predictably increase the maximum amount of securities the market will be required to absorb each month, while avoiding spikes. Thus, in an abundance of caution, I prefer to cap monthly redemptions at a pace that gradually increases over a fixed period. In addition, I would be inclined to follow a similar approach in managing the reduction of the holdings of Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities (MBS), calibrated according to their particular characteristics. The Committee's policy normalization principles have made clear that the Federal Reserve "will, in the longer run, hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively." 12 Over time, the gradual reduction in our balance sheet should result in a gradual decline in reserves to a longer-run level that is well below today's level but likely somewhat higher than in the pre-crisis regime. It is difficult to know in advance with any precision how low reserves can be allowed to drop. That minimum level will depend on the structural demand for reserves and the short-term variability in the demand for and supply of reserves. During the process of balance sheet normalization, I favor an approach of monitoring money markets carefully to gauge the appropriate longer-run level of reserves consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation. Finally, while subordination of the balance sheet to the federal funds rate should be our baseline policy, in my view, there may be circumstances when we may need to rely on the balance sheet more actively. During the period when the balance sheet is running down, if the economy encounters significant adverse shocks, it may be appropriate to commence the reinvestment of principal payments again in order to preserve conventional policy space. Conclusion In recent quarters, the balance of risks has become more favorable, the global outlook has brightened, and financial conditions have eased on net. With the labor market continuing to strengthen, and GDP growth expected to rebound in the second quarter, it likely will be appropriate soon to adjust the federal funds rate. And if the economy evolves in line with the SEP median path, the federal funds rate will likely approach the point at which normalization can be considered well under way before too long, when it will be appropriate to adjust balance sheet policy. I support an approach that retains the federal funds rate as the primary tool for adjusting monetary policy, sets the balance sheet to shrink in a gradual and predictable way for both Treasury securities and MBS, and avoids spikes in redemptions. While that remains my baseline expectation, I will be watching carefully for any signs that progress toward our inflation objective is slowing. With a low neutral real rate, achieving our symmetric inflation target is more important than ever in order to preserve some room for conventional policy to buffer adverse developments in the economy. If the soft inflation data persist, that would be concerning and, ultimately, could lead me to reassess the appropriate path of policy. References Blanchard, Olivier (2016). " The U.S. Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF) " Policy Brief PB16‑1. Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, January. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007). " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 20-21 ," press release, April 11. Bonis, Brian, Jane Ihrig, and Min Wei (2017). " The Effect of the Federal Reserve's Securities Holdings on Longer-Term Interest Rates ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 20. Brainard, Lael (2015a). " Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at "North America's Place in a Changing World Economy," 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, October 12. -------- (2015b). " Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low ," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1. -------- (2017). " Transitions in the Outlook and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass., March 1. Ihrig, Jane, Elizabeth Klee, Canlin Li, Brett Schulte, and Min Wei (2012). " Expectations about the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and the Term Structure of Interest Rates (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-57. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). " Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23. Nalewaik, Jeremy (2016). " Non-Linear Phillips Curves with Inflation Regime-Switching (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016‑078. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Jim Clouse and John Roberts for their assistance in preparing this text. 1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. In the period from 1950 to 2000, inflation often rose late in the business cycle. In response, the Federal Reserve raised interest rates, which in turn led to a weaker economy. Return to text 3. For example, the FOMC minutes for March 2007 expressed "concern" about the rate of inflation but noted that increases in energy and non-energy imports could explain some of the upward pressure on core prices (see Board of Governors, 2007, paragraph 23). The outlook was for a gradual decline in core inflation. Return to text 4. See Blanchard (2016), Kiley (2015), and Brainard (2015a). Similarly, inflation did not fall very much as the unemployment rate climbed to 10 percent during the Great Recession. Return to text 5. The inflation information refers to core PCE inflation measured on a 12-month average basis. Return to text 6. See Nalewaik (2016). Return to text 7. See Brainard (2017). Return to text 8. This rationale is in Brainard (2015b). Return to text 9. Bonis, Ihrig, and Wei (2017) estimate that the cumulative effect of the Federal Reserve's asset purchases results in a reduction in the 10-year Treasury yield term premium moderately in excess of 90 basis points currently. Return to text 10. It seems likely that many investors have developed an expectation of the likely path of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet once the process of normalization is well underway, and these expectations are already priced into asset prices. See, for instance, Federal Reserve Bank of New York May 2017 Responses to Survey of Primary Dealers (PDF) , and Responses to Survey of Market Participants (PDF) . Return to text 11. There may be differences in the specific ways changes in short-term rates and the balance sheet transmit to different asset prices and the exchange rate, although estimates are limited and lack precision. Return to text 12. See the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm . Return to text Last Update: June 26, 2017 Back to Top
