Opening Remarks at the Conference on Supervising Large, Complex Financial Institutions: Defining Objectives and Measuring Effectiveness - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks at the Conference on Supervising Large, Complex Financial Institutions: Defining Objectives and Measuring Effectiveness March 18, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Conference on Supervising Large, Complex Financial Institutions: Defining Objectives and Measuring Effectiveness, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Welcome. It is great to see all of you here today to discuss the objectives and measurement of supervision for large, complex financial institutions. Nearly eight years have passed since the financial crisis hit, pushing the financial system and the U.S. economy to the brink, and leaving scars that are still evident today. The hardships of the financial crisis are unfortunately still open wounds for too many people, especially those who lost their jobs, homes or businesses, or those who struggled with the sharp fall in value of their homes and with staying current on their debts and bills. Understanding what went wrong and how to avoid severe financial crises in the future is, I am sure, an issue foremost in the minds of all the distinguished speakers here today, and I am no exception. Before continuing, let me indicate that what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 A central part of the financial crisis was the failure or near-failure of many large financial institutions—both institutions that were supervised by the Federal Reserve and many that were not—which constrained their ability to play their crucial role in supplying credit and financial services to businesses and consumers. In the wake of the crisis, considerable attention has been devoted to the role that supervisors—including those here at the New York Fed—played in this meltdown. But much of this discussion has taken place without a broad understanding of what supervisors actually do—the scope, breadth, and limits of their activities and authorities. Within the official sector, we make a distinction between regulation —the rules governing what financial institutions must and must not do, and supervision —which involves monitoring, oversight and enforcing compliance with law, regulation and supervisory expectations for firms’ governance, internal processes and controls, and financial condition. This distinction between regulation and supervision is often not well-understood, and thus their complementary roles are not always fully appreciated. Addressing this distinction, as we see it, is one important motivation for this conference. Through the papers presented today and the discussions by noted academic researchers, policymakers and senior supervisors from the U.S. and overseas, we hope to broaden the understanding of the role and objectives of supervision. The goal is to spur conversation and new research on what supervision should be trying to achieve and the best means for achieving those ends. Just as important, we want to generate ideas for how to better assess the effectiveness of supervisory activities. In a world of limited resources, how do we deploy our people and technology in the most effective way to limit disruption and distress at individual firms and to the financial system, while still fostering an efficient and innovative financial system? In considering these questions, a good starting point is to understand more fully what supervisors do and how they do it in the current environment. The papers that are being presented here today are largely aimed at achieving this goal. As described in the first paper—“Supervising Large, Complex Financial Institutions: What do Supervisors Do?”—bank supervision has long been an integral component of the Federal Reserve’s responsibilities. At a broad level, Federal Reserve supervision of large financial institutions is guided by two key objectives: “enhancing the resiliency of a firm to lower the probability of its failure or inability to serve as a financial intermediary [and] reducing the impact on the financial system and the broader economy in the event of a firm’s failure or material weakness.” 2 In addressing these objectives, bank supervisors enforce laws and regulations, but there is much more to supervision than just enforcement. The activities and practices at large, complex financial organizations are simply too intricate and evolve too quickly to be fully described ex ante in regulation. Banking supervision works in concert with regulation as the more flexible element of banking policy. Supervisory policy and standards can, and do, evolve over time to reflect the evolution in practice in the banking industry and in financial markets. Overall, supervisors are guided by the mandate to identify any practices or conditions at supervised firms that are a threat to the safety and soundness of those firms—and, of course, to ensure that the firms take all necessary steps to promptly remediate any such conditions. Critically, the definition of what constitutes “safe and sound” is not hard-coded into regulation, but is guided by the information and analysis done by supervisors and other Federal Reserve staff, such as economists, attorneys and market analysts. Supervisory expectations and standards are expressed through public guidance such as Supervision and Regulation Letters (SR Letters), publicly-posted examination manuals and other guidance. On a day-to-day basis, banking supervisors collect information on financial institutions through examinations and analysis. Examiners look at key aspects of a supervised firm’s businesses and risk management functions. They use this information to assess the adequacy of the firm’s systems and processes for identifying, measuring, monitoring and controlling risks at the firm and in the financial sector more generally. That said, the ultimate responsibility for risk identification and risk management remains with the supervised institution. The Federal Reserve’s role is to ensure that the institution has the necessary strong processes in place to achieve this objective. As risks emerge, supervisors intervene, within the realms of their safety and soundness mandates, to require that banks take corrective actions as necessary. Supervision can reduce the chance that a financial firm fails, but it can never provide a guarantee against failure. Supervisory policies have undergone important changes over the past few years, especially in the context of the largest financial institutions. Banking supervision no longer focuses solely on the safety and soundness of individual institutions—so-called micro-prudential supervision—but now also focuses on the implications for financial stability more generally. The evolving supervisory framework has resulted in a number of organizational changes in the way supervision is conducted at the New York Fed and in the Federal Reserve System more broadly. A very important change in the Federal Reserve System is that supervision of the largest, most systemically important financial institutions are now coordinated across districts through the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC). The LISCC is a System-wide committee, chaired by the director of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve’s Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, and composed of senior officers at the Board and Reserve Banks. In addition, the Federal Reserve has instituted three major horizontal evaluations, which are a key element of the new enhanced supervisory framework for large banking companies. These horizontal evaluations, which focus on capital adequacy, liquidity resiliency and preparedness for recovery and resolution, examine practices and conditions across a group of firms simultaneously, enabling supervisors to develop peer perspectives about best practices and approaches. These programs involve a consistent and systematic assessment of the financial strength and operational resiliency of the largest and most complex financial institutions, addressing both micro-prudential safety-and-soundness supervisory goals and broader macro-prudential financial stability objectives. Specifically, in the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which applies to firms with at least $50 billion in total assets, Federal Reserve supervisors assess whether bank holding companies have sufficient capital to continue operations through times of economic and financial stress, and whether they have robust, forward-looking capital-planning processes that take into account whatever unique risks they might face. By including forward-looking elements, the CCAR complements the enhanced Basel capital requirements now being implemented in the United States. In addition, the Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review (CLAR), which applies to LISCC firms, reviews the liquidity positions and liquidity risk management of large, complex banking organizations, including internal stress-testing practices. Finally, the Federal Reserve does an annual evaluation of the LISCC firms' options to support recovery and progress in removing impediments to orderly resolution in the Supervisory Assessment of Recovery and Resolution Preparedness (SRP). While these evaluations form the core of the supervisory program for large, complex banking companies, they are far from the only important activities pursued by supervisors. Day-to-day oversight of individual firms is a critical complement to these cross-firm, horizontal evaluations. There are three key channels that generate insight on firms: 1) continuous monitoring through meetings with bank senior management, business line management, risk managers, auditors and others; 2) review and analysis of internal reports; and 3) independent analysis by supervisory teams. These insights guide supervisory assessments and supervisory actions for individual institutions, as well as contributing to the assessments made as part of CCAR, CLAR and other horizontal exercises. We have come a long way since the financial crisis, and the financial sector today is much more resilient as a result of the evolving supervisory framework. However, more work still lies ahead. A key challenge in assessing the effectiveness of supervision is that much of what supervisors do, by necessity, is confidential. This reliance on confidential information and confidential actions can make supervision seem mysterious to outsiders, which complicates the evaluation of what policies may be effective or ineffective. For example, if a bank fails, is this evidence of poor supervision, or instead evidence that even good supervision can’t prevent all bank failures? Improving our ability to do this diagnosis is critical. I am confident that today's panels and paper discussions will help us move forward in this direction. Thank you for participating in this conference. 1 Beverly Hirtle, David Lucca and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. “Consolidated Supervision Framework for Large Financial Institutions.” Supervision and Regulation Letter 12-17. December 17, 2012. http://www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/srletters/sr1217.htm By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

March 31, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Annual Meeting of the Virginia Association of Economists, Virginia Military Institute, Lexington, Virginia As prepared for delivery It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today as part of the Virginia Association of Economists annual meeting at Virginia Military Institute and Washington and Lee University. This is an appropriate setting for the topic I will be addressing—the role of the Federal Reserve as the central bank of the United States. When the Federal Reserve Act was enacted in 1913, H. Parker Willis, who had been a professor at Washington and Lee University, played a critical role. He worked closely with Representative Carter Glass of Virginia in crafting the legislative proposal that established the Federal Reserve, and Willis became the first Secretary of the Federal Reserve Board in 1914. Of course, I’m tackling this subject today not just because H. Parker Willis was a professor here in Lexington. Instead, I’m addressing this issue because of the ongoing debate about the role of the Federal Reserve and its structure and governance. My purpose is to demystify the nation’s central bank and to respond to some of the critiques that we continue to face. I see this as necessary because there is a risk that the Federal Reserve could be changed in ways that might impair our ability to achieve our primary objectives—namely, full employment and price stability. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The current debate surrounding this nation’s central bank is not new, but rather dates back to our nation’s independence from Great Britain. The notion of a central bank in the United States has nearly always been controversial—in concept, design and practice. So much so that the charters of the first two U.S. central banks, the First and Second Banks of the United States, were allowed to lapse. The United States, in contrast to many of our European counterparts, had no central bank from 1836 to 1913. During this period, the economy was prone to financial panics. The rapid development of the 19th century American economy, including the westward expansion made possible by railroads, outstripped the ability of the private banking system to satisfy the nation’s needs for an elastic currency and a stable supply of credit. Ultimately, the Panic of 1907―in which J.P. Morgan, the leading financier of the day, played an outsized role in responding to the crisis―was the catalyst that turned the tide back in favor of establishing a central bank. The debate preceding the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913 was protracted and intense. Early drafts of reform proposals were careful not to even mention a “central bank”—the 75-year-old scars from the Second Bank’s failed reauthorization battle had still not fully healed. Although there was a strong recognition that the country needed a central bank to forestall and mitigate financial panics, there was considerable disagreement about how it should be structured. Important considerations included what role should be played by private bankers versus government officials, how centralized the new bank should be and the extent of its powers. 2 During this period, the U.S. economy was susceptible to financial panics. Lacking a central bank, the country had no reliable lender of last resort that could provide currency and credit on demand against high-quality assets. Banks had to self-insure against bank runs by holding a high fraction of deposits as cash, and by entering into private liquidity agreements with other banks. Self-insurance was not only expensive relative to the cost of a public backstop provided by a central bank, but it was also limited in its effectiveness. When the business cycle turned down and financial stress intensified, bank runs often ensued as bank customers rushed to convert their deposits into cash. Without a true lender of last resort, cash that banks individually and collectively kept in reserve often proved inadequate to meet demand. At that point, a bank under duress had to either close its doors or quickly sell assets. Of course, either action worked to intensify the panic and to increase the stress on the economy. The Federal Reserve was established so that there would be a lender of last resort that could lend against high-quality collateral and provide a reliable and elastic currency. 3 The knowledge that such a lender of last resort existed reduced considerably the incentives for depositors to race to their banks to make withdrawals at the first sign of trouble. 4 At that time, the provision of an elastic currency was especially important because the agricultural sector represented a significant proportion of the U.S. economy. As a result, the demand for credit increased significantly each fall when farmers incurred the costs associated with harvesting their crops. Prior to the establishment of the Federal Reserve, accommodating this seasonal demand necessitated a flow of currency and credit from the major financial markets such as New York and Chicago that put upward pressure on interest rates. With its ability to provide an elastic currency, the Federal Reserve would be able to dampen such seasonal swings in interest rates. At its inception, the Federal Reserve differed from central banks in Europe in that it was decentralized. The design reflected long-standing concerns in our country about the concentration of power in a single authority. These concerns are reflected in the federated system established by the Constitution in 1787. Similarly, the design adopted for the central bank in 1913 was also federated, with twelve independent Reserve Banks, each with its own capital and board of directors, overseen by a seven member Federal Reserve Board in Washington, with the Secretary of the Treasury serving as chair of the Board. This decentralized structure allayed the prevailing fear of concentrating power in either New York or Washington and, especially within the banking community, of ceding too much power to the federal government. Paul Warburg was an American banker who had emigrated to the United States from Europe. He was deeply involved in the debate about the appropriate structure of the central bank and described the concern as follows: The view was generally held that centralization of banking would inevitably result in one of two alternatives: either complete governmental control, which meant politics in banking, or control by “Wall Street,” which meant banking in politics. 5 Importantly, the Federal Reserve was designed to have budgetary independence from the federal government. The System funds itself through its business operations, and not through Congressional appropriations. 6 This formed an important foundation in ensuring that the conduct of monetary policy would be independent from political influence. A wide range of research has shown that central banks achieve better outcomes with respect to employment and inflation when they are insulated from short-term political pressures in their conduct of monetary policy. 7 The Federal Reserve System was soon tested, first by the Depression of 1920-21, and then by the Great Depression. The searing experience of the Great Depression, including the 1933 Banking Holiday and thousands of bank failures, revealed significant shortcomings. This led to the Banking Act of 1935, which made two important changes—establishing a federal deposit insurance system and making the Federal Reserve System more centralized. The Great Depression made it clear that having a lender of last resort was not sufficient for preventing bank runs. Deposit insurance, which had been debated but not adopted during the drafting of the Federal Reserve Act, was instituted with the creation of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. A second lesson was that monetary policy would be more effective if it were coordinated at the national level, rather than conducted individually by the Reserve Banks. 8 To accomplish this, the Banking Act replaced the Federal Reserve Board with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and established the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to oversee the conduct of monetary policy. The governors in Washington were made dominant because they were given the majority of votes on the FOMC. 9 Over time, the role of the executive branch and the U.S. Treasury was reduced. Beginning in 1936, the Secretary of the Treasury no longer served on the FOMC. The Federal Reserve Board moved to its own building in 1937, and the Federal Reserve gained independence in the setting of monetary policy with the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord in 1951. A century following the Panic of 1907, another financial crisis led to the Great Recession. As was the case following the Great Depression, weaknesses exposed by the crisis led to further changes to the Federal Reserve System. Some of these changes were legislated while others were initiated by the Federal Reserve itself. Before discussing the lessons learned from the financial crisis and the changes that ensued, I think it is important to recount the Fed’s efforts to support the U.S. economy during this recent period of severe economic and financial distress. As you may recall, the Federal Reserve responded to the financial crisis in two ways. First, it intervened to prevent the failure of several systemically important institutions, including firms that it did not supervise―namely Bear Stearns and AIG. 10 Second, it established a number of special liquidity facilities to ensure that domestic banks, securities dealers, commercial paper issuers, money market mutual funds and foreign banks had sufficient access to dollar liquidity so they could sustain their lending and investment activities, and thereby continue to supply credit to households and businesses. I strongly believe that these interventions were necessary to prevent a systemic collapse of the global financial system. If such a collapse had occurred, I am convinced that the consequences would have been a global depression. If the Federal Reserve hadn’t done everything in its authority to prevent a collapse, we would have been derelict in our duty to the country. Let me be clear: The interventions by the Federal Reserve during the crisis were designed to safeguard the economy, for the benefit of all Americans, while protecting the taxpayer. I am proud of our record on both accounts. In the end, the Federal Reserve’s extraordinary interventions achieved their intended purposes to support economic activity and, incidentally, taxpayers were compensated for the risks undertaken in these interventions. Total profits from these interventions were more than $30 billion. 11 One important condition for lending in these programs was that the loan needed to be secured to the satisfaction of the Federal Reserve Bank extending the loan. Despite the degree of dislocation in the financial system at the time and the severity of the Great Recession, there were no losses for any of the Fed’s programs. At the same time, I agree with those critics who argue that there was something fundamentally unfair about the disparity in treatment between the few large financial institutions that were saved versus the millions of individuals who lost their homes or their jobs. My response is not particularly satisfying. Recessions inflict considerable pain on innocent bystanders in the economy. Depressions greatly compound this pain. Given the Federal Reserve’s role and authority, what we knew at the time and the powers and tools that were available to us, I think we made good choices. If the large systemic banking organizations had failed, the hardships inflicted on households and small business would have been far worse. 12 From my perspective, I believe that any critique of the Fed or other agencies should be focused more on the regulatory and supervisory shortcomings—some of which, I admit, were ours—that created the economic and financial market circumstances in which the Fed’s extraordinary interventions proved necessary. This leads me back to some of those lessons learned and the changes that have resulted. The crisis showed that the regulatory community did not fully grasp the vulnerability of the financial system. In particular, critical financial institutions were not resilient enough to cope with large scale disruptions without assistance, and problems in one institution quickly spread to others. In response, the Federal Reserve has made significant changes in how we regulate and supervise financial institutions. We have raised capital and liquidity requirements, put banks through annual stress tests, established the Large Institution Supervision Coordination Committee (LISCC) to enable us to evaluate the largest firms collectively and relative to one another, and set up the Office of Financial Stability to enable us to look at the financial system more holistically. Financial stability now receives the attention it deserves. For example, there are now regular briefings and discussions on financial stability at FOMC meetings. As discussed earlier, the Federal Reserve has the responsibility to be the lender of last resort. In normal times, this occurs through discount window lending to depository institutions. During the financial crisis, Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act enabled extensions of credit in “unusual and exigent” circumstances to individuals, partnerships and corporations. 13 The extraordinary interventions that were undertaken using our emergency powers under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act were warranted and within our authority. However, I suspect that the scale and scope of these interventions went considerably further than envisioned by the public and Congress prior to the crisis. In response, Congress narrowed the scope of Section 13(3) with the Dodd-Frank Act. In particular, Dodd-Frank limits the Federal Reserve’s authority to extend credit through facilities with broad-based eligibility, and constrains the Federal Reserve’s authority to extend credit to a single company. The Dodd-Frank Act also modified the governance that would apply to any future intervention in an effort to increase public accountability. In addition, the Dodd-Frank Act addressed the broader issue exposed by the crisis―that some large financial institutions had become “too-big-to-fail” (TBTF). To end TBTF, Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act established a process to ensure that any financial firm could be resolved without threatening the viability of the financial system and without putting taxpayer funds at risk. 14 In addition, financial intermediaries designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council are subject to tougher prudential standards and enhanced supervision by the Federal Reserve. The intent behind these measures is to reduce the likelihood of a failure of a large financial firm, and the consequence of such a failure for the financial system, should one occur. The Dodd-Frank Act left intact the decentralized structure of the original federated Federal Reserve System—the twelve Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors in Washington. Each Reserve Bank continues to operate as a separately capitalized corporation with its own Board of Directors. 15 But, to limit the role of bankers on the Federal Reserve Bank boards, the Dodd-Frank Act prohibited the bankers on each board from participating in the selection of its Reserve Bank president. 16 Even prior to the Dodd-Frank Act, it is important to emphasize that the directors played no significant role in setting policy. 17 Instead, their role has been to advise the Reserve Bank president about economic, community and business developments in the District, and to ensure that the Bank is a well-governed and well-managed institution. 18 And, although member banks hold capital in the Federal Reserve and receive a dividend set by law against this capital, member banks do not influence the Fed’s monetary and regulatory policy decisions, how policy is implemented or the supervisory oversight of banks. The Dodd-Frank Act also addressed the need for enhanced transparency by establishing disclosure requirements for participation in Federal Reserve facilities. In terms of transparency, I do think it is a fair critique that, in the past, the Federal Reserve has not always been sufficiently transparent. For example, prior to 1994, we typically didn’t even announce changes that were being implemented in monetary policy. Market participants had to infer what we were doing from our daily open market operations and where the federal funds rate was trading. During the crisis, I also believe we could have done more to explain the motivations for our extraordinary interventions. At times, while the motivations and objectives might have been obvious to us, they weren’t always as readily apparent to Congress or to the public. I think this created uncertainty about what we were trying to accomplish, and made it more difficult for outside observers to assess the appropriateness of our actions and our motives. Today the situation is quite different. We have made significant enhancements with respect to transparency. After each meeting, the FOMC issues a statement that sets the current target range for the federal funds rate and explains its monetary policy decision. Four times a year, the chair holds a press conference explaining the decision and the FOMC releases its Summary of Economic Projections (SEP). The SEP provides the FOMC participants’ forecasts for key economic variables and the federal funds rate over the next few years. In addition, the FOMC participants give numerous speeches explaining their views on monetary policy and other issues, and the chair regularly testifies about monetary policy and the Federal Reserve’s other activities before Congress. Overall, I have found that this move towards greater transparency has held us in good stead. Nearly six years since the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, there still remains considerable debate about whether further changes to the role and structure of the Federal Reserve System are warranted. Some of the issues being debated include how much discretion the Federal Reserve should have in the conduct of monetary policy, whether the Federal Reserve is sufficiently transparent in how it operates, and the role of the New York Fed. I would caution that any further changes to the Federal Reserve System should be grounded on what we learned from the crisis and based on the needs of our evolving economy. Changes should be undertaken if they would make the Federal Reserve more effective in its mission. In contrast, changes based on an emotional, unreasoned response in reaction to the pain associated with the financial crisis and the Great Recession would likely be counter-productive. Some argue that the Federal Reserve has too much discretion in its implementation of monetary policy and, consequently, would have the Fed stick to a formal rule in its conduct of monetary policy. This is a poor idea because adherence to a simple rule would undoubtedly lead to significant policy errors. The world is simply too complex to put monetary policy on autopilot. 19 Concerns over the FOMC’s degree of discretion in monetary policy likely reflect, in part, innovations in monetary policy enacted in recent years that added accommodation at a time when short-term interest rates were stuck very close to the zero lower bound. In particular, the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet grew substantially as the Federal Reserve enacted a series of large-scale asset purchase programs designed to support economic activity. With respect to the argument that these programs have distorted financial markets, I would simply respond that monetary policy always affects financial markets and financial asset valuations. The expected path of the federal funds rate is an important factor influencing the level of bond yields, and the level of bond yields and bond term premia have implications for the valuations of other financial assets, such as equities, and influence the foreign exchange value of the dollar. Of course, the impact of monetary policy may have been greater this time. But this is mainly because more monetary policy stimulus has been required during the current economic cycle in order to push the U.S. economy towards the Fed’s dual mandate objectives. I believe that if we had not responded as forcefully, the recovery would have been slower, the unemployment rate would have been higher and there would have been a greater risk of deflation. While it is much too soon to claim success, the U.S. economy today is in a relatively good place compared to most other countries. The economic expansion is in its seventh year and we have made considerable progress relative to our employment and inflation objectives. Also, the tools that we designed to control monetary policy even with a very large balance sheet have been shown to be effective. In December, when we raised our target range for the federal funds rate to 25 to 50 basis points, we also raised the interest rate we pay on bank reserves to 50 basis points and the rate we pay on our overnight reverse repo facility to 25 basis points. Not only have these new tools been effective in moving the federal funds rate up into the middle of its new target range, but the entire complex of money market rates has moved up as well. Also, the fears expressed by some that the Federal Reserve’s very large balance sheet would lead to runaway inflation have proven to be unwarranted. Now that we have demonstrated that we have monetary control even with a very large balance sheet, I would hope that this issue has been put to rest. As I noted earlier, I am a committed advocate for enhanced transparency and we are always looking for ways to improve. But, of course, there are limits. One could argue, for example, that a live broadcast of a Federal Open Market Committee meeting would be more transparent. But, such a broadcast would do considerable harm by constraining candor and debate over the appropriate monetary policy decision. I believe it would likely lead to less informed decisions and, consequently, poorer execution of our monetary policy responsibilities. Similarly, disclosing in real time who was borrowing from the Federal Reserve’s Discount Window would likely undercut the efficacy of the window. Banks might be reluctant to borrow if it were immediately made public because such borrowing might be construed in the market as a sign of weakness. 20 Stigmatizing Discount Window use by banks would make this tool less effective as a lender of last resort backstop for bank liquidity needs. While there obviously is a point of diminishing returns in terms of increased transparency, I think it’s reasonable to evaluate what further steps the Federal Reserve could make in this direction, judging whether additional steps would enhance versus diminish the effectiveness of our tools and policies, and our ability to achieve our objectives. With regard to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which I have the responsibility of leading, I’d observe that the New York Fed, like the other eleven reserve banks, serves to support the overall mission of the Federal Reserve System. But, by virtue of its location, the New York Fed has a unique responsibility on behalf of the System—namely to serve as the operational arm of the Federal Open Market Committee with respect to the implementation of monetary policy. This separation of the policy arm and the operational arm of monetary policy in two distinct institutions is a very unusual setup among central banks. 21 There are good reasons why these important functions are assigned to the New York Fed. Monetary policy works by affecting financial market conditions in order to promote the economic outcomes consistent with the Fed’s dual mandate. As such, effective and efficient monetary policy execution requires a practical and thorough understanding of the broad range of the financial markets through which monetary policy operates. New York City is the nation’s principal financial center. By locating the duties related to the execution of monetary policy at the New York Fed, the System gains a number of benefits. These include the New York Fed’s ability to develop expertise in and understanding of the broad spectrum of financial markets and institutions, and its access to a deep pool of specialized financial talent in the place where it is most concentrated. The New York Fed’s institutional knowledge and experience in financial markets and its related disciplines are a critical input at all times, but never more so than during periods of duress. This was evidenced during the financial crisis, when the New York Fed’s unique insights and expertise helped the Federal Reserve respond quickly and effectively to unfolding events. The authors who crafted the Federal Reserve Act such as Carter Glass—assisted by H. Parker Willis—deliberately created a central bank structure that fits the U.S. political system, with a series of important checks and balances—between Washington and the rest of the country, between Washington and New York, and with respect to the role of the federal government versus the private sector. These checks and balances exist to ensure that the central bank acts in the broadest interests of the nation, and is appropriately insulated from short-term political pressures and considerations. In this construction, New York does have a special role, but one that stems from where it sits, in New York City, the nation’s most important financial center. The Federal Reserve exists to serve Main Street, not Wall Street. The dual mandate objectives established by Congress—full employment and price stability—are clear on this point. There is no mention of Wall Street. At the same time, it is broadly recognized that without a well-functioning financial system it would be difficult, if not impossible, for the Federal Reserve to achieve those objectives. The Federal Reserve has evolved considerably since its inception in 1913. This evolution has been informed by lessons from past financial crises. The goal has been to make the Federal Reserve even more effective in carrying out its mission. This process of learning from experience is as critical for institutions as it as individuals. To paraphrase Winston Churchill: People always make mistakes, but only wise ones learn from their mistakes. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Kenneth Garbade, Jack Gutt, Joyce Hansen, Michael Held and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See America’s Bank: The Epic Struggle to Create the Federal Reserve , Roger Lowenstein, 2015. 3 President Wilson, who signed the Federal Reserve Act, described this new feature for the currency. “Suffice it here to say that it provides a currency which expands as it is needed and contracts when it is not needed: a currency which comes into existence in response to the call of every man who can show a going business and a concrete basis for extending credit to him, however obscure or prominent he may be, however big or little his business transactions.” Letter to Congressman Oscar Underwood, October 17, 1914, Wilson Papers , vol. 31. 4 In addition, the Federal Reserve was given the authority to clear checks on a nationwide basis. This helped knit the country’s commerce together better and ensured that checks would be payable at par rather than discounted by differing amounts depending on how far one was from the bank of issue and how little one knew about a particular bank’s financial condition and viability. 5 Paul Warburg, The Federal Reserve System: Its Origins and Growth , vol. 1, 1930. 6 The Federal Reserve Banks are funded through their respective operations. The Federal Reserve Board―and later, the Board of Governors―is funded through semiannual assessments on the Banks [Section 10(3) of the Federal Reserve Act]. The Board’s financial independence was strengthened in the 1933 Banking Act [Section 6(b)] which stipulated that these semiannual assessments “[…] shall not be construed to be Government funds or appropriated moneys.” 7 For example, see Alesina and Summers, “Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 25, no. 2 pg. 157-62, 1993. 8 H. Parker Willis described this independence given to the Reserve Banks in the conduct of policy. “There is nothing, either in the Federal Reserve Act or in the regulations of the Federal Reserve Board, to indicate that the reserve banks are to be operated in groups or through communications with one another, resulting in the establishment of a single policy as to detail.” H. Parker Willis, The Federal Reserve , pg. 128, 1915. 9 This assumes no vacancies on the seven-member Board of Governors. Currently, with five members of the Board of Governors and five votes among the Reserve Banks, the balance is split equally. 10 The Federal Reserve was unable to prevent the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. 11 For example, see “Federal Reserve: Emergency Lending,” Marc Labonte, Congressional Research Service, January 6, 2016. 12 In retrospect, I believe more government support could have been provided to homeowners. Although the Federal Reserve did not have the authority to implement a mortgage modification loan program, we did implement a mortgage-backed securities purchase program to lower mortgage interest rates. 13 Several other conditions had to be satisfied as well. 14 Although considerable progress has been made in ending TBTF, I think it is premature to declare victory. Some banks still have work to do to make their resolution plans credible, and there needs to be more work on cross-border issues to ensure that such a resolution would proceed smoothly. 15 Each Board is made up of nine members divided evenly into Class A, B, and C directors. The Class A directors represent the banks of the District that are Federal Reserve member banks, the Class B and C directors represent the broader public interest. Only eligible Class B and Class C directors can participate in the process for selecting Reserve Bank presidents. 16 The selection of the President consists of two steps: Appointment of the Reserve Bank president by the Board of Directors, and approval of the appointment by the Board of Governors. For details see: http://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/how-is-a-federal-reserve-bank-president-selected.htm 17 There is one exception, but it has little actual significance. Boards of Directors do make recommendations concerning changes in the primary credit (discount) rate. However, these recommendations only go into effect by an affirmative vote by the Board of Governors. Also, if the Board of Governors wanted to change the primary credit rate and no recommendations were available to act upon, the Board legally could move unilaterally. In fact, what would likely happen in this unlikely circumstance would be a phone call to one or more Reserve Banks to ask for the desired recommendation and rapid compliance with the Board of Governors’ request. 18 The Board of Governors plays an important role in the oversight of the Reserve Banks. The Board of Governors regularly evaluates Reserve Bank operations and each Bank’s budget The Reserve Banks conduct supervision under delegated authority from the Board of Governors. Reserve Bank directors continue to have no role in bank supervision. 19 See The Fed at a crossroads, Where to go next? Brookings Institution panel remarks, October 15, 2015. 20 A historical example was the disclosure of Reconstruction Finance Corporation loans to banks in the Great Depression. This disclosure often created runs at the respective banks. See James Butkiewicz, “The Reconstruction Finance Corporation, the Gold Standard, and the Banking Panic of 1933,” Southern Economic Journal , vol. 66, no. 2, October 1999, pg. 271. 21 In the case of the European Central Bank, the member national central banks are involved in policy implementation. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

April 8, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the University of Bridgeport, Bridgeport, Connecticut As prepared for delivery Good morning. I am very pleased to be in Bridgeport and to speak with you today. I would like to give a special thanks to the University of Bridgeport for their part in making this event possible. My visit today is part of our ongoing efforts at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to better understand the regional economy. We plan trips like this so that we can meet with a diverse array of stakeholders in the region to gain insights and perspectives on the local economy. These trips also allow us to hear from Main Street about the major issues and concerns affecting people and businesses in the area. Fairfield County is our first destination in 2016, and this is the second time we have visited the area in the past three years. I am looking forward to meeting with a number of different groups today. After starting our day here at the University of Bridgeport, we will meet with an organization called The WorkPlace to hear about some of the nationally-recognized programs they have successfully developed to help the long-term unemployed find jobs. Long-term unemployment is a significant problem in the broader economy, and something that I will discuss in more detail later in my remarks. Next, we will take a tour of the American Job Center, an organization that provides workforce assistance to job seekers in conjunction with local businesses. Later we will attend, a roundtable lunch with members of the Bridgeport Regional Business Community. And, finally, we will meet with leadership from the Housing Development Fund, New Horizons and NeighborWorks America to hear about the state of affordable housing and community development in Fairfield County. These trips are valuable to us, and represent one of the many ways in which the New York Fed engages with people and businesses in our region. Another one of our efforts in this vein is our Small Business Credit Survey ―the latest version of which was released last month. This survey―which includes responses from across 26 states―helps us understand the challenges facing small businesses in the region, focusing on financing needs and impediments to obtaining credit. We partnered with multiple organizations throughout Connecticut to produce this survey―some of which are right here in Bridgeport―and received responses from nearly 200 small business owners from around the state. I’d like to personally thank those who participated in the survey. The remainder of my remarks will focus on recent developments in the national and local economy. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 U.S. Economic Outlook Despite the swings we have seen in financial markets over the past few months and the recent divergences across different economic and financial market indicators, recent developments have not led me to make a fundamental change in my outlook for the U.S. economy. I continue to expect that the economy will expand over the course of this year at a pace slightly above its long-term trend—sufficient to push the unemployment rate down a bit further and to more fully utilize the nation’s labor resources. On inflation, although recent data have been somewhat firmer, it still appears that inflation for this year will fall short of our 2 percent objective for the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator. However, I anticipate an eventual return to our objective as the transitory factors that have held down inflation dissipate over time. In assessing the current state of the U.S. economy, recent news has generated divergent signals. Several sectors have been showing signs of softness. Real consumer spending growth appears to have moderated somewhat from the relatively robust pace of the second half of 2015. Both new and existing home sales have flattened since the middle of last year. Finally, indicators of real business investment spending point to continued softness. In contrast, manufacturing production—which had been a particular weak spot of the U.S. economy in 2015—rose in the first two months of this year. Recent survey data, including our own Empire State Manufacturing Survey , indicate further improvement in conditions for the manufacturing sector in March. Through it all, the U.S. labor market has remained healthy. Payroll employment increased an average of about 229,000 per month over the course of 2015, and the gains in the first quarter of this year were nearly as high. Even though the unemployment rate ticked up in March to 5 percent, the amount of slack in the labor market still appears to be diminishing. Both the share of the population that is employed and the labor force participation rate have risen a bit over the past several months, with the employment-to-population ratio now at its highest level since the end of the recession. However, measures of aggregate wage growth have remained quite subdued, which suggests there is still some slack in the labor market. An important question is how to reconcile these cross-currents. I continue to anticipate that consumption and housing activity will expand at a moderate pace this year. Continued job and wage gains, combined with still-low energy prices, should sustain real disposable income growth and support consumer spending. The housing market should remain on a solid trajectory, supported by rising employment and low mortgage rates. In contrast to previous years, fiscal policy should also provide a moderate stimulus this year. I believe that these positive factors will be sufficient to offset weakness in other areas, such as net exports and fixed business investment that will continue to be adversely impacted by the still-strong dollar, weak foreign growth, and low energy and commodity prices. Putting this all together, I expect real GDP growth of about 2 percent in 2016, slightly below the average pace of growth in this expansion, but a bit above my estimate of the potential growth of the U.S. economy. If this materializes, then we should see some further reduction in the unemployment rate to around 4¾ percent—my estimate of the rate that I view as consistent with stable inflation over the long term. Turning to the outlook for inflation, on a year-over-year basis, both headline and core inflation have recently risen above the low levels that prevailed through most of 2015. Nevertheless, inflation still remains below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent objective. As the FOMC noted in its March statement, this continued low inflation is partly due to declines in energy prices and non-energy import prices. Although energy prices have stopped falling and the dollar has stopped appreciating, earlier movements in these factors still appear to be weighing on inflation. A concern with this long period of low inflation is that it has the potential to reduce inflation expectations, which, in turn, would tend to continue to hold down inflation. As past experience shows, it is difficult to push inflation back up to the central bank’s objective if inflation expectations fall meaningfully below that objective. Japan’s experience is cautionary in this regard. Recent evidence on inflation expectations suggests some firming, but there is still cause for concern. Although both measures of longer-term inflation compensation based on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities as well as some survey measures of inflation expectations have risen modestly since mid-February, the levels of many of these measures remain quite low. Now, as I have noted, the low level of market-based inflation compensation probably reflects factors besides inflation expectations, in particular lower term premiums. Still, it would be prudent to consider the possibility that longer-term inflation expectations of market participants may have declined somewhat. Even after a rise in its most recent reading, the median of the three-year inflation expectations from the New York Fed’s Survey of Consumer Expectations remains near its lowest reading over its short history. Renewed declines in survey measures would be worrisome. However, at this point, my conclusion is that inflation expectations have not become unanchored. In sum, I anticipate that the combination of decreasing resource slack and anchored longer-term inflation expectations will help push inflation up to our 2 percent objective over the medium term. The recent rise in inflation and in measures of inflation expectations have increased my confidence around this outlook compared to earlier in the year, but it is still possible that the return of inflation to our objective could take longer than I anticipate. The forecast that I have just described is my best assessment of how the U.S. economy will evolve this year. As always, there is uncertainty and risk relative to this forecast, which also needs to be taken into consideration in assessing the implications of the outlook for monetary policy. I see the uncertainties around my forecast to be somewhat greater than usual. This assessment reflects the divergent economic signals I highlighted earlier. In addition, the factors behind the financial turbulence we saw earlier this year do not yet appear to be resolved fully. Although the downside risks have diminished since earlier in the year, I still judge the balance of risks to my inflation and growth outlooks to be tilted slightly to the downside. The low levels of energy and commodity prices may signal more persistent disinflationary pressures than I currently anticipate, while renewed tightening of financial market conditions could have a greater negative impact on the U.S. economy. Also, there is significant uncertainty about economic growth prospects abroad and how this will affect the U.S. economic outlook. I continue to monitor global economic and financial market developments closely to assess their implications for the outlook. Given my outlook and risk assessment, I judge that a cautious and gradual approach to policy normalization is appropriate. Moreover, caution is also called for because of our limited ability to reduce the policy rate to respond to adverse developments, recognizing that we could also use forward guidance and balance sheet policies to provide additional accommodation if that proved warranted. Of course, the trajectory of short-term interest rates and the timing of future monetary policy adjustments will continue to be informed by the incoming data—both economic and financial—and how that data influences the outlook. The Problem of Long-Term Unemployment Before turning to the outlook for the local economy, I would like to spend a few minutes talking about the problem of long-term unemployment. The Great Recession was very severe, resulting in a large decline in output and damage to the labor market. From peak to trough, non-farm payroll employment declined by 8.7 million. The unemployment rate peaked at 10 percent. At the same time, the average duration of unemployment increased significantly. The number of individuals classified as long-term unemployed—that is, those who were unemployed for at least 27 weeks—peaked in December 2010 at 6.4 million, an increase of 5.3 million from the cyclical low in May 2007. Long-term unemployment as a fraction of total unemployment increased from 16.7 percent to 44.8 percent. The hardships of prolonged unemployment touched many families around the country and this is tragic. The very accommodative monetary policy that we implemented in response was aimed at helping to heal the labor market and promote price stability. Slowly, the economy began to respond and to recover. In October 2014, the FOMC announced the end of its latest asset purchase program citing that “there has been substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market since the inception of its current asset purchase program.” In March 2015, the FOMC set out conditions for the decision to begin to normalize monetary policy, stating “The Committee anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to its 2 percent objective over the medium term.” The FOMC judged at its December 2015 meeting that those conditions had been met. The improvement that we have seen in the labor market is very welcome. It took until May 2014 for the labor market to recover the jobs lost in the recession, but now there are 5.3 million jobs beyond the prior cyclical peak. The unemployment rate has declined to 5.0 percent. With this improvement, the number of long-term unemployed has been reduced to 2.2 million. Despite these gains, it is important to emphasize that more needs to be done to improve the labor market. The current number of long-term unemployed is still higher than the prior cyclical peak in June 2003, and is more than a million above the prior cyclical low in October 2006. Further progress on transitioning these unemployed workers back into jobs requires sustained effort on many fronts. Essential to this effort are programs such as the Platform to Employment developed by The WorkPlace. I am looking forward to my visit there later today to hear more about this program. The Platform to Employment program has been replicated in nearly 20 communities across the country from Newark to San Diego. Helping the long-term unemployed regain employment needs to be a priority for all of us. The ongoing challenge in reducing the number of long-term unemployed is also a reminder of the importance of financial stability and sustainable economic growth. Recessions can quickly undo years’ worth of hard-earned progress in the labor market. Making the financial system and the economy more resilient so we can avoid such deep downturns in the future is a responsibility that I take very seriously. Local Economic Outlook Turning now to the region, while Fairfield County’s economy has recovered from the Great Recession, its job growth has lagged behind both New York City and the nation. Only recently has employment approached its pre-recession levels, and it is still well shy of where it was back in 2000. Other barometers of the Fairfield County economy, such as home prices, also indicate a slow recovery from the recession. There are still a sizable number of properties that are either in foreclosure or up for foreclosure sale, which has weighed down the local housing market. Yet, Fairfield County has not been the only place in the metro region to see a sluggish recovery—notably, both northern New Jersey and the Mid-Hudson Valley have yet to see employment return to their pre-recession peaks. This picture is in contrast with New York City’s economic performance, which has been exceptionally strong throughout this expansion, and has been a driver of growth for the whole tri-state region. Why is New York City seeing so much stronger job growth than Fairfield County? After all, it wasn’t so long ago that Stamford was attracting finance-sector jobs away from Manhattan. The answer lies in a mix of cyclical and secular trends. On the cyclical side, while finance employment has been sluggish in both New York City and Fairfield County, New York City is benefiting from strong employment gains in technology, construction, retailing and advertising—sectors that are not contributing to the same degree in Fairfield County. In addition, Stamford has had to deal with the relocations of UBS and RBS, while Fairfield faces the prospective relocation of GE. One potential long-term trend that is likely affecting the region is a renewed urbanization: that is, a gradual but broad-based shift of preferences to urban living, especially for younger generations. Throughout the second half of the 20th century, we saw a steady and widespread migration from cities to suburbs. More recently, this suburbanization trend seems to have halted; and there are signs that cities, especially major cities, have been gaining relative to their suburbs. It’s too early to say if this is the start of a secular trend, and the implications for Fairfield County are unclear. However, Stamford and Bridgeport stand to benefit from a shift in preferences toward more urban living, given their high population densities and strong transit links to New York City. Even now, while Fairfield County may have lagged in job growth, population growth has remained quite sturdy—not only across the county, but here in Bridgeport as well. In fact, Bridgeport’s population has grown by about 6 percent since 2000—its first sustained increase since the 1940s —while Stamford’s has grown by almost 10 percent. Fairfield County can leverage its proximity to the New York City job market. While most residents of Fairfield County rely on job opportunities locally, many residents commute to jobs in Manhattan. So the strength in New York City’s economy should be of significant help to Fairfield County. Over the past year, New York City’s economy has, on average, added more than twice as many jobs each month as the total expected job losses from the relocations of GE, UBS and RBS. While a majority of these jobs may not have been in high-paying-industry sectors, some of them were—especially in technology-related industries. So, as long as New York City keeps adding jobs at such a brisk pace, Fairfield County will benefit. In addition, research indicates that a strong central city is critical for the well-being of its suburbs, meaning that a healthy and growing New York City economy is critically important to Fairfield County. What else can the region do to foster economic growth going forward? It certainly helps for cities like Bridgeport and Stamford to be attractive locations for businesses to locate and grow. It is also important to focus on quality of life issues that make people want to live here—like good schools and low crime, and also amenities ranging from nice parks to good restaurants. Bridgeport has clearly been making progress in this regard, both along the waterfront at Steelpointe Harbor and along Main Street. With New York City’s large and booming economy nearby, and Metro North providing a convenient mass transit link, anything that makes people more inclined to live here—and perhaps even set up shop here—is bound to boost the local economy. And finally, one of the most important ingredients for a healthy urban economy is a well-trained and motivated work force. It cannot be overstated how important it is to help provide residents with the skills and tools they need to be productive and successful, so that they can realize their full potential. College Graduates Finding Good Jobs I would like to close with a message for the students in attendance today, especially those of you who will be graduating soon. If you started college four or five years ago, you may have heard about the difficult time that graduates have had finding good jobs, perhaps even making you wonder about the value of obtaining a college degree. Indeed, in the years following the Great Recession, unemployment and underemployment among recent college graduates reached highs not seen in decades. So, it wouldn’t be surprising if many of you are concerned about your ability to find a good job after graduation. I want to make two points that should temper these concerns. First, it is not unusual for college graduates to take some time to find the right job when they transition from school to the working world. In good economic times, as well as in bad times, there is often an adjustment period as newly-minted graduates search for a job that best fits their skills and interests. Second, as the job market has continued to strengthen through the expansion, it has gotten easier for those graduating from college to find a good job. 2 While job opportunities for those with a college degree were flat between 2011 and early 2014, demand for college graduates has been on the rise for about two years now. As a result, for the first time during this recovery, both unemployment and underemployment among recent college graduates has generally been falling. This means that, not only has it become easier to find a job upon graduation, but more college graduates are taking jobs that better utilize their degrees. In addition, starting salaries for recent college graduates have been increasing for the past couple of years, reflecting the growing demand for their skills in a tighter job market. To conclude, while there are economic challenges facing both the nation and the region, I am optimistic that we will continue to make progress on both fronts over the next few years. Achieving our dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment and price stability will help those who will graduate soon to achieve their own aspirations. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take some questions. 1 Jaison Abel, Jason Bram, Tony Davis, Richard Deitz, Jonathan McCarthy and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 We have been tracking these developments using data our economists have developed to help us better understand the job prospects facing recent college graduates. These data are available on our website and are updated regularly. See The Labor Market for Recent College Graduates . By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

. More research is necessary to inform future policy choices in this critical area. References Angrist, Joshua, Sarah Cohodes, Susan Dynarski, Parag Pathak and Christopher Walters. 2016. “Stand and Deliver: Effects of Boston’s Charter High Schools on College Preparation, Entry, and Choice,” Journal of Labor Economics , 34(2): 275-318. Aslund, Olof, Per-Anders Edin, Peter Fredriksson and Hans Gronqvist. 2011. “Peers, Neighborhoods, and Student Achievement: Evidence From a Placement Policy,” American Economic Journal Applied Economics , 3(2): 67-95. Baum-Snow, Nathaniel. 2007. “Did Highways Cause Suburbanization?” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 122(2): 775-805. Bayer, Patrick, Steven L. Ross and Giorgio Topa. 2008. “Place of Work and Place of Residence: Informal Hiring Networks and Labor Market Outcomes,” Journal of Political Economy , 116(6): 1150-1196. Chakrabarti, Rajashri and Joydeep Roy. 2015. "Housing Markets and Residential Segregation: Impacts of the Michigan School Finance Reform on Inter- and Intra-district Sorting," Journal of Public Economics , 122: 110-132. Chakrabarti, Rajashri. 2008."Can Increasing Private School Participation and Monetary Loss in a Voucher Program Affect Public School Performance? Evidence from Milwaukee," Journal of Public Economics , 92(5-6), 1371-1393. Chakrabarti, Rajashri. 2013. "Impact of Voucher Design on Public School Performance: Evidence from Florida and Milwaukee Voucher Programs," B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy: Contributions , 14(1): 349-394. Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez and Nicholas Turner. 2014. “Is the United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility,” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings , 104(5): 141-147. Chetty, Raj and Nathaniel Hendren. 2015. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility: Childhood Exposure Effects and County-Level Estimates,” Harvard University and NBER. Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline and Emmanuel Saez. 2014. “Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 129(4): 1553-1623. Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2015. “The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment,” Harvard University and NBER. Deming, David. 2009. “Early Childhood Intervention and Life-Cycle Skill Development: Evidence from Head Start,” American Economic Journal Applied Economics , 1:3, 111-134. Deming, David. 2011. “Better Schools, Less Crime?” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 126(4): 2063-2215. Deming, David, Justine Hastings, Thomas Kane and Douglas Staiger. 2011. “School Choice, School Quality and Postsecondary Attainment,” NBER Working paper No. 17438. Dobbie, Will and Roland Fryer. 2011. Are High-Quality Schools Enough to Increase Achievement Among the Poor? Evidence from the Harlem Children’s Zone,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics , 3(3): 158-187. Dobbie, Will and Roland Fryer. 2015."The Medium-Term Impacts of High-Achieving Charter Schools,” Journal of Political Economy , 123(5): 985-1037. Heckman, James J. 2006. “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged Children,” Science 312, 1900. Hellerstein, Judith K., Melissa McInerney and David Neumark. 2011. “Neighbors and Co-Workers: The Importance of Residential Labor Market Networks,” Journal of Labor Economics , 29(4): 659-695. Hoxby, Caroline. 2003. School Choice and School Productivity (Or, Could School Choice be the Tide that Lifts all Boats?)," The Economics of School Choice, University of Chicago Press, Chicago. Jackson, Kenneth T. Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States . Oxford University Press, 1987. Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez. 2003. “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913– 1998,” Quarterly Journal of Economics , 118 (1): 1–41. Schmutte, Ian M. 2015. “Job Referral Networks and the Determination of Earnings in Local Labor Markets,” Journal of Labor Economics , 33(1): 1-32. 1 Rajashri Chakrabarti, Andrew Haughwout, Giorgio Topa, Joseph Tracy and Wilbert van der Klaauw assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 Piketty and Saez (2003) and Chetty, et al. (2014). 3 Chetty, et al. (2014). 4 Chetty and Hendren (2015), Chetty, et al. (2014). 5 Measured by income-adjusted test scores, drop-out rates, average class size and per-pupil spending. 6 Chakrabarti and Roy (2015). 7 Hoxby (2003), Chakrabarti (2008) and Chakrabarti (2013). 8 Dobbie and Fryer (2011), Dobbie and Fryer (2015), Angrist, et al. (2016). 9 Heckman (2006) 10 Deming (2009). 11 See Bayer et al. (2008), Schmutte (2015), Hellerstein et al. (2011), Aslund et al. (2011). 12 Chetty et al. (2015) 13 See Baum-Snow (2007) and Jackson (1987). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Opening Remarks at the Transatlantic Economy: Convergence or Divergence Conference - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks at the Transatlantic Economy: Convergence or Divergence Conference April 18, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Transatlantic Economy: Convergence or Divergence Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery It is my pleasure to welcome you to today’s conference. Over the past decade, the New York Fed has been working together with the European Commission and the Centre for Economic Policy Research in sponsoring a number of conferences on interdependencies and policy challenges on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean. Today, as in the past, we have a great program with many distinguished speakers from academia, and the private and public sectors. In particular, I would highlight the keynote speech following lunch by Pierre Moscovici, European Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs, Taxation and Customs. As the two largest economies in the world, the United States and the European Union have a shared stake in the vitality of the global economy. Without growth in both our regions, the global economy will not prosper and we will not be able to provide the conditions to enable our citizens to fulfill their aspirations. Both the United States and Europe suffered large social and economic costs from the financial crisis and the deep recession that followed. We continue to take steps to minimize the risks that we will ever find ourselves in that situation again. In many respects, the United States and Europe face similar challenges and have similar goals. Today I want to focus on some of the challenges. On the regulatory side, there is considerable good news. In particular, substantial progress has been made in strengthening the global banking system. Capital and liquidity standards for internationally active banks have been raised significantly. This should reduce the risk of failure for these banks. Also, the financial system is being made more resilient and robust. For example, the global set of principles for financial market infrastructures has been updated and strengthened. Moreover, some steps have been taken to better deal with the failure of systemically important financial firms on a cross-border basis. Key attributes for resolution regimes have been promulgated by the Financial Stability Board. Efforts are underway to improve how we can work together in a coordinated way on a global basis. But more needs to be done. The impediments to an orderly cross-border resolution still need to be fully identified and dismantled. This is necessary to solve the so-called “too big to fail” problem. Also, cross-border regulatory cooperation needs to be further enhanced. This includes greater exchange of confidential supervisory information so that national regulators can be fully informed about the conditions of the banks that operate within their borders. It also requires efforts to ensure a level playing field across jurisdictions so that the focus is on promoting safety and soundness rather than on trying to protect, favor, or shield national champions. On the macroeconomic side, the news for the United States is mostly favorable. Labor market conditions have significantly improved over the past few years and unemployment is now around 5 percent. The household sector is much less leveraged, the housing sector is recovering, the banking system is much healthier, and the corporate sector is highly profitable, even as business fixed investment spending remains quite weak. Although inflation has fallen short of our objective, I am confident that inflation will return to our 2 percent objective over the next few years as the labor market tightens further and the transitory factors that have held inflation down dissipate. After years at the effective lower bound for short-term interest rates, economic conditions have finally warranted the start of U.S. monetary policy normalization. But these monetary policy adjustments are likely to be gradual and cautious, as we continue to face significant uncertainties and the headwinds to growth from the financial crisis have not fully abated. For Europe, the economic outlook has started to improve. The European Union is experiencing a cyclical recovery and the unemployment rate has been steadily declining over the past two years. The end of fiscal tightening appears to be a key factor in this recovery. Risks of low inflation, however, remain a concern for the European Central Bank and have motivated their aggressive use of unconventional monetary policy instruments. Today’s conference touches on a range of interesting questions concerning both regions: Are there policy strategies that can ensure that the global economy will escape from this very long period of very low inflation and very low real interest rates? Is there scope for fiscal policy to take on some of the burden of ending this period of persistently low inflation and low interest rates? Are we now in a period of secular stagnation or are we in the midst of a deleveraging process that will gradually dissipate? Why has investment spending failed to respond to the low level of interest rates? What do we believe are the factors underlying the recent slowdown in productivity growth globally? Is a banking union with a common deposit guarantee scheme achievable in Europe? Are there opportunities for further regulatory and supervisory convergence between the United States and Europe? I would like to thank the participants for addressing these and other questions during today’s three panels, and I look forward to insightful discussion over the course of the day. It is now my pleasure to introduce the European Union Ambassador to the United States, His Excellency David O’Sullivan. The ambassador is extraordinarily well-versed to speak on the issues of interdependence and the policy challenges we face. Welcome, Ambassador O’ Sullivan. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 1, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 2016 Financial Markets Conference, Fernandina Beach, Florida As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to participate in the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s 21st Annual Financial Markets Conference. This year’s topic, focusing on the connection between liquidity and financial stability, is an excellent one. As the first speaker, I thought it would be useful to lay out what I see as some of the key issues. I may raise more questions than provide answers, but, hopefully, my remarks will help to stimulate our discussion and debate over the next two days. As I see it, in the context of our financial system there are two distinct types of liquidity. The first is what is typically referred to as market liquidity. I would define market liquidity as the cost—both in expense and time—of buying or selling an asset for cash. Market liquidity reflects a number of factors, including any direct transaction expense, such as brokerage costs; the price the transaction is executed at relative to the midpoint of the bid-ask spread; how much, if at all, the transaction moves the market price; and the immediacy or speediness with which the transaction can be completed. With respect to market liquidity, there are a number of important open questions. Has market liquidity declined for some asset classes? If so, what are the causes? In particular, has the increase in the regulatory requirements imposed on systemically-important securities dealers adversely impacted market liquidity? If this is the case, are there adjustments that could be made that might improve market liquidity without impairing financial stability? The second important type of liquidity is funding liquidity. By funding liquidity, I mean the ability of a financial entity to raise cash by borrowing on either an unsecured or a secured basis. Although market and funding liquidity are often treated as distinct, they can be closely related. This is especially the case during a financial crisis. If funding liquidity declines because of market stress, for example, this may cause intermediaries to become less willing to provide market liquidity. Declines in market liquidity, in turn, may further impair funding liquidity, creating a negative feedback dynamic. Capital and liquidity requirements play a role in preventing such a self-reinforcing negative dynamic. The central bank may also have an important role to play as the lender-of-last-resort. When and how the central bank intervenes―and what the appropriate preconditions should be to maintain market discipline and mitigate moral hazard―are important open questions. As always what I have to say today represents my own views and not necessarily the views of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Turning first to the issue of market liquidity, the evidence that market liquidity has diminished is mixed. Some market liquidity metrics have not changed much in recent years. For the U.S. Treasury market, quoted bid-ask spreads in the inter-dealer market have remained stable since 2010 at their pre-crisis levels ( Exhibit 1 ). And, order book depth, while lower now than in 2012 and 2013, does not appear low by historical standards ( Exhibit 2 ). 2 For the corporate bond market, some evidence even suggests improving market liquidity. For example, excluding the financial crisis period, the realized bid-ask spread calculated from TRACE data has been trending down since the early 2000s ( Exhibit 3 ). 3 But these metrics don’t tell the whole story. In particular, we have significant data gaps that make it difficult to comprehensively measure market liquidity. For example, in the U.S. Treasury market we have poor visibility into dealer-to-customer transactions. In this market segment, business is conducted bilaterally on an over-the-counter (OTC) basis—typically by phone or through electronic trading platforms like Tradeweb and Bloomberg that are based on the traditional request-for-quote model. The U.S. Treasury has issued a detailed request for information seeking public comment on the many factors that are affecting the structure and liquidity of the U.S. Treasury market, and is seeking comments on the relevant data gaps. 4 This is an important step that will help clarify what further work is needed in this area. Even in the corporate bond market where we have detailed TRACE transaction data, this still tells an incomplete story. TRACE data show what trades have taken place, not what trades have potentially been foregone because of any possible diminution of market liquidity. Gaining a better understanding of this phenomenon is being actively researched by my staff. In contrast to the market liquidity metrics such as bid-ask spreads, indirect evidence on market liquidity suggests that there has been a decline. Asset managers report that large blocks of securities are now harder to buy and sell without generating significant movements in prices. Also, average trade sizes have decreased ( Exhibit 4 ) and there is evidence of a growing bifurcation in the corporate bond market, with greater activity and liquidity in those bonds that were issued more recently, larger in size or brought to market by larger issuers. Also, capital and liquidity requirements for the largest securities dealers—which have been raised significantly since the financial crisis—might have adversely impacted market liquidity. These regulatory changes likely have affected the profitability of dealer intermediation activities and consequently the provision of market liquidity. For the Treasury market, the most important change in regulatory requirements appears to be the supplementary leverage ratio (SLR). The SLR limits the leverage of dealer balance sheets. In the SLR, all assets are treated the same in terms of required regulatory capital. Consequently, the SLR is much tougher on low-risk assets as compared to the risk-based capital measures that it complements. This makes the economics of repo-financing much less attractive. Not surprisingly, we observe significant declines in the quantity of repo financing by dealers ( Exhibit 5 ). For the corporate bond market, the most relevant regulatory changes appear to be the increase in the Basel risk-weighted capital ratio, the Comprehensive Capital and Analysis Review (CCAR) stress tests and the Volcker Rule—which prohibits proprietary trading for a number of asset classes such as corporate bonds, albeit not U.S. Treasuries. We do observe significant declines in recent years in securities dealers’ holdings of corporate bonds ( Exhibit 6 ). It would be surprising if these declines in repo and corporate bond holdings did not have some consequence for market liquidity. However, we do not observe marked declines in dealer holdings of Treasuries, even as overall dealer assets have stagnated ( Exhibit 7 ). The stagnation in dealer assets might indicate that inventory risk has shifted from dealers to asset managers and other buy-side participants, reflecting a shift in market-making from a “principal” to an “agency” model. While increases in regulatory requirements have undoubtedly played a role, I think that other non-regulatory factors are also important. Liquidity provision is affected by changes in market structure, how trades are executed, and by competition from those operating outside of the regulatory boundaries that have been established for systemically-important financial institutions. Similarly, the demand for liquidity is also evolving with the growth of large asset managers, mutual funds, exchange traded funds (ETFs) and principal trading firms (PTFs)—which are sometimes referred to as high-frequency trading firms. In the U.S. Treasury market, for example, high-frequency trading firms have seized a large proportion of the inter-dealer market in recent years ( Exhibit 8 ). In the credit market, a rapidly rising share of corporate bonds outstanding is now held by mutual funds ( Exhibit 9 ). Because mutual funds are not natural providers of intraday liquidity, 5 their rapid growth may have contributed to the decline in secondary market trading activity. Fixed-income market liquidity may also be declining for cyclical reasons. Dealer inventories have historically been sensitive to changes in the size of credit risk-premia and term-premia ( Exhibit 10 ). Finally, the effects of unconventional monetary policy on rate expectations and corporate bond issuance may also be affecting market liquidity. This is an area in need of further study. To reiterate, the evidence that market liquidity has diminished is mixed. But even if one agrees with the position that market liquidity has diminished, concluding that tougher regulatory requirements are the most important factor would be premature at this stage. The available evidence and common sense suggest that the changes in the regulatory regime are likely important, but we need to do considerably more work before we reach a definitive conclusion on their relative contribution. Furthermore, even if additional evidence supported the conclusion that market liquidity has declined due to the increase in the regulatory burden on the major securities firms, this decline would still need to be weighed against the benefits of a more resilient and robust financial system. During the last cycle, market liquidity was plentiful prior to the financial crisis. But, as the financial system became stressed and several large systemic firms teetered on the brink of failure, market liquidity quickly dried up. A somewhat higher cost for the provision of market liquidity during the more benign stages of a financial cycle might be worthwhile if it were accompanied by less volatility and stress when the cycle inevitably turned down. In fact, even if market liquidity costs are now going to be higher on average, this might be a small price to pay for a much more stable financial sector. Also, it is important to recognize that market liquidity conditions a few years from now may be very different from the situation today. If the cost of providing liquidity services has increased, this creates strong incentives for innovators to find better ways to match buyers and sellers. In my view, this innovative response is already underway. For example, in both the Treasury and corporate bond markets, firms are being established to more efficiently match buyers and sellers of less liquid bonds in order to reduce search costs and the need to carry inventory. Furthermore, execution algorithms have been developed that divide large trades into smaller sizes, thus reducing the costs of moving large blocks of securities. Market liquidity conditions could very well improve over time as innovation occurs in response to this new regime. Let me now turn to the topic of funding liquidity. I think this issue deserves as much attention as market liquidity. After all, during the financial crisis the demise of several major financial institutions resulted from their inability to finance their long-dated illiquid assets. The deterioration in funding liquidity also increased the degree of systemic stress as firms were forced to sell assets, which depressed their prices, undermining the solvency of firms throughout the financial system. As I noted earlier, while funding liquidity can be considered as its own distinct subject, it does have a direct link back to market liquidity. If firms that trade and invest in securities cannot obtain funding liquidity, this will likely lead to less transactions volume, thinner markets and less overall market liquidity. It is also likely to lead to less pricing efficiency resulting in wider and more persistent disparities in the prices of similar assets. Without access to funding, leveraged players, such as hedge funds, will find it more difficult to react to transient dislocations in market prices by engaging in arbitrage—that is, buying the cheaper and selling the more expensive asset. Without a reliable source of short-term funding, market functioning can become impaired, which can further disrupt funding and market liquidity. This can be seen by looking at the relationship between the volume of dealer-funded repo backed by U.S. Treasury securities versus the size of Treasury bid-ask spreads ( Exhibit 11 ). 6 During times of financial crisis—such as in 2008—sharp deleveraging of dealers’ repo books coincides with an increase in Treasury bid-ask spreads. However, during non-crisis periods, this correlation is quite low. This relationship between funding and market liquidity is also evident when we examine the relationship between the dispersion of Treasury yields relative to a fitted Treasury yield curve and Treasury bid-ask spreads ( Exhibit 12 ). Large dispersions of Treasury yields from what is implied by a fitted yield curve may indicate funding liquidity strains, as market participants find it more difficult to arbitrage relative price distortions. 7 Again, we see a strong correlation between the sizes of the yield curve errors and of bid-ask spreads during a financial crisis, but not during non-crisis periods. The drop in the availability of dealer-funded repo financing also appears to have led to less efficient arbitrage between closely related asset pairs, such as on-the-run and off-the run Treasuries, corporate bonds and credit default swaps, and Treasuries versus interest rate swaps. The price differences or yield spreads between the more capital intensive and less capital intensive assets have widened. For example, we can see this in the difference between the fixed-rate paid on a 10-year interest rate swap and the secondary market yield on a 10-year Treasury note ( Exhibit 13 ). Whereas historically this spread has been positive—reflecting the fact that an interest rate swap has more credit risk than a Treasury security—the spread has been negative since September 2015. Market participants suggest that this shift has occurred because the higher capital requirements have made it unattractive for dealers to arbitrage away this dislocation. Similarly, dealers apparently are unwilling to provide the funding and the balance sheet capacity necessary for their leveraged clients to arbitrage away this dislocation. The degree to which this shift in the yield spread between Treasury and interest rate swap yields is due to the differential capital requirements imposed on cash versus derivative instruments warrants more investigation. Just as market and funding liquidity are interlinked, so are funding liquidity and capital requirements. All else equal, stronger capital requirements reduce firms’ vulnerability to runs. This suggests that funding liquidity risk can be addressed in many different ways. First, capital requirements can be bolstered to reduce the risk that a firm will become insolvent in particularly bad states of the world. Second, improved reporting and transparency can reduce the degree of uncertainty about whether a firm is solvent, thus reducing the risk that investors might wrongly perceive that a firm is insolvent, when, in fact, it still has adequate capital. Third, liquidity requirements can be increased to reduce the risk that the firm will have to engage in a fire sale of assets that might deplete its capital. Also, a liquidity buffer gives the firm’s management time to respond to bad events without having to resort immediately to selling assets. Fourth, a lender-of-last-resort can provide a liquidity backstop that makes funding liquidity more resilient. Consider the case when a counterparty is uncertain about how other potential lenders view a firm’s solvency. If there is no lender-of-last-resort backstop, this may cause firms to be unwilling to lend, not because they perceive the counterparty as insolvent, but, instead, because they are worried about what others think. That is, I may be unwilling to lend to you, not because I perceive you as insolvent, but because I am uncertain about how others view your solvency. If I do lend and others don’t share my view, will I be able to get my money back? With a lender-of-last-resort added to the picture, I no longer need to know what others think. As long as the lender-of-last-resort is available, if I am correct in my assessment that the firm is solvent, then I can be assured that I will be paid back. This issue was particularly relevant during the financial crisis when counterparties even pulled back from firms that were widely viewed as solvent. The Federal Reserve stepped in and created funding backstops for a wide array of assets, such as commercial paper and asset-backed securities. This bolstered the confidence of counterparties in one another and restored market and funding liquidity. Of course, this type of lending is only feasible to an institution that is deemed to be solvent with sufficient collateral available to pledge to the lender-of-last-resort so that it can safely secure its loan. In practice, all of these methods are in place to address funding liquidity risk. Capital requirements have been increased; there is much better reporting about how firms will do under significant stress tests; liquidity requirements—such as the liquidity coverage ratio—provide a buffer that allows management more time to respond to problems; and, if necessary, the central bank can act as the lender-of-last-resort to support market confidence and funding liquidity. So, should more be done to support funding liquidity? In my view, an important issue is to identify and address gaps in the lender-of-last-resort function. In the U.S., some significant gaps remain. For example, the Federal Reserve has a very limited ability to provide funding to a securities firm, even on a fully collateralized basis. The Discount Window is only available to depository institutions, and Section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act severely constrains the ability of a depository institution to pass Discount Window funding along to its securities affiliate. Although the Federal Reserve may be able lend to a securities affiliate under its emergency lending authority under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, this is not a standing facility—it can only be established if “unusual and exigent” circumstances exist and the program or facility must have broad-based eligibility, among other requirements. 8 In the U.S., given the restrictions on central bank lending, if a securities firm were to lose access to funding the remaining options available would be finding a means of replenishing the firm’s capital, selling assets, or selling all or part of the securities firm’s operations. While this might be manageable in the case of a firm-specific idiosyncratic shock, it might prove more difficult if a common shock was broadly hitting the securities industry. In this circumstance, the failure of one firm could increase the stress on other firms that were facing similar difficulties. If all of the requirements for Section 13(3) are met, the central bank could provide liquidity support. However, since this is not a certainty, it is worth considering possible alternatives. Now that all major securities firms in the U.S. are part of bank holding companies and are subject to enhanced prudential standards as well as capital and liquidity stress tests, providing these firms with access to the Discount Window might be worth exploring. To me, this is a more reasonable proposition now than it was prior to the crisis when the major dealers weren’t subject to those safeguards. More generally, I am happy to report that the Committee on the Global Financial System—one of the Bank for International Settlements’ central bank groups—is engaged in a project to determine what lender-of-last-resort gaps currently exist, focusing, in particular, on those that may create vulnerability in terms of financial stability. One area that I anticipate will receive considerable attention is whether there are any gaps with respect to the activities of globally systemic firms that operate on a cross-border basis. Another issue that still needs greater attention is the appropriate role for the home- versus host-country supervisor. The regulatory and supervisory responses for large, systemically-important firms that operate on a cross-border basis need to be closely coordinated, especially during times of stress. In particular, expectations about who will be the lender-of-last-resort need to be well understood in both the home and host countries. We have made considerable progress in recent years in enhancing the safety and soundness of the U.S. financial system. But there is more that we need to do. In particular, we need to study and understand how market liquidity and funding liquidity conditions are changing and what factors are driving that evolution. Conferences like this one go a long way in that regard. They serve as an important forum for discussing ideas and improving our knowledge and understanding. This will provide a solid foundation for any policy actions. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Tobias Adrian, Nina Boyarchenko, Michael Fleming, Catherine Kung, Ernst Schaumburg, Joseph Tracy, Erik Vogt and Nathaniel Wuerffel assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See Adrian, Fleming, Stackman, Vogt (2015) Has U.S. Treasury Market Liquidity Deteriorated? , Liberty Street Economics Blog , August 17, for further analysis of Treasury market liquidity. 3 See Adrian, Fleming, Vogt, Wojtowicz (2016) Corporate Bond Market Liquidity Redux: More Price-Based Evidence , Liberty Street Economics Blog , February 9, for further analysis of corporate bond market liquidity. 4 See U.S. Department of Treasury, Notice Seeking Public Comment on the Evolution of the Treasury Market Structure, January 2016. 5 Mizrach, B. (2015). Analysis of Corporate Bond Liquidity. FINRA Office of the Chief Economist. 6 Brunnermeier and Pedersen (2009) “Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity” Review of Financial Studies 22(6) pp. 2201-2238 provide a theory that features strong correlation between market and funding liquidity during crises. 7 Hu, Pan, Wang (2013) “Noise as Information for Illiquidity” Journal of Finance 68(6), pp.2341-2382 provide further evidence on the relationship between yield curve fitting errors and alternative funding liquidity metrics. 8 A program or facility has broad-based eligibility only if it is designed to provide liquidity to an identifiable market or sector of the financial system. The program or facility will not be considered to have a broad-based eligibility if fewer than five persons or entities would be eligible to participate, or if it is designed to assist a company avoid bankruptcy, resolution or insolvency (including by removing assets from its balance sheet) or aid a failing financial company. See Regulation A, 12 CFR 201.4(d). In addition to the “unusual and exigent” circumstances and broad-based eligibility requirements, other conditions for making Section 13(3) emergency credit include obtaining the affirmative vote of a requisite number of Federal Reserve Governors and the prior approval of the U.S. Treasury Secretary, the emergency credit is not extended to an insolvent borrower, the lending Federal Reserve Bank is secured to its satisfaction, evidence is obtained regarding the unavailability of adequate credit accommodation from other banking institutions under prevailing circumstances to borrowers of the emergency credit, penalty interest rate is set for the emergency credit, and meeting disclosure/reporting requirements. See Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 USC 343) and Regulation A (12 CFR 201.4(d)). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Panel Remarks at the 7th High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Panel Remarks at the 7th High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System May 10, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the 7th High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System, Zürich, Switzerland As prepared for delivery It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to participate in this panel. To me, the question posed for discussion seems relatively straightforward: Will more reserve currencies strengthen the international monetary system? My answer can be summed up in one word: “yes.” I believe that a reserve currency—or at least an enduring and important one—has to have a number of demonstrated attributes. These include that the reserve currency country has a strong and credible institutional structure; that its policymakers follow a sustainable fiscal regime as well as a monetary policy that keeps inflation low and stable over time; and that the currency is readily convertible and serves as a stable store of value. These are good attributes for any country—reserve currency or not. The greater the number of countries that have such attributes, the more stable and sound the global financial system is likely to be. Also, such a regime is desirable because it provides an environment that should encourage international trade and an efficient allocation of resources, which, in turn should lift productivity and living standards. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own view and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Although a reserve currency can formally be defined as any currency that is part of a foreign country’s foreign exchange reserve holdings, I do not think this is what we have in mind when we talk about a reserve currency. While the status of being a reserve currency can be conferred, the stature of being a reserve currency must be earned. As I see it, a successful reserve currency needs to satisfy a number of conditions. First, the currency needs to be fully convertible—with no risk of restrictions that could limit the ability to convert such holdings into cash denominated in the investors’ domestic currency. Second, the reserve currency country needs to have deep, liquid and transparent capital markets so that the sovereign debt instruments and other high-quality debt obligations can be bought and sold at narrow bid-ask spreads and easily converted to and from cash. Third, the assets in the country must be governed by a well-understood, consistent and enforceable legal regime. This is to ensure that investors’ rights will be well protected, regardless of short-term political developments or changes in the governing regime. Fourth, the financial system in the country must be strong and stable to ensure that liquidity will be available even during times of stress. Fifth, the risk of default on the country’s sovereign debt must be viewed as negligible, to ensure both that the currency is a stable store of value and that continuous, deep liquid domestic markets will be available regardless of the economic circumstances. Sixth, the country must have a credible central bank that is insulated from political interference and committed to keeping inflation low and stable—a necessary condition for a reserve currency to be a reliable store of value. I think that the U.S. dollar satisfies these general criteria. That is why over 60 percent of foreign exchange reserve holdings are denominated in dollars—a share that has been quite stable in recent years. The dollar’s share has remained steady despite the presence of a number of currencies that broadly satisfy the attributes that I have just discussed. But should the U.S. be concerned if more countries satisfy the attributes needed to be successful reserve currencies? Would it be problematic for the United States if the U.S. dollar share of foreign exchange holdings slipped over time because of progress made elsewhere? I think the answer to both of these questions is “no.” It would seem positive to me if a decline in the U.S. market share reflected the following developments: a greater number of stable and effective central banks and fiscal authorities, more investors who are reassured about countries’ institutional arrangements and financial stability, and deeper and more liquid capital markets outside the United States. These attributes are a prerequisite for a vibrant international financial system and are supportive to global trade. A regime with many reserve currencies would imply a well-governed international economy. This should facilitate global investment, resulting in rising productivity growth and improving standards of living. In other words, I don’t see this as a zero-sum game. If other countries’ currencies emerge to gain stature as reserve currencies, it is not obvious to me that the United States loses. This is assuming, of course, that the emergence of alternatives is being driven by their progress, rather than by the U.S. doing a poorer job in satisfying the attributes that I discussed earlier. Having more countries achieve the stature of having a reserve currency may also be desirable for other reasons. First, with more reserve currencies available, portfolio diversification opportunities are enhanced. This is desirable because, all else equal, it would allow investors to move further out on the risk/return frontier. Second, more currencies are likely to be close substitutes, which could dampen currency volatility. With many viable reserve currencies available, no particular one would necessarily have to bear the bulk of any adjustment. The dollar’s dominant reserve currency status has sometimes been referred to as the United States’ “exorbitant privilege,” implying that the U.S. benefits extraordinarily from this privileged status. I’d argue that the situation is much more nuanced. Yes, this status does allow the U.S. to benefit from seigniorage. More than half of all U.S. currency outstanding is held abroad. But, there are also costs of being the dominant reserve currency. For example, this can lead to shifts in the valuation of the dollar that are due primarily to developments abroad that affect risk appetites and international capital flows. In such cases, the dollar’s valuation can be pushed to levels inconsistent with U.S. economic fundamentals. For the United States, I believe that the most important goal must be to keep our own house in order. If we do this, then I expect that the U.S. dollar will earn the right to remain the most important reserve currency in the world. The United States has a number of advantages in sustaining the dominant reserve currency status of the U.S. dollar. First, there is a first-mover advantage. As the leading reserve currency in the world, there is no strong incentive for countries to move to other currencies as long as the dollar continues to have the attributes I discussed earlier. The history of reserve currency usage is characterized by considerable inertia. The U.S. dollar emerged as the leading reserve currency quite a bit after it became the world’s largest economy. Typically, the loss of dominant reserve currency status requires either substantial economic decline or political instability that motivates foreign counterparties to shift to a new reserve currency. Second, the U.S. has the deepest and most liquid capital markets in the world. This is important in making U.S. Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities attractive holdings as part of countries’ foreign exchange reserve portfolios. Third, the U.S. has an independent central bank—the Federal Reserve—which has been successful in keeping inflation low and stable. As a result, the dollar has been a reliable store of value in recent years. Another point in the United States’ favor is the considerable steps taken to shore up areas of weakness revealed by the financial crisis. In particular, the safety and soundness of our financial system has been enhanced. Capital and liquidity requirements for U.S. banks have been raised significantly. Stress tests have been imposed to enhance the viability of large systemic institutions even in very adverse economic and financial environments. Reforms have been enacted to facilitate the recovery and resolution of troubled institutions. This includes living will requirements for the major systemically-important financial institutions, and the development of an improved resolution regime to ensure that institutions that do get into difficulty can be resolved without disrupting the stability of the financial system. In conclusion, I welcome other countries’ progress toward achieving the preconditions necessary for their currencies to attain the stature of a reserve currency. However, we should not act as if this is sufficient to achieve a well-functioning global financial system. In particular, the current regime is inefficient in a number of important ways. Countries have found it necessary to self-insure against the risk of large capital flow reversals. This has led to a very sharp rise in aggregate foreign exchange reserve holdings. This form of self-insurance is very expensive—especially when the return on the foreign exchange reserve portfolio is less than the cost of the domestic liabilities that fund these holdings. As I have said in the past, I encourage more work to examine whether there are other more efficient regimes that, for example, would economize on required foreign exchange reserve buffers. In this regard, I think expanding the capacity of the IMF’s resources and working to further de-stigmatize drawing on the IMF’s liquidity facilities could be worthwhile steps in this direction. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Linda Goldberg and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Opening Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the U.S. Economy in a Snapshot - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the U.S. Economy in a Snapshot May 19, 2016 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the U.S. Economy in a Snapshot, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Welcome to our Economic Press Briefing. Today we are going to introduce you to a data product that we have been making available to the public, U.S. Economy in a Snapshot . My role is to put this product in the broader context of the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) communication strategy about the economy and policy. My colleague Robert Rich will then walk you through the structure of the product and discuss excerpts from the May release. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Conventional U.S. monetary policy is conducted by targeting the level of the federal funds rate—an overnight interest rate on bank reserves. Few participants in our economy have any direct interaction with this interest rate. How, then, is controlling this interest rate such an important part of setting monetary policy and steering an 18 trillion dollar economy toward the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability? This is the remarkable aspect of monetary policy. Just as a pebble dropped into a lake disturbs the water not just at the point of impact but ripples outward far from the origin, changes in the federal funds rate influence the prices of financial assets more broadly and this, in turn, affects the broader economy. An important insight of modern monetary theory is that this transmission of monetary policy to the broader economy through its many channels works best when the central bank is transparent about its goals, policy strategy and approach to implementing its strategy. In this case, market participants and households both understand and can anticipate actions by the central bank. By doing so, the transmission channels of monetary policy are enhanced. This places considerable importance on effective central bank communication. Recognizing this, the FOMC has undertaken many initiatives over the years to improve its communications with the public. These include providing clarification in terms of the goals of monetary policy, discussions of the FOMC’s broad policy strategy, as well as FOMC participants’ ongoing explanations of their views on monetary policy. As part of this effort, I provide a comprehensive update on my outlook for the economy and monetary policy several times during the year. Once a year we publish our staff’s judgmental economic forecast. We have also provided in the Liberty Street Economics blog discussions of an internal staff model-based economic forecast. In addition, we now regularly release our real-time forecast of “current quarter” real GDP growth. All of these help the public to understand our assessment of economic conditions through the lenses of these different types of forecasts. When asked about the trajectory for the monetary policy stance, I always point out that it is data dependent. The FOMC calibrates the stance of monetary policy to best achieve our twin objectives of price stability and maximum sustainable employment, taking into account our forecast for how the economy is evolving. This forecast reflects the ongoing flow of the data. Data releases that are close to our expectations have little additional impact on the forecast, while data releases that deviate significantly from our expectations can lead to more significant revisions of the forecast. It is, therefore, important for market participants and households to be able to follow the data along with the FOMC and to understand how we are likely to interpret and react to incoming data. While market analysts readily have access to economic and financial data, this access is not widely available to everyone. To help fill this information gap, for the past year we have been making available on our website a monthly publication called U.S. Economy in a Snapshot . This publication contains a set of key data charts as well as commentary by our staff economists. The purpose is to provide interested readers easy access to clear and concise presentations of important economic information. The associated commentary provides some pertinent observations one might draw from the data. Our goal is to provide information that helps households and businesses follow the data along with the Fed. If people know more about how the economy is performing and how that is likely to influence our actions, this should make it easier for us to achieve our twin objectives. I will now turn it over to Rob to discuss the Snapshot in greater detail. 1 Jonathan McCarthy, Paolo Pesenti, Robert Rich and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
