The Complexity of Culture Reform in Finance - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech The Complexity of Culture Reform in Finance October 04, 2018 Kevin J. Stiroh , Executive Vice President Remarks at the 4th Annual Culture and Conduct Forum for the Financial Services Industry, London As prepared for delivery Good morning. Thank you for the kind introduction, and for the invitation to speak at today’s forum. 1 We are all here today to talk about conduct and culture in the financial services sector, so I’m confident that you will agree that we have moved beyond the questions about “if” this an important issue and statements about “why” it is important. Rather, the focus is “how” the financial industry—both financial firms and the official sector—can continue to make progress in improving culture and reducing misconduct risk. The New York Fed, under the leadership of former President Bill Dudley and current President John Williams, has been a strong advocate for reform of culture in the financial industry. Today, I’d like to offer some thoughts about the progress made to date and some of the challenges that remain. These challenges reflect, in large part, the complexity of the problem. Please note that my comments today are my own and do not necessarily represent the views of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System. Culture Reform as a Complex Problem I’ll begin by observing that the issue of conduct and culture reform in the financial services industry is a “complex” problem and not simply a “complicated” one. Complicated problems have clear and relatively stable cause-and-effect patterns so that outcomes are largely predictable with the appropriate expertise and analysis. By contrast, complex problems are typically marked by interconnectedness of a large number of factors, constant evolution, feedback loops, “unknown unknowns”, and unpredictable outcomes. 2 Culture reform is that type of problem. A firm’s culture can be defined as the shared set of norms that influences decision-making and is evidenced through behavior. Now consider a global systemically important bank with trillions of dollars of assets; with operations that span diverse business lines, customers, counterparties, investors and regulators across multiple jurisdictions; and that competes in a global industry against similar firms. Add in tens, or even hundreds, of thousands of employees with a wide range of motivations and goals who interact in varied but interconnected operating environments with different regional, corporate and individual values, incentives, regulations, and laws, and the inherent complexity becomes clear. This complexity makes it virtually impossible to fully comprehend the drivers of culture or predict its behavioral consequences. An implication is the need for a long-term, sustained commitment to addressing conduct and culture reform using a wide range of tools that are suitable for a complex problem. Evolution of New York Fed’s Effort In the ten years that followed the financial crisis, we have continued to see a stream of misconduct scandals and cultural failures, and a corresponding increase in significant litigation and enforcement activity, with costs estimated at an aggregate of $320 billion worldwide. 3 At the New York Fed, our work in advocating culture and behavior reform in the financial sector started in late 2013 when our former President, Bill Dudley, delivered a speech on the “too-big-to-fail” problem. In that speech, he argued that “there is evidence of deep-seated culture and ethical failures at many financial institutions.” 4 More recently, our current President John Williams concluded that “we have not yet fully addressed the root causes of many of the problems that have plagued the financial sector” and that there was still a “sense of urgency in addressing banking culture.” 5 Over the past five years, the New York Fed has focused on shining a spotlight on culture, behavior and conduct concerns, and pushed the industry to address these issues through a range of activities: Engaging with diverse thinkers on governance, culture and organizational behavior to better understand the complexity of culture reform; Convening academic experts, and leaders in finance and the official sector through conferences and workshops on culture and behavior reform; 6 Facilitating discussions among the supervisory community on assessing and influencing industry culture-related efforts; Building a platform for a partnership between business schools and industry representatives to influence culture reform through training of future leaders in finance; and Publishing a white paper on “Misconduct Risk, Culture and Supervision” that discussed a range of market failures that provide a conceptual rationale for intervention by bank supervisors. 7 Our white paper also summarizes work of supervisors from multiple jurisdictions around the world who are increasingly focused on the risks posed by poor culture and misconduct, and have developed a broad assortment of new tools and practices for identifying and supervising for misconduct risk. International efforts range from the creation of specialized units of behavioral risk experts to risk culture assessment frameworks to supervisory guidance that directs supervised institutions to develop and promote a sound corporate culture. I view this variation in approach as a feature and not a bug of the official sector focus on culture reform. There is rarely a single solution to a complex problem with many interdependencies and deep uncertainty. Rather, the official sector must experiment and innovate; probe and adapt; and try new approaches to foster a healthy culture that promotes appropriate conduct. One common thread of the recent innovations, however, is that supervisors can provide a horizontal perspective on culture reform that reflects broad social goals in a way that the private sector cannot. To be clear, it is not the supervisors’ job to dictate the internal culture of a firm, but when there are market failures such as externalities or information asymmetries, then there is a role for the official sector to push firms to do more to address these issues and mitigate misconduct risk. We should be cautious, however, about our ability to influence precisely and predictably. Public health studies, for example, document “policy resistance” where interventions are defeated by the system’s response to an intervention. 8 As an example, a rules-based regime that focuses on reducing conduct risk by prescriptive regulatory fiat runs the risks of creating a “check-the-box culture” where everything not explicitly banned is considered acceptable behavior. This has the potential to facilitate exactly the wrong type of culture, conduct and risk-taking. 9 Challenges Related to Complexity While I have spoken so far about work by the official sector, progress has also been made over the past few years by the industry in terms of senior management focus and commitment to culture reform. Some firms have created Board-level committees looking at culture, others have introduced behavioral risk into their audit programs, and still others have developed dashboards with a range of quantitative and qualitative factors to track their efforts and outcomes. Progress has been uneven, however, and there is still more to do. Let me identify several areas where I think additional work is needed—assessment, technology, and influence. Assessment Given the complexity of the problem, measuring and assessing progress is not straightforward. Assessment of culture and the factors needed to change it are difficult, but this should not deter us. Managers, investors, and the official sector all want to know what is changing and whether misconduct risk has been mitigated. The question then is, how will we really know whether change is happening and whether progress is sustainable? I don’t believe that there is a “silver bullet” for assessing culture change—no single solution, approach, or template will work for every firm in every circumstance. That said, standardized metrics will help in assessing changes over time and across firms. The UK Banking Standards Board (BSB), for example, provides one lens on assessing culture change for a broad cross-section of financial service firms operating in the U.K. 10 I believe diagnostic tools like this are an important part of the cultural assessment toolkit. Moreover, firms and the official sector need to evaluate a wide range of behaviors, signals, and outcomes to draw the most robust conclusions about the depth and pace of culture reform. I think it is critical for both firms and the official sector to continue to experiment with new approaches to assessing culture change, to collect and build new forms of data and measurement, to develop qualitative assessments to complement quantitative ones, to use new techniques and technology to understand how a firm’s culture and conduct are changing, and to continue adapting and course correcting to a sustainable business strategy as the operating environment evolves. Influence Fostering productive behavioral change is at the heart of culture reform. Behavior, in turn, is driven by a multifaceted set of factors including incentives, cues from peers, observations about leaders, and formal policies and procedures. Most of us are not experts in human behavior, so I believe we should be open to incorporating lessons from behavioral economics and other social sciences into programs to mitigate conduct risk and promote cultural change. Behavioral economics blends psychology and economics to provide insight into why individuals may behave in a certain way and make decisions that may not be in their own economic best interest. For example, individuals often make choices that provide immediate recognition or satisfaction—higher status within a peer group, for example—often at the cost of a potentially better financial outcome in the long term. This type of human behavior is at the core of the complexity of culture reform. Lessons from the field have increased understanding of where decision-making can depart from economic expectations. Sometimes, these lessons have been used to create circumstances and environments that positively influence individual outcomes by “nudging” individuals to better choices. 11 These nudges, in turn, help reinforce acceptable behavioral norms, and ultimately a firm’s culture. How can we nudge in order to reduce misconduct risk? More broadly, how can the financial services sector, including firms and supervisors, leverage insights from the social sciences to promote environments that foster healthy group behavioral patterns with better decision-making? Technology The promise of new technology and big data for financial institutions is everywhere we look. From artificial intelligence to machine learning to natural language processing, there seems to be unlimited potential for more efficient operations, better analytics and more accurate predictions, and more personalized product development. But, how will advances in technology, particularly the adoption of new technologies, such as artificial intelligence, influence the behavioral risks associated with human decision-making? And how does technology introduce new risks that prompt a rethinking of responsibility and customer relationships—especially with regard to privacy and information security? Moreover, the disruptive potential of innovation is likely to exacerbate an already complex environment as decision-making becomes more opaque and new roles and responsibilities are introduced. For example, what will effective governance and risk management look like? Do artificial intelligence and machine learning introduce new model risk? Or operational risk? Or conduct risk? What does it mean to supervise or regulate conduct if decisions are made by self-learning algorithms? More broadly, what culture and conduct risk will be embedded in technology-driven financial services in the future? These are hard questions for financial firms and for the official sector, and our approach to the reform of financial industry culture will need to address them. Conclusions To return to the beginning of this discussion, culture reform in finance is a complex problem. Causal relationships are difficult to isolate, linkages are constantly changing, and accurate prediction is impossible. That does not mean that we are powerless, or that we should accept complexity as an excuse for not trying to foster change. Rather, we need a long-term commitment that brings the appropriate tools and approaches to bear. The costs and potential consequences of market failures associated with misconduct risk and culture suggests that it is vitally important that we do so. Both financial firms and the official sector should focus attention on investigating and asking questions to better understand the underlying drivers, motivations and risks behind the behaviors of individuals and groups. We should ensure that we look at behaviors and outcomes from multiple perspectives, so we can gain a more robust understanding of the operating environment as a whole. No single perspective is likely to provide all of the insights. Experimentation and iteration, use of narrative and story-telling, and innovative methods for harnessing diversity of perspective are thought to be effective ways of tackling complex problems and we all need to innovate, adapt and seek new approaches. 12 I think this focus on conduct and culture is entirely consistent with a traditional supervisory focus on resilience, both for individual firms and the financial system as whole. This can be resilience of a firm’s balance sheet in response to financial risk or an unexpected loss that depletes a firm’s equity capital or resilience of a firm’s culture in response to conduct risk or an unexpected fraud that depletes its cultural capital. 13 In all of these cases, a resilient firm will be better able to adapt and evolve in order to continue to function and provide the critical financial services necessary to support a growing and stable economy. Thank you. 1 I thank Stephanie Chaly, Robert Fitchette, Jim Hennessy, Jackie McCormack, and Tom Noone for helpful discussions and feedback on earlier drafts. 2 David J. Snowden and Mary E. Boone, “A Leader’s Framework for Decision Making,” Harvard Business Review , November 2007 3 The Boston Consulting Group, Staying the Course in Banking , March 2, 2017. 4 William C. Dudley, Ending Too Big to Fail , November 7, 2013. 5 John C. Williams, Now is the Time for Banking Culture Reform , June 18, 2018. 6 Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Progress, Challenges, and the Next Generation of Leaders 7 Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Lev Menand, Kevin Stiroh and Joseph Tracy, Misconduct Risk, Culture, and Supervision , December 2017. 8 John Sterman, “Learning from Evidence in a Complex World,” Public Health Matters , 96(3), 2006. For example, the overuse of antibiotics that spread resistant pathogens. 9 Michael Held, Reforming Culture and Conduct in the Financial Services Industry: How Can Lawyers Help? , Remarks at Yale Law School’s Chirelstein Colloquium, Mar. 8, 2017. 10 Banking Standards Board 11 Richard H. Thaler and Cass Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and Happiness , 2009. 12 Kurtz and Snowden, “The new dynamics of strategy: Sense-making in a complex and complicated world,” IBM Systems Journal, Vol. 42, No. 3, 2003; and, David Snowden and Mary Boone, “A Leader’s Framework for Decision Making,” November 2007, Harvard Business Review. 13 See Misconduct Risk, Culture, and Supervision for more on the concept of “cultural capital.” By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 09, 2018 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Investing in America's Workforce Book Launch Event, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Welcome Good morning. I am very pleased to welcome you all to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the launch of Investing in America’s Workforce: Improving Outcomes for Workers and Employers . I would like to thank our colleagues across the Federal Reserve System, the Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University, the Ray Marshall Center at the University of Texas at Austin, and the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research for collaborating with us on this initiative. My colleagues and I are proud to co-sponsor this event today and appreciate everyone who contributed their time and effort to making the Investing in America’s Workforce publication a reality. With over 100 contributors, pulling this together was not an easy feat. I recognize the value of sharing knowledge and resources and am pleased that we can help facilitate this effort. I congratulate my colleagues and our partners for this accomplishment and believe this is just the beginning of our work to support the workforce field. There is a tendency to try to re-invent the wheel and overlook past experience, but by taking a step back and learning from one another, we can have a much greater positive impact in our communities. Roadshow Workforce Experience Sustainable economic growth and thus broad-based prosperity is dependent on a healthy job market, one in which employers can find the skills they need and workers find jobs that allow them to grow and move up the economic ladder. The challenge is developing a system that encompasses both and is accessible to all those seeking a job. Our workforce development initiative aims to promote dialogue and a greater understanding of promising policies and programs that allow workers, especially those in low and moderate-income communities, to develop in-demand skills and connect them with employers. We can achieve this by connecting with workforce stakeholders through policy forums, roundtable discussion sessions, and examining areas through our research and outreach. One of the best aspects of my job is the opportunity to visit communities across our Second District. The skills gap and the uneven economic recovery among different communities are consistent themes I hear, not just in the Second District but also in my previous job on the West Coast. I also have heard about a variety of policies and programs that seem to be making an impact and could have broader potential that are worth sharing. Early in my tenure I visited Brooklyn P-TECH and met with a dedicated and focused group of young students learning IT skills for middle-skill jobs. This partnership between IBM Corporation, the New York City Department of Education, the City University of New York, and the NYC College of Technology, provides an instructive model. It takes kids from high school through an associate’s degree with corporate support and real-life experiences. And it’s working. Their first class of 91 students entered the program in September 2011 and almost all have since earned their high school diplomas and about half have earned an associate’s degree in a STEM field. IBM has hired 23 graduates and continues to offer paid summer internships. 1 In a few weeks, I will be visiting Per Scholas, a tuition-free workforce training program in the Bronx and in other parts of the country. It seeks to break the cycle of poverty by providing free technology career education, training, placement, and advancement services to people in underserved communities. Approximately 90% of Per Scholas trainees are people of color, with the large majority representing Black/African American and Hispanic/Latino individuals -- groups with historically low representation in IT and the financial services industry. This workforce program is unique in that it seeks to re-train adult workers for successful careers as technology professionals and works with employers in crafting unique training programs for their business. In 2017, Per Scholas NY enrolled 502 students and 406 graduated, of which a substantial majority reported being placed with an employer with an average starting wage of more than $20 an hour. 2 Earlier this year, the New York Fed partnered with Per Scholas NY to support our own Diversity & Inclusion efforts focused on career paths in IT, cybersecurity, and data science in the financial services industry. I am proud to say that the New York Fed was recognized by Per Scholas as a Major Partner in its recent 2018 annual update report. I mention these two examples as they reflect the theme of today’s event and the book—workforce development is about investing in work, workers and systems leading to greater employment opportunities for all. Employer Engagement by Community Colleges in New York State Another important issue is the role of employer engagement with community colleges. By working directly with local employers, community colleges can more effectively prepare students for available jobs, and at the same time, help employers find and retain workers with the skills they need. In an effort to better understand the level and types of employer engagement activities taking place in our region, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York recently conducted a survey of all of the community colleges in New York State. Next Wednesday, we will be releasing a report that details our findings. Our report does show that employer engagement by community colleges in New York State has become the norm. The typical community college engages with more than 100 employers, spanning a broad range of industries, including healthcare, manufacturing, utilities, and tourism, just to name a few. It is also quite common for community colleges to actively assess local labor market needs, often with the help of local employers. As part of these engagement efforts, employers provide a wide range of education and training support to community colleges, offer various forms of work experience, and help students prepare for the job market. Employer engagement is a promising and important undertaking for community colleges, local employers, students, and workers. Investing in America’s Workforce These are just a few examples of the work being done across the Federal Reserve System and beyond, which is one of the reasons we have come together under the Investing in America’s Workforce umbrella. This initiative started in 2017 as a way to identify new approaches, opportunities, and challenges in the various areas of workforce development. Led by the Federal Reserve System alongside other educational and nonprofit institutions, Investing in America’s Workforce has encompassed 52 regional meetings held across the country last year, a capstone conference held in Austin, TX last October, and a three-volume book highlighting workforce development efforts as investments for economic and community growth, which the Fed and our partners are releasing today. In 2017 and 2018, the New York Fed held seven regional meetings in our District, and one in Orlando, FL in partnership with our Atlanta Fed colleagues after the influx of Puerto Ricans to the mainland post-Hurricane Maria. We found that all of these communities shared certain needs, including to: develop training programs that lead more directly to available jobs; make the public workforce system less complicated; and find a consistent way to document and collect data on individuals who participate in training to assess the effectiveness of the programs. I hope this book will help find solutions, recognizing that there is no one-size-fits-all solution or approach. So what’s in the book? Investing in America’s Workforce: Improving Outcomes for Workers and Employers is a collection of more than 65 essays from national and regional workforce experts about systemic barriers to employment and how further workforce investments can overcome those barriers. Staff from the New York Fed contributed two chapters in the publication. One piece—on partnership development as a key workforce strategy— includes a look into how three employers in New York and Puerto Rico developed partnerships with post-secondary institutions to make progress in overcoming the skills gap issue. By detailing some of the factors that contributed to employers’ partnering with educational institutions, this chapter aims to provide insight to employers seeking to engage with educational partners to address labor market concerns and support the development of skilled industry talent. The second piece examines the high child poverty rate in Puerto Rico and its impact on the long-term economic sustainability of the island and its ability to recover from Hurricane Maria. The island’s child poverty rate is almost three times higher than that of mainland, and has remained stagnant even during times of economic growth, suggesting the issue is not just rooted in labor demand. This chapter discusses the dual programmatic and policy strategy of the Boys and Girls Club of Puerto Rico and its sister organization the Youth Development Institute. Before I conclude my remarks, I would like to provide a quick overview of today’s sessions. First, my colleague Patrick Harker, President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, will discuss key shifts in perspective needed to see workforce development as an investment. Then there will be three panel sessions, each dedicated to the overarching focus of a volume in the publication – investing in workers, investing in work, and investing in systems. The day will then end with a luncheon panel discussion where speakers from various sectors will discuss what needs to happen to realize the goal of seeing workforce development as an investment in inclusive economic growth that benefits workers, employers, and communities. I am thrilled that we can bring together national and regional leaders representing the private, public, and nonprofit sectors to engage in a dialogue that can inform workforce development programming across the country and learn from one another about the opportunities for investing in America’s workforce. We look forward to a productive day and continuing the conversation after the event. Thank you. 1 From Robin Willner, NYS P-TECH Leaderships Council 2 From Sarah Conte, Per Scholas NY By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 30, 2018 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the 80th Plenary Meeting of the Group of Thirty, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery I would like to start by thanking Tharman for the invitation to participate in this panel of esteemed current and former policymakers. I am also pleased to continue the long tradition of hosting the Group of Thirty at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and very much look forward to this morning’s discussion. In my remarks, I will focus on the following question: What long-run monetary policy strategy is best suited to anchor inflation expectations, foster price stability, and promote maximum employment? I emphasize the phrase “long-run” because I will focus on the features of a systematic policy framework, rather than tactical policy decisions. This topic is not only of academic interest: As was recently announced, the Federal Reserve is embarking on a review of its long-run monetary policy framework. 1 I will argue that the global decline in the neutral rate of interest over the past quarter century poses significant challenges to maintaining well-anchored inflation expectations in a standard inflation-targeting regime. I will then lay out some alternative policy strategies that have the potential of providing a solid anchor for inflation expectations—even with a very low neutral interest rate—while preserving broad continuity with current inflation-targeting practice. Now that I am already way out on a limb, I should emphasize that my remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. As a starting point, it’s useful to travel back in time to the 1980s and 1990s, when inflation targeting was introduced. The problem at the time was high and variable inflation that contributed to macroeconomic instability and unmoored inflation expectations, which in turn fueled high and variable inflation. To break this vicious cycle, numerous central banks instituted inflation targeting, or variants thereof, with a focus on bringing inflation down to a low level and fostering the establishment of stable, well-anchored inflation expectations. This strategy worked extraordinarily well in the decade preceding the global financial crisis, as central banks were able to achieve remarkably low and stable inflation, leading to a positive feedback loop between low inflation and well-anchored inflation expectations. Today, we face an altogether different set of problems stemming from a very low neutral interest rate—that is, the short-term real interest rate consistent with an economy operating at its potential alongside low and stable inflation. Ironically, the problem we need to solve these days is the risk of inflation that is persistently too low , rather than too high . Today’s low neutral interest rates reflect the culmination of trends extending back 25 years. A quarter century ago, a typical estimate of the neutral rate in the United States was 2 or 2½ percent—consistent with historical averages over the preceding half century. Since then, however, there has been a clear downward trend in neutral interest rates in the United States and other advanced economies, with current estimates ranging from 0 to 1½ percent. 2 Three main global trends appear to account for the bulk of the decline in the neutral rate over the past quarter century. 3 One is demographics: populations are aging as people live longer and birth rates have fallen. The second is productivity growth, which has slowed around the world. The third is the heightened demand for safe and liquid assets, which has led to a wider wedge between yields on safe government securities or central bank reserves and yields on riskier assets such as corporate bonds. Importantly, the onset of these trends preceded the global financial crisis and they have continued even as countries have recovered. Although there is a great deal of uncertainty about the neutral rate, and conditions may change, a reasonable assumption is that it will remain low—not far from current levels—for the foreseeable future. 4 What does a low neutral rate mean for monetary policy and the anchoring of inflation expectations? When a recession hits, central banks may not be able to reduce interest rates well below their neutral level to stimulate the economy as warranted because of the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates. This shortfall of monetary accommodation would result in less desirable economic outcomes during the recession and recovery. In particular, inflation would typically undershoot its desired target during these episodes. The persistence of below-target inflation rates in many advanced economies over the past decade is a testament to this dynamic. As a result of the inherent asymmetry introduced by the lower bound on interest rates, an inflation-targeting central bank could experience inflation that is below target, once we consider the average inflation rate over periods when policy is constrained and those when it is not. With inflation on average below the target level, inflation expectations will likely slip below the target rate as well. 5 A simple example helps illustrate this problem. Say that 80 percent of the time, the lower bound on interest rates does not constrain policy and the central bank aims for a 2 percent target inflation rate. During these “good” times, an inflation-targeting central bank aims to keep inflation near 2 percent. But, 20 percent of the time, the economy falls into a recession that’s severe enough that the lower bound constrains policy. Assume that during these periods, inflation averages only 1 percent. So, 80 percent of the time inflation averages 2 percent and 20 percent of the time inflation averages 1 percent. The resulting average rate of inflation is about 1.8 percent. As a consequence, inflation expectations are likely to become anchored at the long-run average of 1.8 percent, below the desired 2 percent target. But, that’s not the end of the story. This downward shift in inflation expectations has a second-round effect on real interest rates, the economy, and inflation. When policy is constrained by the effective lower bound, the downward shift in inflation expectations raises the real interest rate, further diminishing the degree of monetary stimulus, making the downturn worse and reducing inflation even more. Even in times when policy is not constrained, the expectation of below-target inflation in the future affects current decisions, putting additional downward pressure on inflation. In other words, monetary policy is always swimming upstream, fighting a current of too-low inflation expectations that interferes with achieving the target inflation rate. A number of alternative monetary policy frameworks have been proposed that aim to tackle the problems associated with the lower bound on interest rates. Although they differ in many ways, it is useful to divide these proposals into three broad categories. The first option is to maintain the basic framework of inflation targeting and to rely on a combination of aggressive conventional and unconventional policy actions when facing economic downturns to limit the deleterious effects of the lower bound. This carries with it the risk that inflation expectations become anchored at too low a level. The second option is “average-inflation targeting,” whereby the central bank purposefully aims to achieve an above-target inflation rate in “good” times when the lower bound is not a constraint. Properly designed and implemented, such an overshoot can offset the inflation undershoot during “bad” times so that the longer-run average inflation rate and inflation expectations are in line with the target. The third option is price-level targeting, including its various offshoots, such as nominal GDP targeting and temporary price-level targeting. In such a regime, the central bank commits to keep the price level near a steadily growing target path. Like average-inflation targeting, this strategy promises to overshoot the target inflation rate in “good” times to make up for the inflation undershoot when policy is constrained. In theory, both average-inflation and price-level targeting can solve the problem of anchoring inflation expectations at the target rate while maintaining a low inflation target rate amid low neutral rates. Although price-level targeting is a bigger leap from inflation targeting than average-inflation targeting, each can be implemented in ways that are very similar to standard inflation targeting, either in terms of forecast-targeting or a policy rule. 6 Importantly, neither will likely be effective in practice unless communicated clearly and carried out consistently over time. More broadly, all of these proposed strategies face potential costs and benefits—in terms of macroeconomic performance, communication, and robustness to uncertainty—which require careful study. In considering alternative monetary policy strategies, academic experts, policymakers, and others from around the world have an important part to play, sharing and discussing ideas and comparing experiences to help all of us to think through these issues. This process of careful study and discussion proved highly valuable during the development and implementation of inflation targeting in decades past, and will be equally valuable in the present debates. Thank you. 1 See Federal Reserve to review strategies, tools, and communication practices it uses to pursue its mandate of maximum employment and price stability , November 15, 2018. 2 Shigeaki Fujiwara, Yuto Iwasaki, Ichiro Muto, Kenji Nishizaki, and Nao Sudo, Developments in the Natural Rate of Interest in Japan , Bank of Japan Review 2016-E-12 (October 2016); Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants , Journal of International Economics, Volume 108, Supplement 1, pp. S59–S75 (May 2017); Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux , Business Economics, Volume 51, Issue 2, pp. 57–67 (July 2016); John C. Williams, Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World , FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23 (August 15, 2016). 3 Carlos Carvalho, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio, Demographic Transition and Low U.S. Interest Rates , FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-27 (September 25, 2017); Marco Del Negro, Domenico Giannone, Marc P. Giannoni, and Andrea Tambalotti, Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2017. 4 John C. Williams, The Future Fortunes of R-star: Are They Really Rising? FRBSF Economic Letter 2018-13 (May 21, 2018). 5 Thomas M. Mertens and John C. Williams, What to Expect from the Lower Bound on Interest Rates: Evidence from Derivatives Prices , Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 865 (August 2018). 6 John C. Williams, Preparing for the Next Storm: Reassessing Frameworks and Strategies in a Low R-star World , FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-13 (May 8, 2017). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
