Th e Outlook for the Economy and Federal Reserve Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland E conomists on the Economy Council for Economic Education New York, NY (via videoconference) Ju ne 17, 2020 1 Introduction Let me start by thanking Nan Morrison and the Council for Economic Education for the opportunity to speak today. I have the pleasure of serving on the council’s board so I have seen firsthand the important work the council is doing to increase economic and financial literacy in the country. As the council’s mission statement explains, equipping students with this knowledge can help them make better decisions for themselves, their families, and their communities. It is noteworthy that despite the burdens of the pandemic, the council has found creative ways to carry on its mission, including its support of teachers, the National Economics Challenge, and this speakers’ series. Today, before we open it up to questions, I’ll give you an update on the economy and on the Federal Reserve’s policy response. As always, the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Current Economy The coronavirus pandemic is a global public health crisis that has inflicted pain and hardship on people all over the world. This is an unprecedented situation and unprecedented actions have been taken in response. The country took aggressive social distancing measures to limit the spread of the virus, resulting in a shutdown of much of the economy starting in March. This was an investment in public health that bought some time for the healthcare system to increase its capacity to care for the sick, for doctors and scientists to learn more about the disease itself, and for the country to begin to develop tests and treatments. But at the same time, the effect of the shutdown on the economy was swift and severe. [FIGURE 1] In the first quarter, real output declined at a 5 percent annual rate, with real consumption down almost 7 percent and nonresidential business fixed investment down nearly 8 percent. These declines reflect what occurred in a single month, March. Earlier this month, the National Bureau of Economic Research’s Business Cycle Dating Committee determined that economic activity peaked in 2 February and that the U.S. economy entered a recession. I anticipate that the second quarter will show the most severe effects of the pandemic shutdown on economic activity. Most private-sector forecasts for second quarter GDP growth range from minus 25 down to minus 40 percent, measured at an annual rate. I agree that second quarter growth could be the largest quarterly decline on record. [FIGURE 2] The decline in activity led to both headline and core inflation readings moving down in March and April. I expect inflation to decline further this year because the sharp pullback in demand will outweigh any upward pressure coming from limited supplies of certain goods and services. In recent weeks, states have begun to relax some of their stay-at-home restrictions, and we are beginning to see some positive signs in the data. Retail sales rebounded significantly in May, with sales up in all major categories. In the Fourth District, which includes Ohio and parts of Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and West Virginia, some activities have picked up faster than our business contacts had expected. Tourism activity increased after Memorial Day and foot traffic at retail stores in the region moved up. Even so, about 40 percent of our contacts do not expect activity to recover to pre-pandemic levels for at least a year. As more regions and sectors of the economy reopen, rates of growth are going to look very good, but we are digging out from a very deep hole and it is more informative to think in terms of levels. One of the most positive pieces of news we’ve received is the employment report for May. Instead of rising as most economists expected, the unemployment rate fell. And instead of losing jobs, payrolls increased by 2.5 million jobs. This is great news and points to some stabilization in the labor market after two months of deep declines. I am hoping we will continue to see positive reports over coming months as more of the economy opens up. 3 But it is also important to put May’s report into perspective. [FIGURE 3] In April, the unemployment rate surged to 14.7 percent. In May, it fell to 13.3 percent, still considerably above its previous peak in October 2009, in the aftermath of the Great Recession, and well above the 3.5 percent it was as recently as February. In May, 21 million workers were unemployed compared with 6 million in February. That is about one in 12 Americans aged 16 or older. This is worse than in October 2009, when about one in 15 people were unemployed. [FIGURE 4] The gain of 2.5 million jobs in May was a record monthly gain, but it is only about 11 percent of the job losses in March and April. [FIGURE 5] In fact, the level of employment is near the lows we saw right after the Great Recession. So that means the economy has lost almost all of the jobs it added over the entire expansion of 10-plus years. Employment is 13 percent below February’s level. The deterioration in the labor market is even sharper than these numbers indicate. Many people left the work force at the beginning of the shutdown and they do not show up in the unemployment rate, and many workers had their hours cut. Our survey of firms in the Fourth District indicates that while layoffs began to slow in May, firms have recalled workers more slowly than they originally intended to. Moreover, the improvements in May were not evenly shared. Indeed, half of the net private-sector job losses since February have been in the leisure and hospitality and the retail trade sectors, the two sectors ranked lowest in terms of average hourly earnings. 4 [FIGURE 6] The unemployment rates among blacks and Hispanics have been chronically above those of whites and Asians. Over the long expansion, we had finally seen some progress being made on that front, as the gap in unemployment rates narrowed. But the pandemic has increased the disparities. All groups have experienced an increase in their unemployment rate since February, but the increase was less for whites than for the other groups. And in May, the unemployment rate for both blacks and Asians continued to edge up rather than fall. It is particularly distressing that much of the sacrifice over the pandemic period is being borne by the most vulnerable in our economy: lower-income and minority workers and communities, and the smaller of the small businesses. [FIGURE 7] And it shines a bright light on long-standing economic inequality that needs to be addressed if the economy is to perform up to its potential. Like the Council for Economic Education, I believe that education is a path to better economic outcomes for individuals, households, and the country at large. Our work force has become more educated over time. But the likelihood of completing a degree varies by race. Graduation rates for whites, Hispanics, and Asians have risen over time, but those of blacks remain well below those of these other groups and have shown no progress over time. Economic well-being rises with education, so if more is not done to ensure that blacks who enter college have the support to complete their degrees, economic inequality is likely to continue to rise.1 The Economic Outlook and Policy Let me now turn to the outlook and policy. Macroeconomic forecasting is particularly challenging at this time. With states relaxing stay-at-home restrictions, I expect economic activity to pick up in the second half of the year. But there is considerable uncertainty about what the recovery will look like after the 1 See Loretta J. Mester, “Community Development and Human Capital,” remarks at the 2015 Policy Summit on Housing, Human Capital, and Inequality, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Philadelphia, and Richmond, Pittsburgh, PA, June 19, 2015 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20150619- community-development-and-human-capital.aspx). And see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020,” May 2020 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/2020-economic-well-being-of-us-households-in-2019- preface.htm). 5 economy reopens. The shape of the recovery will depend on the path of the virus and our ability to handle its spread through testing, contact tracing, treatment, and risk-focused restrictions on activity. It will also depend on the behavior of households and businesses and how comfortable they feel in re- engaging in economic activity. The Cleveland Fed’s daily national survey of households suggests widely varying views about the pandemic and how people plan to behave. About 60 percent of the respondents think the pandemic will last a year or less, and on average, this group says they are likely to return to their pre-pandemic usage of bars and restaurants, public spaces, public transportation, and crowded events. The other 40 percent of the respondents expect the pandemic to last more than a year, and on average, this group says they will not engage in these activities to the same extent they once did, even after the pandemic has ended.2 It will be important to continue to monitor household and business attitudes in assessing the outlook. The other important factor that will determine the path of the recovery is how successful policy actions are in ensuring that the temporary disruption in activity we have seen so far does not cause lasting damage to the economy and that the recovery has enough support to be sustained. Let me discuss some of these policy actions and then talk about the outlook. Both the federal government and the Federal Reserve took significant actions quickly to provide households and businesses with relief during the shutdown. Fiscal policymakers made grants to individuals, certain businesses hit hardest by the pandemic, and states and municipalities. They have expanded unemployment benefits and have funded the Paycheck Protection Program, which provides small businesses with loans that turn into grants if they maintain their payrolls. As the magnitude of the need has come into better focus, the federal government has increased its level of support. Although the amount of support has been sizable, so is the 2 The Cleveland Fed’s website provides updates of these survey results each Wednesday on the Consumers and COVID-19 page, https://www.clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and-data/consumers-and-covid-19.aspx. 6 depth of the economic downturn. In my view, further direct fiscal support will be needed for states and municipal governments and for households most affected by the pandemic. The Federal Reserve is not legally able to make grants, but it has taken significant actions and has committed to using its full set of tools to support the economy, guided by our congressional mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability. Early in the pandemic, the Fed began taking actions to help ensure that financial markets have enough liquidity to continue to function well. Well-functioning financial markets are what allow credit to flow to households and businesses and monetary policy to effectively transmit to broader financial conditions. So when conditions became strained, the Fed began buying Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities and conducted operations in the repo market to ease those strains. At our meeting last week, the FOMC said that over the coming months, the Fed would increase its holdings of Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities at least at the current pace. The Fed has also set up emergency lending facilities, with the backing of the U.S. Treasury, to serve as a backstop to other key credit markets, including money market mutual funds and the commercial paper market. The Fed is also ensuring that our central bank counterparties abroad have access to dollar funding. Although volatility and risk spreads have not returned to pre-pandemic levels, there has been a significant lessening of stress and an improvement in market functioning in many markets since these actions have been taken. 7 Another set of our emergency lending facilities focuses more directly on supporting the flow of credit to households, to businesses of all sizes, and to state and local governments.3 Included in this group are the Municipal Liquidity Facility, which purchases short-term notes from states to help them manage cash- flow pressures, and the Main Street Lending Program, which supports lending to small and medium-sized businesses that were in sound financial condition before the onset of the pandemic. Based on consultations with both lenders and potential borrowers, the Fed has adjusted the terms on some of these programs to ensure that they will support the economy as effectively as they can while safeguarding taxpayer funds. And earlier this week the Fed announced it was seeking public feedback on a proposed expansion of the Main Street program to nonprofits, which provide vital services in the economy. Because much of the flow of credit to households and businesses relies on the banking system, the Fed has encouraged banks to use its discount window as a source of liquidity and to work with their borrowers affected by the virus. The Fed has temporarily relaxed some of the regulatory requirements and supervisory oversight so that banks have greater capacity to lend. Last, but not least, in March the FOMC reduced its target range for the fed funds rate to 0 to 1/4 percent. At our meeting last week, we maintained the funds rate at that level and reiterated that we expect to maintain this target range until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. As more states relax restrictions on activity, the economy is moving from a shutdown phase, through a re- opening phase, and into a recovery phase. As this happens, the focus of Fed policy will expand from supporting market functioning and the flow of credit to supporting the recovery. I expect to see an 3 In addition to the Municipal Liquidity and the Main Street Lending Program, these facilities include the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility, the Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities, and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility. More information on the Federal Reserve’s actions in response to the effects of the coronavirus on the economy is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/covid -19.htm. 8 improvement in the second half of the year as the economy reopens. But after that, I believe it will take quite some time for economic activity and job levels to approach more normal levels. The improvement will vary across sectors, because even if people can resume some of their normal activities, they need to feel some reassurance that it is safe to do so. In some industries, like travel and leisure and hospitality, it will likely take quite a while longer for activity to pick up than in others. By the end of this year, I expect that output will still be about 6 percent below its level at the end of last year, and the unemployment rate, while down from its peak, will still be around 9 percent. I expect inflation to remain below our 2 percent goal for some time to come. In my view, very accommodative monetary policy will be needed to support the recovery and the return to the FOMC’s goals of price stability and maximum employment over time. My economic forecast is very similar to the median forecasts of the FOMC participants that were released last week, which show an economic recovery starting in the second half of the year and continuing over the next couple of years. Almost all of my FOMC colleagues agree with me that it will be appropriate for the fed funds rate to remain at its current level through 2022, the end of our projection horizon, in support of the recovery.4 Over the next several weeks as more states reopen, we will get further readings on the condition of the economy. The uncertainty surrounding the outlook is extremely high because we are in an unprecedented situation. Outcomes depend not only on appropriate economic policy but also on public health considerations. Epidemiologists tell us to expect periodic upswings in the number of cases until a vaccine can be distributed. We are seeing that today in some locations. People often say that the virus determines the timeline. I agree, but that does not mean we are helpless to affect the outcomes. Increased investment would speed up the progress on testing, contact tracing, and treatments, and help ensure that the healthcare system has adequate capacity. Better adherence to the guidelines on social distancing, mask 4 See Press Conference Projection Materials, June 10, 2020 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcprojtabl20200610.htm). 9 wearing, and hygiene would help to control the virus’s spread. These actions would make it safer for people to re-engage in activity and would allow for interventions to become more focused on helping those at highest risk from the disease, thereby supporting the recovery. And May’s positive employment and retail sales reports remind us of the resiliency of the U.S. economy. Of course, if the number of cases of the virus is not well-controlled and the healthcare system gets overwhelmed, then the economic outcomes I have discussed could turn out to be much more dire, with people and businesses restricting their own activity even if states do not reinstate restrictions. So at this juncture, I think it makes sense for monetary policymakers to continue to monitor the economy as the country begins to re-engage in economic activity, to continue to support the flow of credit to households and businesses and ensure the smooth functioning of financial markets, to remember that there are several different scenarios that could play out, and to stand ready to use all of our tools to mitigate lasting damage and to support the economy’s recovery back to maximum employment and price stability. 1 Charts for “The Outlook for the Economy and Federal Reserve Policy” * The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Loretta J. Mester* President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economists on the Economy Council for Economic Education June 17, 2020 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 ‐10.0 ‐8.0 ‐6.0 ‐4.0 ‐2.0 0.0 2.0 4.0 6.0 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Percent Change, SAAR Figure 1. The economic expansion ended in February Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics Quarterly data: Last obs. 2020Q1 ‐5% Growth of real GDP 3 ‐1.5 ‐1.0 ‐0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Figure 2. Inflation has moved down Headline PCE Core PCE Cleveland Fed Median PCE Year‐over‐year percentage change Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics and Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Monthly data: Last obs. April 2020 Percent 4 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Unemployment rate Figure 3. The unemployment rate is well over its previous peak Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. May 2020 Percent, SA 13.3% ‐1600 ‐1400 ‐1200 ‐1000 ‐800 ‐600 ‐400 ‐200 0 200 400 600 Thousands of jobs 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Quarterly data: Last obs. May 2020 Figure 4. Only 11% of job losses in March and April were regained in May ‐20.7 mill +2.5 mill Monthly change in payroll jobs 6 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Figure 5. The economy has shed almost all of the jobs it added over the past expansion Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. May 2020 Millions of Jobs, SA 133 mill Nonfarm payroll employment 7 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Figure 6. May’s decline in the unemployment rate was not shared by blacks or Asians Asian Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. May 2020 Percent, SA 17.6 12.4 16.8 15.0 Unemployment rate by race and ethnicity 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Percent 1996 2012 1996 2012 1996 2012Starting dates Starting dates Starting dates Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), Table 326.10 Figure 7. Graduation rates for blacks are lower than for other groups and have not improved over time For‐profit institutions Nonprofit institutionsPublic institutions Asian Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White Graduation rates for BAs six years from start 9 Charts for “The Outlook for the Economy and Federal Reserve Policy” * The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Loretta J. Mester* President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economists on the Economy Council for Economic Education June 17, 2020

The Economy and Monetary Policy in Our Challenging Times Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Keynote Session 2020 Liberal Arts Macroeconomics Conference Pomona College Claremont, CA (via videoconference) August 5, 2020 1 Introduction I thank Dean Croushore and the organizers of the 2020 Liberal Arts Macroeconomics Conference for inviting me to present in the keynote session. I also want to acknowledge the important role that the participants in this conference play in our economy and in society. In recent years, some have questioned whether a liberal arts education offers the same value as it once did, and point to other types of programs that, in their view, better prepare students for the job market. I take the opposite view: to me the value of a liberal arts education has never been clearer. The current pandemic underscores the fact that the future is uncertain. A year ago, I certainly wasn’t imagining we would be in the place we find ourselves today. If we want students to be prepared for the future, then we must give them the tools they will need to successfully stand up to future challenges, think critically through possible approaches and solutions to those challenges, be resilient in the face of adversity, and question the status quo. A broad-based liberal arts education, which encompasses the study of history, literature, and the arts, as well as mathematics and the natural and social sciences, holds the best promise to prepare students for the future, whatever it may bring. I applaud the professors taking part in this conference. Not only do you have to be inspirational teachers, but you also have to be excellent researchers who are pushing the boundaries of knowledge in economics forward. Both roles have become more challenging during the pandemic, with the sudden need to move to remote teaching and the difficulty in keeping ongoing research on track. I appreciate your efforts and ask that you persevere in these very important roles. Today, before we open it up to questions, I’ll give you an update on the economy and on the Federal Reserve’s policy response. As always, the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 2 The Economy The coronavirus pandemic is a global public health crisis that has inflicted pain and hardship on people all over the world. This is an unprecedented situation and unprecedented actions have been taken in response. In thinking about the economic impact of the pandemic, it helps to think in terms of phases: the shutdown phase, the reopening phase, and a more traditional economic recovery phase. The shutdown phase began in March when the country took aggressive social distancing measures to limit the spread of the virus and to buy some time for the healthcare system to increase its capacity to care for the sick, learn more about the virus itself, and develop testing and treatments. The shutdown had swift and severe effects on the economy. The economy entered the reopening phase in May, as the public health statistics began to improve in some parts of the country. Many states began to relax some of their stay-at-home restrictions, with some states doing so more quickly and more broadly than others. We began to see some welcome rebound in the economic data in May and June. But it is good to keep in mind that growth rates after a shutdown are going to look good as activity resumes. Given the deep hole we are digging out of, it is more informative to look at levels when gauging the economy and assessing the outlook. The reopening phase has proved to be challenging. In late June, virus cases in many parts of the country began rising again and, in response, some states have hit the pause button on their reopening plans, while other states have reimposed some restrictions on activities. Although we don’t yet see the effects of the pause in many of the official economic statistics, the higher-frequency data and discussions with regional contacts do indicate that economic activity has slowed in recent weeks. Thus, the reopening phase may be more protracted than many had anticipated when it started. 3 [FIGURE 1] At this point, the most dated of our official statistics are the GDP data. These statistics show that economic activity peaked in February and the U.S. economy entered a recession. After declining at a 5 percent annual pace in the first quarter, real GDP plunged at a record 33 percent annual pace in the second quarter, with nonresidential business fixed investment down 27 percent, and personal consumption down almost 35 percent, at an annual rate. I expect that the second quarter will be the trough in economic activity. Consumer spending rebounded in May and June, with June’s spending on goods higher than it was in February, before the shutdown. But while spending on services, which includes dining at restaurants, air travel, and hotel stays, moved up in May and June, it remains well below pre-pandemic levels. [FIGURE 2] The decline in activity has put downward pressure on inflation. Both headline and core inflation readings moved down in March and April and remained low in May and June. It is true that supply disruptions have caused the prices of certain goods and services to rise, but this upward pressure has been more than offset by the downward pressure driven by the pullback in demand. And I expect inflation to remain low for some time to come. [FIGURE 3] The shutdown of the economy earlier this year led to an unprecedented rise in unemployment and loss of jobs. While many people can work from home, many others cannot. As reopening began, we started to see some improvement in labor markets. Both the unemployment rate and payroll employment have improved over the past two months. Recall that in February, the unemployment rate was 3.5 percent, its 50-year low. In April, the unemployment rate surged to 14.7 percent. As reopening commenced in May, people on temporary furlough began to be rehired. As of June, the unemployment rate is down to 11.1 percent. The fact that the unemployment rate is coming down is good news. But we also need to put this into perspective. The current level is still above its peak in the aftermath of the Great Recession. And there are still almost 18 million unemployed workers in the U.S., 4 compared with 6 million in February. This means one in 15 Americans over the age of 16 is unemployed, about the same as at the height after the Great Recession. [FIGURE 4] The economy lost over 22 million jobs in March and April. This is a staggering number. It would have been literally off the charts if I hadn’t changed the scale. In fact, the losses in just the two months of March and April were about the same as the number of jobs the economy added over the entire recent expansion that lasted more than 10 years. The jobs added in May and June make up only about one-third of the jobs lost. [FIGURE 5] To get a sense of where we are, it is helpful to look at employment in levels rather than monthly changes. The current level of payroll jobs is now back to where it was in 2014. In other words, the economy is still down about 6 years’ worth of job growth. The deterioration in the labor market is even sharper than these numbers indicate. Many people left the work force at the beginning of the shutdown and consequently they do not show up in the unemployment rate, and many workers had their hours cut. Our survey of firms in the Fourth District, which includes Ohio and parts of Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and West Virginia, indicates that firms have recalled workers more slowly than they originally intended to. As of mid-July, over half of District contacts have told us they are meaningfully altering their plans in response to the rise in virus cases, including reducing employment or employee compensation or cancelling or postponing planned capital expenditures. The deterioration in the labor market has not been evenly shared. Net job losses have been predominantly in lower-paying jobs. Nearly half of the net private-sector job losses since February have been in the leisure and hospitality and the retail trade sectors, the two sectors ranked lowest in terms of average hourly earnings. Three-quarters of the job losses are in the sectors that pay below-average wages. 5 [FIGURE 6] There are racial disparities as well. Unemployment rates among Blacks and Hispanics have been chronically above those of whites and Asians. Over the long expansion, we had finally seen some progress being made on that front, as the gap in unemployment rates narrowed. But the pandemic has increased the disparities. The net increase in the unemployment rate since February is higher for Blacks, Hispanics, and Asians than for whites. It is particularly distressing that much of the sacrifice over the pandemic period is being borne by the most vulnerable in our economy: lower-income and minority workers and communities, and the smaller of the small businesses. [FIGURE 7] And it shines a bright light on long-standing economic inequality that needs to be addressed if the economy is to perform up to its potential. Education is a path to better economic outcomes for individuals, households, and the country at large. According to data from the 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances, the median income for families whose head has a college degree was over $90,000 compared with only $40,000 for families whose head has only a high school diploma. Similarly, median net worth is considerably higher for those with a college degree.1 [FIGURE 8] Our work force has become more educated over time. But educational attainment differs by race, as does the likelihood of completing a degree. In the Fed’s survey, 39 percent of white heads of households held a college degree compared to 23 percent of Black heads of household and 17 percent of Hispanic heads of household. 2 1 Information about and data from the Federal Reserve’s Survey of Consumer Finances are available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scfindex.htm. 2 See Lisa J. Dettling, Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, and Jeffrey P. Thompson, “Recent Trends in Wealth-Holding by Race and Ethnicity: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances ,” FED Notes, September 27, 2019 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/recent-trends-in-wealth-holding-by- race-and-ethnicity-evidence-from-the-survey-of-consumer-finances-20170927.htm). 6 [FIGURE 9] Graduation rates for whites, Hispanics, and Asians have all risen over time, but those of Blacks remain well below those of these other groups and have shown no progress over time. Because economic well-being rises with education, unless more is done to support those entering college so they can complete their degrees, economic inequality is likely to continue to rise.3 The Economic Outlook and Policy Let me now turn to the outlook and policy. Macroeconomic forecasting has been particularly challenging during the pandemic. Higher-frequency indicators, including data on mobility, restaurant visits, debit and credit card transactions, employment in small businesses, and the weekly initial claims for unemployment insurance, all suggest that activity has begun to decelerate with the rise in virus cases. These recent developments add uncertainty to what was already an uncertain outlook. Whether the rise in cases and the deceleration in activity prove to be temporary or more persistent remains to be seen. At the very least, they suggest that the economy will be in the reopening phase for a while longer. It is clear that the path of the economy depends on the path of the virus. But that does not mean we are helpless. The actions we take can help control the virus and thereby change the impact of the virus on the economy. Increased government and private-sector investment in expanded testing, contact tracing, and developments of therapeutics and vaccines will influence the path of the virus and our ability to re-engage in economic activity. Each individual can also influence the path of the virus: we can wear a mask that covers our noses and mouths when out and about, we can avoid social gatherings and maintain our distance from others, and we can wash our hands frequently. These simple steps have been shown to make a difference in infection rates. According to the Cleveland Clinic, the latest estimates indicate that 3 See Loretta J. Mester, “Community Development and Human Capital,” remarks at the 2015 Policy Summit on Housing, Human Capital, and Inequality, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Philadelphia, and Richmond, Pittsburgh, PA, June 19, 2015 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20150619- community-development-and-human-capital.aspx). And see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020,” May 2020 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/2020-economic-well-being-of-us-households-in-2019- preface.htm). 7 if 95 percent of Americans wore face coverings in public, COVID-related deaths could be reduced by up to 40,000 to 50,000.4 In response to the increase in cases seen in Ohio, the governor recently upgraded the mask-wearing recommendation to a mandate. This is occurring in other states as well. Evidence from the Cleveland Fed’s daily national survey of households shows that the vast majority of the more than 1,000 survey respondents would comply with such a mandate, with older people more likely to comply than younger people. The vast majority also thought that mask-wearing is helpful in reducing transmission of the virus, and those who believed this are more likely to wear a mask. About 70 percent of respondents also reported that they feel more comfortable shopping when they see others wearing masks.5 Assuming that the virus gets under control once again and people feel safe enough and businesses confident enough to re-engage in economic activity, the economy will move from the reopening phase to the recovery phase. I anticipate that the recovery will take some time because significant sectoral reallocations are going to need to occur. Changes in consumers’ behavior, including their shopping, dining, and housing preferences; changes in firms’ demand for office space and work arrangements; and changes in supply chains will all take time to sort out. The pandemic was a significant shock to the economy – the largest in most of our lifetimes. A significant number of firms have already declared bankruptcy. Many workers will need to be rehired; some will have to find jobs in different industries. It 4 “COVID-19 Update: What Employers Need to Know,” conversation with Steve Gordon, MD, Chair, Department of Infectious Disease, Cleveland Clinic, moderated by James Merlino, MD, Chief Clinical Transformation Officer, Cleveland Clinic, webinar, July 27, 2020 (https://youtu.be/zxFECH7ZO4w). 5 The Cleveland Fed’s website provides updates of these survey results each Wednesday on the Consumers and COVID-19 page, https://www.clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and-data/consumers-and-covid-19.aspx. For a discussion of the results on mask-wearing, see Edward S. Knotek II, Raphael S. Schoenle, Alexander M. Dietrich, Gernot J. Müller, Kristian Ove R. Myrseth, and Michael Weber (2020) “Consumers and COVID-19: Survey Results on Mask-Wearing Behaviors and Beliefs,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary 2020–20. https://doi.org/10.26509/frbc-ec-202020. 8 will take continued fiscal and monetary policy support to limit lasting damage to the economy and achieve a sustainable recovery. Policy Actions Both the federal government and the Federal Reserve took swift and significant actions to provide households and businesses with relief during the shutdown. Fiscal policymakers made grants to individuals, certain businesses hit hardest by the pandemic, and states and municipalities. They offered expanded unemployment benefits and loans to small businesses that turn into grants if they maintain their payrolls. It is clear that these programs made a significant difference; it is also clear that more fiscal support is needed to provide a bridge for households, small businesses, and state and local municipalities that have borne the brunt of the economic shutdown until the recovery is sustainably in place. As one indicator of the need, I point you to recent analysis by a Brookings Institution researcher of data from the Census Bureau’s Pulse Survey from the third week in June. These data show that 16.5 percent of households with children reported that sometimes or often their children were not eating enough due to a lack of resources. This is more than 5 times as high as in 2018. It translates into 14 million children, which is over 2-1/2 times the number at the peak of the Great Recession. 6 Unlike the federal government, the Federal Reserve is not legally able to make grants, but it has taken significant actions to ensure that financial markets have enough liquidity to continue to function well and that credit can flow to households and businesses. Actions include buying Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities to address strains in these markets, and setting up a variety of so-called 13(3) facilities. These emergency lending facilities, with the backing of the U.S. Treasury, serve as a backstop to other key credit markets and support the flow of credit to households, businesses of all sizes, and state 6 Lauren Bauer, “About 14 Million Children in the U.S. Are Not Getting Enough to Eat,” Up Front, The Brookings Institution, July 9, 2020. (https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2020/07/09/about-14-million-children-in-the-us- are-not-getting-enough-to-eat/) 9 and local governments. The Fed is also ensuring that our central bank counterparties abroad have access to dollar funding. Because much of the flow of credit to households and businesses relies on the banking system, the Fed has encouraged banks to use its discount window as a source of liquidity and to work with their borrowers affected by the virus. The Fed has temporarily relaxed some of the regulatory requirements and supervisory oversight so that banks have greater capacity to lend, but it has also suspended share buybacks, limited dividend distributions, and is requiring large banks to reassess their long-run capital plans to ensure they remain adequately capitalized to sustain lending through the downturn. Since March, the FOMC has set its fed funds rate target range at 0 to 1/4 percent. At our meeting last week, we reiterated that we expect to maintain this target range until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. The portfolio of Fed actions has helped to relieve stress in financial markets, improve market functioning, support the flow of credit to businesses and households, and contribute to very accommodative financial conditions in support of economic activity. As the economy emerges from the reopening phase and moves into the recovery phase, the focus of Fed policy will expand from supporting market functioning and the flow of credit to ensuring that appropriate monetary policy accommodation remains in place to support the economy’s return to more normal levels of economic activity and employment and inflation’s moving back up. Although our policy rate is already at its effective lower bound, the tools that we used to support the recovery from the Great Recession, including forward guidance about the future path of policy and purchases of longer-term Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities, can be used to provide additional accommodation. Clear communications about our policy strategy, which is part of our current review of our monetary 10 policy framework, can also make the monetary policy actions we take more effective.7 As Fed Chair Powell indicated in his recent press conference, we plan to wrap up the review in the near future.8 By the end of this year, I expect that output will still be about 6 percent below its level at the end of last year; that the unemployment rate will remain elevated, at around 9 percent or so; and that inflation will be well below our 2 percent goal. Of course, the uncertainty around this forecast is extremely high: we are in an unprecedented situation and outcomes depend not only on appropriate economic policy but also on public health considerations. The increase in virus cases that we’ve seen in recent weeks has raised the downside risks to the outlook and is a stark reminder that there are several different scenarios that could play out. While there are many uncertainties, there is one thing you can be certain of: the Federal Reserve is committed to using all of its policy tools to provide relief to households and businesses, to foster stability in the financial system, and to support the recovery back to maximum employment and price stability in service to the public. 7 For information about the Federal Reserve’s review of its monetary policy framework, including strategy, tools, and communications, see https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools- and-communications.htm. 8 See “Transcript of Chair Powell’s Press Conference,” July 29, 2020 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20200729.pdf ). 1 Charts for “The Economy and Monetary Policy in Our Challenging Times” * The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Loretta J. Mester* President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Keynote Session 2020 Liberal Arts Macroeconomics Conference August 5, 2020 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 ‐36.0 ‐30.0 ‐24.0 ‐18.0 ‐12.0 ‐6.0 0.0 6.0 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Percent Change, SAAR Figure 1. The economic expansion ended in February and output plunged Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics Quarterly data: Last obs. 2020Q2 ‐33% Growth of real GDP 3 ‐1.5 ‐1.0 ‐0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Figure 2. Inflation has moved down Headline PCE Core PCE Cleveland Fed Median PCE Year‐over‐year percentage change Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics and Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Monthly data: Last obs. June 2020 Percent 4 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Unemployment rate Figure 3. The unemployment rate moved down in June but remains well above its peak after the Great Recession Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. June 2020 Percent, SA 11.1% 0 100 200 300 400 500 Thousands of jobs 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Jan‐Feb 2020 Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Quarterly data: Last obs. June 2020 Figure 4. In May and June, the economy regained about 1/3 of the job losses in March and April Monthly change in payroll jobs ‐25000 ‐20000 ‐15000 ‐10000 ‐5000 0 5000 March April May June 2020 2020 2020 2020 Thousands of jobs 5 6 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Figure 5. Jobs lost in March and April were nearly the same number added over the 10+ year expansion; we are still down about 6 years’ worth of job growth Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. June 2020 Millions of Jobs, SA 138 mill Nonfarm payroll employment 7 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Figure 6. The net increase in the unemployment rate since February is larger for nonwhites than for whites Asian Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. June 2020 Percent, SA 14.5 10.1 15.4 13.8 Unemployment rate by race and ethnicity 0 50 100 150 200 250 300 Thousands of 2016 dollars No high school diploma Source: Federal Reserve’s 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances Figure 7. Income and net worth rise with educational attainment High school diploma Some college College degree Median income of household, by education of head of household Median net worth of household, by education of head of household 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances 8 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 Axis Title Axis Title Percent of households, by race of head of household No high school diploma Source: Federal Reserve’s 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances Figure 8. Educational attainment for nonwhites lags that of whites High school diploma Some college College degree Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White 2016 Consumer Finance Survey 9 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Percent 1996 2012 1996 2012 1996 2012Starting dates Starting dates Starting dates Source: U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), Table 326.10 Figure 9. Graduation rates for Blacks are lower than for other groups and have not improved over time For‐profit institutions Nonprofit institutionsPublic institutions Asian Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White Graduation rates for BAs six years from start 10 11 Charts for “The Economy and Monetary Policy in Our Challenging Times” * The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Loretta J. Mester* President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Keynote Session 2020 Liberal Arts Macroeconomics Conference August 5, 2020

An Update on the Economy and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Keynote Session 2020 Economic Measurement Seminar The NABE Foundation (via videoconference) September 2, 2020 1 Introduction I thank Jack Kleinhenz for inviting me to participate in the NABE Foundation’s 2020 Economic Measurement Seminar. I last spoke at a NABE conference in February. That was only six short months ago, but it seems like a lifetime. Many things have changed since then, including current economic conditions and the outlook for the economy and monetary policy. I want to compliment NABE for maintaining its important programming throughout the pandemic. It is a demonstration of perseverance and resilience in the face of extraordinary circumstances, traits exhibited by many households, businesses, and organizations over the past several months. Such resilience is a hallmark of the U.S. economy, and it will prove useful as the economy makes its way to a sustainable recovery. Before we turn to the question and answer part of this session, I’ll give you a brief update on the economic outlook and monetary policy, and touch on the changes to the FOMC’s policy strategy that were announced last week. The views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economy In thinking about the economic impact of the pandemic, I find it helps to think in terms of phases. The shutdown phase started in March when the country took aggressive social distancing measures to limit the spread of the virus and to buy some time for the healthcare system to increase its capacity to care for the sick, learn more about the virus itself, and develop testing and treatments. There were swift and severe effects on the economy from the shutdown of nonessential businesses and activities. The reopening phase started in May, as public health statistics began to improve and many parts of the country began to relax some of their stay-at-home restrictions. Economic activity and hiring in many sectors began to improve in May and June as businesses began to reopen and consumers began to re- engage. Even sectors such as travel and leisure and hospitality saw some improvement, although these sectors are likely to remain weak for some time. Early in the reopening phase, many of our business 2 contacts in the Fourth Federal Reserve District, which includes Ohio and parts of Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and West Virginia, told us that activity was picking up more than they had expected. And some of the official statistics have come in stronger than economists had expected. The housing market has been particularly strong, with both new home and existing home sales now back to or above pre- pandemic levels. Spending on durable goods, including autos, is well above pre-pandemic levels. This is all good news. But the recovery in activity appears to be a fragile one. The most recent high- frequency data and discussions with regional contacts indicate that the pickup in activity seen in May and June has slowed over the past couple of months. This slowdown has occurred as the number of virus cases began to rise again in some parts of the country in late June, causing some localities to put their reopening plans on pause or to reimpose restrictions on activity. Even in areas where authorities did not change reopening plans, the rise in virus cases seems to have had a dampening effect on activity as people pulled back, out of concern for their safety. The most recent virus data suggest the number of new cases, while still elevated, has turned back down, so I’ll be watching to see if the pace of activity picks up again. Since this is a measurement conference, it seems fitting that I should show you some charts illustrating some of the data. Economists tend to look at growth rates when assessing the economy, but in this unprecedented situation of a shutdown followed by a reopening, looking at the level of activity compared to what it was before the pandemic is helpful in gauging the economic outlook. [FIGURE 1] The official GDP data clearly show the deep plunge in activity associated with the shutdown. Economic activity peaked in February and the U.S. economy entered a recession. Real GDP fell at a 5 percent annual pace in the first quarter and a record 32 percent annual pace in the second quarter, with nonresidential business fixed investment down 26 percent, and personal consumption down 34 percent, at an annual rate. The level of real GDP in the second quarter was back down to the level it was in 2014 – so we have lost six years of output growth. 3 The recovery in some sectors, like services, will take longer than in others, and there will be fits and starts, depending on the course of the virus. But I expect the second quarter to be the trough, a strong rebound in growth in the third quarter, and continued positive growth in the fourth quarter, but with the level of output still ending the year somewhat below where it was at the end of last year. [FIGURE 2] The decline in activity in the first half of the year when the economy shut down put downward pressure on inflation, even though supply disruptions have caused the prices of certain goods and services to rise. During the reopening phase, there has been some recovery in the inflation measures, but I expect inflation to remain below our longer-run 2 percent goal for some time to come. [FIGURE 3] The shutdown and reopening had clear effects on the labor market. In April there was an unprecedented rise in unemployment and loss of jobs, particularly in sectors where people cannot work from home. Many workers reported that they expected their unemployment spell would be temporary, and as the economy has been reopening, we have seen a rapid decline in the unemployment rate as people on temporary furlough began to be rehired. This is good news. But it is also good to keep these numbers in perspective. The unemployment rate was 10.2 percent in July, still slightly above its peak after the Great Recession. There are still 16 million unemployed workers in the U.S., compared with 6 million in February. This means that about one in 16 Americans over the age of 16 is unemployed, near the level after the Great Recession. Moreover, the deterioration in the labor market has not been evenly shared, with the net increase in the unemployment rate since February being higher for Blacks, Hispanics, and Asians than for whites. [FIGURE 4] The payroll employment data tell a similar story. In just the two months of March and April, the economy lost 22 million jobs, the same number of jobs it had added over the entire recent expansion that lasted over 10 years. More than three-quarters of those losses were in the sectors paying 4 below-average wages. The good news is that in just three months, the economy has added back over 9 million jobs. Of course, this means we are less than half way back up to the pre-pandemic level of jobs, and the current level of employment is about what it was back in 2014. So like output, about 6 years’ worth of job growth has been lost. Given the unprecedented nature of the pandemic and economic shutdown, many economists, including those at the Fed, have been looking at higher-frequency indicators to track developments. The Cleveland Fed has been surveying our contacts with greater frequency and we have added a nationwide survey of consumers to gauge how the virus has affected their attitudes and activities. These higher-frequency indicators clearly show the rebound in activity that came with the reopening of the economy, but they also show that activity is correlated with data on the course of the virus. [FIGURE 5] For example, when virus cases began to rise again in late June, the data on mobility, or the percentage of time spent away from home, and the data on restaurant visits began to level off compared to May when reopening began. Our contacts in the restaurant industry also confirmed that the pace of business activity was dampening and some have begun to question the longer-run viability of many establishments, especially those that have not been able to transition to takeout. [FIGURE 6] As the pandemic has worn on, businesses have begun to change their plans. Early on, many contacts told us that they were not planning to make permanent reductions to their work force; however, they eventually had to let some workers go. In our latest survey, over half of the firms told us that in light of the increase in virus cases since late June, they have made meaningful changes to their plans, including for hiring and capital spending. Small businesses have been disproportionately affected by the virus, and the smallest of the small businesses particularly so. Data from Homebase show that the strides made since April on employment at 5 small businesses have now begun to stall, with the number of hourly staff down about 20 percent since January. As documented by researchers at the New York Fed, Black-owned businesses have been particularly hard hit by the pandemic, and have been twice as likely to close as other firms during the pandemic. The researchers point to a number of contributing factors including these firms’ weaker financial cushions, weaker bank relationships, and funding gaps that existed prior to the pandemic, plus less access to federal relief funds.1 [FIGURE 7] The Cleveland Fed’s survey data show that both businesses and consumers are thinking differently about the pandemic than they did at the start. In our survey taken in late June, about half of our regional business contacts said it will take at least a year for their firms’ activity to return to pre- pandemic levels. The Cleveland Fed’s national daily survey shows that consumers are now more willing to engage in certain activities than they were at the start, but they also believe that the pandemic will last much longer than they originally thought.2 In March, over 80 percent of respondents thought the pandemic would last a year or less. In early August, only half think that, and the other half thinks it will be two years or even longer. The Economic Outlook and Policy The link we’ve seen between the rise in virus cases and the dampening of activity underscores the fact that the path of the economy depends on the path of the virus. Of course, the path of the virus can be 1 Claire Kramer Mills and Jessica Battisto, “Double Jeopardy: Covid-19’s Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities,” Brief, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020 (https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/smallbusiness/DoubleJeopardy_COVID19andBlackOwnedBusine sses). 2 The Cleveland Fed’s website provides updates of these survey results each Wednesday on the Consumers and COVID-19 page, https://www.clevelandfed.org/our-research/indicators-and-data/consumers-and-covid-19.aspx. For further results from the survey, see Edward S. Knotek II, et al., “Consumers and COVID-19: A Real-Time Survey,” Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, 2020-08, April 17, 2020 (https://doi.org/10.26509/frbc- ec-202008). 6 affected by our actions. These include public- and private-sector investments in expanded testing, contact tracing, treatments, and vaccines, as well as our own individual actions to safely engage in activity by wearing a mask that covers our noses and mouths, avoiding social gatherings, maintaining distance from others, and washing our hands frequently. Assuming that we get the virus under control and people feel safe enough and businesses confident enough to re-engage in economic activity, the economy will move from the reopening phase to a more sustained recovery phase. This recovery is likely to take some time because the pandemic was a significant shock to the economy. Both the federal government and the Federal Reserve took swift and significant actions to provide households and businesses with relief during the shutdown. Fiscal actions have included grants to individuals, certain businesses hit hardest by the pandemic, and states and municipalities; expanded unemployment benefits; and loans to small businesses that became grants for firms maintaining their payrolls. The Federal Reserve took actions to ensure that financial markets had enough liquidity to continue to function well and that credit could continue to flow to households and businesses, thereby avoiding financial instability on top of the pandemic. These actions have included buying Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities to address strains in these markets; making sure our central bank counterparties abroad have access to dollar funding; setting up a variety of so-called 13(3) emergency facilities, backed by the U.S. Treasury, that serve as a backstop to other key credit markets and support the flow of credit to households, businesses of all sizes, and state and local governments; temporarily relaxing some of the regulatory requirements on banks so they have greater capacity to lend; and since March, maintaining the fed funds rate target range at 0 to 1/4 percent. 7 By the end of this year, I expect that output will still be somewhat below its level at the end of last year; that the unemployment rate will remain in the high single digits; and that inflation will be well below our longer-run 2 percent goal. Of course, the uncertainty around this forecast is extremely high: we are in an unprecedented situation and outcomes depend on public health considerations. The outlook also depends on appropriate economic policy. In my view, fiscal policy and monetary policy support are needed to limit lasting damage to the economy and achieve a broader, sustainable recovery. Several key parts of the fiscal policy support already in place are expiring. Given economic conditions, it seems clear that further fiscal support is needed to provide a bridge for households, small businesses, and state and local municipalities that have borne the brunt of the pandemic until the recovery is sustainably in place.3 For the Fed’s part, the FOMC has indicated that we expect to maintain the fed funds rate target range at 0 to 1/4 percent until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum employment and price stability goals. Our asset purchases continue to support market functioning and accommodative financial conditions. In addition, clear communications about our policy strategy can also make any monetary policy actions we take more effective. Last week, the FOMC released a revised statement outlining our longer-run goals and monetary policy strategy, which should help clarify and reinforce the FOMC’s policy intentions.4 So let me conclude with a few highlights from this statement. I direct you to Fed Chair Powell’s recent remarks for a fuller discussion of the statement.5 3 Recent Cleveland Fed research shows that there have been sizable declines in activit ies that typically produce the largest share of state and local government tax revenue, including air transportation and gasoline sales. See Stephan Whitaker, “How Much Help Do State and Local Governments Need? Updated Estimates of Revenue Losses from Pandemic Mitigation,” District Data Brief, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, June 29, 2020 (https://doi.org /10.26509/frbc-ddb-20200629). 4 For information about the Federal Reserve’s review of its monetary policy framework, including strategy, tools, and communications, see https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools- and-communications.htm. 5 See Jerome H. Powell, “New Economic Challenges and the Fed's Monetary Policy Review,” remarks at “Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy,” an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, WY (via webcast), August 27, 2020 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20200827a.htm). 8 Revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy For the past year and a half, the FOMC has been engaged in a review of our framework – the strategy, tools, and communications – for setting monetary policy in pursuit of our statutory goals to promote maximum employment, price stability, and moderate long-term interest rates. The review was informed by our experience during and after the Great Recession, by economic theory and empirical analysis, and by consultations with academic researchers and practitioners at research conferences and with the public at large, through a series of Fed Listens events held across the country. The review, whose main conclusions are captured in the strategy statement, was undertaken in light of changes in the economic environment that have emerged since our first strategy statement was published in 2012. One important change is the decline both here and abroad in the general level of interest rates consistent with sustainable growth and price stability. This decline reflects several factors, including the aging of the population, changes in risk preferences, and slower productivity growth. It means that the level of the fed funds rate consistent with maximum employment and price stability is now lower than it has been in the past. This means that during economic downturns, it is now more likely that the fed funds rate will be constrained by its effective lower bound. In other words, in the wake of a downturn, the FOMC will have less policy space to support the economy using its traditional policy tool. With households, businesses, and financial markets all understanding this constraint, this imparts a downward bias to inflation and inflation expectations, and increases the downside risks to achieving both of our policy goals. Another change in the economic environment pertains to inflation dynamics. Resource slack has become less correlated with actual inflation than in the past, and inflation expectations now play a larger role in determining inflation outcomes. This makes it even more important that inflation expectations remain well anchored at levels consistent with our longer-run 2 percent inflation goal, especially since inflation running below our goal would result in even less policy space in a low-interest-rate environment. 9 The first thing to note about the revised strategy statement is that the FOMC has reaffirmed that a longer- run inflation rate of 2 percent is most consistent with our statutory mandate. But our strategy statement is now more explicit about how we will go about achieving this inflation goal. Namely, after periods in which inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, we will likely aim to have inflation run moderately above 2 percent for some time. Doing so will help anchor inflation expectations, a main determinant of actual inflation, at levels consistent with 2 percent inflation. The new language is a stronger statement than we have made in the past as we have struggled to effectively convey that 2 percent should not be interpreted as a ceiling. We are now clear that after inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, not only will we tolerate serendipitous shocks that move inflation above 2 percent, but that we will likely set policy with the intention to move inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. I have spoken many times on the fact that policy communications should acknowledge uncertainty.6 The changes made in the strategy statement about our employment goal are an acknowledgment of the uncertainty around assessments of the level of maximum employment. Indeed, the FOMC’s assessments of the longer-run unemployment rate have come down significantly over time, and employment growth over the expansion ended up being considerably stronger without generating inflation than past experience suggested was possible. It took time to learn about these structural changes in the economy. And this time-to-learn, combined with the previous strategy statement’s references to “deviations” of employment from maximum employment, has been misinterpreted by some as suggesting that the FOMC, at times, takes deliberate policy action to bring employment down independently of our inflation goal. This is not the case. The benefits of a strong labor market in fostering economic inclusion for all Americans are clear and we need to be humble about our abilities to assess maximum employment in real 6 See, e.g., Loretta J. Mester, “Acknowledging Uncertainty,” remarks at the Shadow Open Market Committee Fall Meeting, New York, NY, October 7, 2016 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp- 20161007-acknowledging-uncertainty.aspx). 10 time. The new statement language clarifies that in the absence of inflationary pressures or risks to financial stability, strong employment is not a concern and monetary policy will not react to it. I strongly believe that clear policy communications are an important part of effective monetary policymaking. The completion of the framework review and the revised strategy statement come at an opportune time, in support of the FOMC’s commitment to doing all that it can to support a sustainable recovery back to maximum employment and price stability in service to the public. 1 Charts for “An Update on the Economy and Monetary Policy” * The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Loretta J. Mester* President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Keynote Session 2020 Economic Measurement Seminar The NABE Foundation September 2, 2020 2 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 15 16 17 18 19 20 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Trillions of chain‐weighted 2012 $ Figure 1. The economic expansion ended in February and output plunged Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics Quarterly data: Last obs. 2020Q2 Level of real GDP 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 ‐35.0 ‐30.0 ‐25.0 ‐20.0 ‐15.0 ‐10.0 ‐5.0 0.0 5.0 10.0 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Percent change, SAAR ‐32% Growth of real GDP, annualized 3 ‐1.5 ‐1.0 ‐0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Figure 2. Inflation moved down as the economy shut down Headline PCE Core PCE Cleveland Fed Median PCE Year‐over‐year percentage change Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics and Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Monthly data: Last obs. July 2020 Percent 4 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Figure 3. Unemployment rates are down since April but remain very elevated. Net increases since February have been larger for nonwhites than for whites. Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. July 2020 Percent, SA 9.2 12.0 14.6 12.9 Overall Asian Black or African American Hispanic or Latino White 10.2 Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Monthly data: Last obs. July 2020 Figure 4. The economy is adding jobs again but we are still down about 6 years’ worth of job growth Monthly change in payroll jobs ‐25000 ‐20000 ‐15000 ‐10000 ‐5000 0 5000 March April May June July 2020 2020 2020 2020 2020 Thousands of jobs 5 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Millions of jobs, SA Level of payroll employment 140 mill 6 ‐30 ‐25 ‐20 ‐15 ‐10 ‐5 0 5 10 3/6 3/20 4/3 4/17 5/1 5/15 5/29 6/12 6/26 7/10 7/24 8/7 8/21 Figure 5. People are re‐engaging in activity but the pace has slowed Source for Mobility: Google via Opportunity Insights at www.tracktherecovery.org, Daily data: Last obs. 8/21/2020 Source for Restaurant Visits: OpenTable, Daily data: Last obs. 8/30/2020 Percentage change since January 2020 ‐8.8% Mobility: Average time spent outside the home Dates in 2020 ‐110 ‐100 ‐90 ‐80 ‐70 ‐60 ‐50 ‐40 ‐30 ‐20 ‐10 0 10 20 2/16 3/1 3/15 3/29 4/12 4/26 5/10 5/24 6/7 6/21 7/5 7/19 8/2 8/16 8/30 Restaurant visits Dates in 2020 Year‐over‐year percentage change ‐52% 7 ‐60 ‐50 ‐40 ‐30 ‐20 ‐10 0 10 Mar‐20 Apr‐20 May‐20 Jun‐20 Jul ‐20 Aug ‐20 Figure 6. Firms have altered plans in recent weeks Source for Plan Changes: Cleveland Fed, Information collected between 7/13/2020 and 7/20/2020 Source for Hourly Employees: Homebase via Haver Analytics, Daily data: Last obs. 8/1/2020 Percentage change since January 2020 ‐21.0% Number of hourly employees of small businesses 25.0 50.0 55.4 55.6 58.8 62.1 66.7 0 2 04 06 08 0 Professional and Bus Servs Construction and Real Estate TOTAL Transportation Retail Manufacturing Financial Services Percent of industry respondents Has your firm meaningfully altered its plans (e.g., hiring, capital expenditures, hours, etc.) in response to the recent increase in COVID‐19 cases? Figure 7. Business and consumer expectations about the effects of the pandemic have changed over time 9.8 9.0 6.0 25.6 22.6 27.0 21.9 0.0 15.2 19.0 23.8 20.0 01 0 2 0 3 0 Unsure or no response Already returned 3 months from now 6 months from now 12 months from now Longer than 12 months Percent of respondentsApril 17‐22, 2020 June 22‐29, 2020 8 When will your firm’s output return to pre‐crisis levels? Source for firm output: Cleveland Fed, Information collected 4/17‐22/2020 and 6/22‐29/2020 Source for Consumers and COVID‐19 Survey: Cleveland Fed, Daily data: Last obs. 8/25/2020 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 3/10 3/24 4/7 4/21 5/5 5/19 6/2 6/16 6/30 7/14 7/28 8/11 8/25 1 year or less 2 years 3 years or more Consumers and COVID‐19 Survey: How long will the coronavirus outbreak last? Dates in 2020 Percent of respondents 9 Charts for “An Update on the Economy and Monetary Policy” * The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Loretta J. Mester* President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Keynote Session 2020 Economic Measurement Seminar The NABE Foundation September 2, 2020
