Now, I will turn to our special topic. In an important sense, schools constitute the backbone of our national and regional economy. Yet, this backbone can be vulnerable during recessions. Schools teach our citizens skills, including how to read, write, do math, create art or music and work in teams. Economists call these skills “human capital” because they are an important input that fuels a nation’s or region’s economic growth and development. In this way, schools play a key role in shaping our future. Therefore, it is essential to understand how the Great Recession has affected our ability to educate the next generations of students. Thus, today, we will examine how the recession has affected funding levels for schools in our region. As you know, there is an ongoing vigorous debate about how to most effectively organize public education and provide incentives to teachers, students and administrators. Such inquiry is key to any effort to ensure the best possible education for our citizens, but it is beyond the scope of this briefing. The housing bust and the onset of the recession in 2007 strained state and local government finances. Most local governments rely heavily on property tax revenue to fund their schools and other activities. This was particularly true during the first half of the decade, when the housing boom strongly supported property tax revenues. Then came the bust; steep declines in the housing market led to corresponding drops in local property tax revenue. State governments’ revenues also fell, as rising unemployment cut income tax revenue and reduced consumption shrank sales tax revenues. Since most state and local governments spend at least half of their budgets on education, these developments have constrained funding for our primary and secondary schools. To stave off drastic state and local government spending cuts, the federal government allocated $100 billion to states, including New York and New Jersey, for education through the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA). Research done here at the New York Fed reveals that school finances in both New York and New Jersey were impacted by the Great Recession, with New Jersey sustaining particularly severe cuts. 4 ARRA funds helped school finances in both states, yet did not completely compensate for lost state and local revenues. With ARRA funding drying up and our local and state economies still under stress, a question looms before us. How might we expect school finances and student learning to fare in the near future? Given the key role that human capital plays in our nation’s growth, this is an important issue. We at the New York Fed will continue to monitor school finances and other education indicators in our region closely as this will, over time, affect our regional economy. Conclusion In summary, during the second half of 2011, growth slowed in New York, falling well short of the national rate, although New Jersey kept pace. It’s also important to note that the national labor market is showing more consistent signs of improvement, and the regional labor market has continued to make progress. However, at the national level, the pace of recovery remains sluggish by historical standards and is likely to slow somewhat in early 2012. Thus, unemployment, both nationally and locally, is likely to remain unacceptably high for some time. Also, inflation is likely to be below our objective for several years. Clearly, much work remains to achieve the Fed’s dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability. The Great Recession has affected education financing in both New York and New Jersey, but New Jersey was hit harder. Through its impact on the education of the next generation, this situation could have troubling implications for the ability of the next generation to succeed in the demanding jobs of the future. I will now ask Jason Bram to provide additional details on the regional economy. ___________________________________________________ 1 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2012 White Paper, " The U.S. Housing Market: Current Conditions and Policy Considerations " and “ Housing and the Economic Recovery ” by William Dudley. 2 For more information, see Indexes of Coincident Economic Indicators on the New York Fed website. 3 For a more information, see “ An Introduction to the FRBNY Consumer Credit Panel ,” New York Fed Staff Report No. 479, November 2010. For the recent releases from the panel, see U.S. Credit Conditions . 4 For more detail, see Chakrabarti, Rajashri and Elizabeth Setren. 2011. “ The Impact of the Great Recession on School District Finances: Evidence from New York ,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 534; Chakrabarti, Rajashri and Sarah Sutherland. 2012. “Precarious Slopes? The Great Recession, Federal Stimulus, and New Jersey Schools ,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No. 538; and watch for two forthcoming Liberty Street Economics Blog posts on January 30 and February 1, 2012. Quick Links Index of Coincident Economic Indicators U.S. Credit Conditions Empire State Manufacturing Survey By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

February 24, 2012 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Panel Discussion at 2012 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York City It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today on a panel with Charles Plosser of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, and Juergen Stark, formerly of the European Central Bank. Our topic today is fiscal policy—for central bankers always dangerous waters to swim in. I will focus my remarks on the United States as others are better qualified to comment on the situation in Europe and elsewhere. To start, let me stress that it is essential that the United States put in place a credible program of medium-term fiscal consolidation that addresses our sizeable and growing structural deficits in a manner that is consistent with supporting ongoing economic recovery. Today I am going to discuss two specific issues relevant to U.S. fiscal policy. First, I am going to highlight the importance of taking the increase in debt service costs into account that will take place when economic conditions permit the normalization of monetary policy. I will argue that we are in an unusual period in which net interest expense is temporarily depressed. This will not last and the fiscal authorities need to factor this in when considering what needs to be done to put the federal budget deficit and the nation's debt burden on a sustainable path. Second, I will argue that fiscal consolidation should take into consideration the offsetting adjustments needed to keep the economy on an even keel. While fiscal consolidation is a necessary condition for a healthy economy over time, it is not a sufficient condition. Fiscal adjustments require offsetting changes in private-sector spending and saving behavior, and in the trade sector. Prudent economic policies and international coordination can help ensure that such adjustments take place in ways that support economic activity (and, by extension also support government revenue). As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and opinions and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. As we all are aware, the federal budget deficit is very high and the federal debt burden has climbed sharply as a share of gross domestic product (GDP) (Figure 1) . Despite this, the net interest burden on the outstanding debt remains low as a share of GDP (Figure 2) . This is due, of course, to the unusually low level of short- and long-term interest rates. These unusually low interest rates are the result of monetary policy actions taken by the FOMC. The sole purpose of these actions has been to promote the dual mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability in the wake of the financial crisis. The FOMC has stated that it currently anticipates keeping short-term interest rates exceptionally low until late 2014 and this has contributed to the decline in long-term rates. In addition, large-scale asset purchases and the maturity extension program have pushed down longer-term interest rates by removing duration from the private market. As a result, both the U.S. government and private-sector borrowers have benefited from unusually low borrowing costs. Indeed, the net interest burden data shown in Figure 2 actually overstates the net cost to Treasury. That is because the interest payments from the Treasury to the Federal Reserve are included in the net interest cost shown in Figure 2, but no offsetting adjustment is made for the fact that the Fed remits almost all of the interest it receives from the Treasury and on its other portfolio holdings right back to the Treasury. The Federal Reserve's remittances to the Treasury are included in the budget separately in the miscellaneous receipts category. Thus, one should deduct these receipts from the debt service numbers to properly measure the Treasury's net interest burden. Normally, this adjustment doesn't change the picture much. However, it is relevant now because Federal Reserve remittances are unusually high. This is because the Fed's balance sheet is unusually large, as a result of asset purchases undertaken to promote the dual mandate, and because the spread between the cost of the Federal Reserve's liabilities (mainly the 0.25 percent rate that the Fed pays on excess reserves) and the return on its assets is unusually high. As shown in (Figure 3) , the Fed's net remittances to the Treasury have climbed sharply in recent years, rising to more than $75 billion per year over the past two years, after averaging about $27 billion over the 2005-07 period. 1 Subtracting net remittances from the Fed from the Treasury's net interest cost (as a share of GDP), one can see that the increase in our enlarged federal debt has not yet generated a significant rise in the net debt service burden (Figure 4) , However, the low interest rates and enlarged balance sheet, which has generated these reduced borrowing costs, will not be sustained over time. Recall that the Federal Reserve's policy decisions are motivated solely by monetary policy considerations—how best to achieve maximum sustainable employment and price stability. This means that the ancillary effects on the federal deficit from the Fed's monetary policy actions are incidental and will prove temporary. Eventually, as economic and financial conditions improve, the pursuit of the dual mandate will lead to a different monetary policy stance, one that requires higher short-term interest rates. And, the Federal Reserve will also eventually shrink the size of its balance sheet. These actions will tend to increase the Treasury's net interest costs and pull down the Federal Reserve's remittances to the Treasury. Together, these two effects will sharply push up the Treasury's net interest burden. To show how this may play out, let's use as an illustration a "current policy" baseline based on information provided by the Congressional Budget Office, including its macroeconomic assumptions. Under these assumptions, the output gap is closed and monetary policy is normalized by 2017. As shown in Figure 5, net debt service is projected to rise to 3.3 percent of GDP by fiscal year 2020 up from 1.0 percent in 2011, based on an assumption that the interest rate for three-month Treasury bills will rise from around 10 basis points today to 3.8 percent by 2020 and the interest rate on benchmark 10-year Treasury securities will increase from around 2 percent today to 5 percent by 2020. On top of this, Federal Reserve remittances are projected to fall sharply. In its recent current law baseline projection, the CBO calculates that net remittances will decline from a peak of 0.55 percent of GDP in 2011 to a long-run average of around 0.2 percent by 2017 and beyond. Thus, on the current policy baseline, the combined effect of higher debt service and lower remittances will total 2 ¼ percent of GDP by fiscal 2020 relative to the current fiscal year (Figure 5) . Of course, this assumes that interest rates follow the trajectory used in the CBO baseline. If interest rates rose faster and reached a level 100 basis points higher in 2020 than what the CBO has assumed, the net debt service burden would be about 3 ¼ percentage points higher by 2020, all else equal. Given the uncertainties around economic forecasts that far into the future, it would be highly desirable for the fiscal authorities to put in place a medium-term program of fiscal consolidation now, while market conditions are benign. At the same time, I think we must be careful and not focus exclusively on the imperative of fiscal consolidation. That is because fiscal policy adjustments have important implications for the level and composition of economic activity more broadly—both here and abroad. If we must undertake fiscal consolidation— and over time we must—then we need to be cognizant that this adjustment will need to be accompanied by other offsetting changes in the composition of economic activity in our and the global economy. 2 One way of illustrating these interrelationships is to use the following accounting identity, which imposes an adding up constraint on the overall economy: If you define private-sector net saving as the private balance and public sector net saving as the public balance, then: Private balance + public balance = current account balance. At the outset of the financial crisis, the private balance, which was negative, swung sharply into surplus, and this was largely accommodated by a decrease in the public balance—in other words, an increase in the government deficit. Recently, 3 this accounting identity looked roughly like this: 6.5% of GDP private balance + (-9.5% of GDP) public balance = -3% of GDP current account balance Realistically, the public balance 4 needs to be reduced to about -3 percent of GDP over the next five years or so for the ratio of federal debt held by the public-to-GDP to stabilize around 75 percent to 80 percent of GDP. One might reasonably do more, but this just strikes me as the minimum adjustment that would be prudent and sustainable. This requires a large change from where we are today. For the accounting identity to continue to hold, which it must, there needs to be sizable shifts in the private balance and/or the current account balance. This is not a policy choice – it is basic math – but policy choices can help ensure that the adjustments take place in a way that is supportive of economic activity. The private balance can be further divided into two pieces—the household balance and the business balance. Currently, for the United States, the household balance is about 2.5 percent of GDP and the business balance is about 4 percent of GDP. As shown in (Figure 6) , which shows these two components over time, the business balance is currently unusually high; that is, businesses have very high cash flows relative to their investment outlays. This suggests that some of the required adjustment could occur by fostering greater investment spending as a share of GDP. For this to occur, it will be important that economic policies promote long-term growth and financial stability, and ensure that the United States is a competitive place to base production, with a well-functioning infrastructure, a skilled workforce and a reasonable tax and regulatory system. In addition, it seems desirable that some of the adjustment should take place in the trade sector. Although a current account deficit of 3 percent of GDP by itself would be sustainable over time, for the household balance to remain close to current levels and the public balance to sharply narrow, then the current account may need to move further toward balance. For this to occur, there needs to be two offsetting adjustments. On one hand, the U.S. economy must be reoriented toward global demand and stronger net exports. On the other hand, there will have to be offsetting adjustments elsewhere in the world. After all, on a global basis, the current account balance—properly measured—must sum to zero. This means that countries with significant trade surpluses will need to reorient their economies over time toward increasing domestic demand and running smaller trade surpluses. To sum up, the United States faces substantial fiscal challenges in the years ahead. And, in one important respect—net interest expense—these challenges may be more daunting than fully appreciated currently. In particular, the interest bill on the growing federal debt burden has been temporarily restrained by the low level of interest rates and high level of remittances from the Federal Reserve to the Treasury. In addition, while significant fiscal adjustments must take place, it is important to recognize that such efforts will necessitate offsetting shifts in private domestic spending and production both here and abroad. Finding ways for these adjustments to occur smoothly is an important challenge for economic policy. Thank you for your kind attention. _____________________________________________________ 1 The 2011 remittance figure is a preliminary unaudited estimate. 2 See "Securing the Recovery and Building for the Future." Remarks by William Dudley at United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, November 17, 2011, for a more detailed discussion of this issue. 3 Third quarter 2011, the latest period for which data are available. 4 The federal public balance is roughly equivalent, though not identical, to the federal budget deficit; the overall public balance numbers provided here include state and local government. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

March 19, 2012 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Long Island Association, Melville, New York As prepared for delivery Good morning. I am pleased to be here on Long Island. It is always a pleasure to speak with the business community because of the leadership role you play in your communities and in shaping the economic landscape in the region. So, I thank you all for coming today. Over the past few years, I have been engaged in a series of outreach meetings all across my Federal Reserve District. For example, in 2010 I visited several upstate cities. Early last year I made visits to various parts of the city—Brooklyn, the Bronx, Queens—and to Puerto Rico. In August, I met with community and business leaders and elected officials in Newark, Patterson and Jersey City. In November, I went to West Point and the Capital region. I consider these visits just as important as my trips to Washington, D.C., to help formulate monetary policy or to Switzerland to help shape international bank regulation. Each visit within the region helps me to deepen the relationships with the people I represent. I believe that the understanding of issues and concerns that I gain today will help ensure that the Fed's policy decisions reflect the public interest in the broadest sense. Today, I want to talk with you first about the Fed—what we do and why we do it. Then I'll provide some thoughts about the economic outlook nationally and locally. How the economy performs is important in many ways. At the personal level, for example, it affects your family's finances and students' job prospects at graduation time. Collectively, it affects the potential of our nation to confront and deal with the many challenges we face. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as the FOMC. What the New York Fed Does By way of introduction, I will briefly review what the New York Fed does and what makes my job so interesting. I am vice chair of the FOMC, which meets eight times a year in Washington to set interest rates and make other decisions about monetary policy. The members of this committee all strive to set policy to advance the mandate given to us by Congress to promote the maximum level of employment consistent with price stability. Sometimes we have different views on the specific policy choice at hand, and you should view this as completely appropriate: these are hard questions— particularly at times like this. In fact, I think we make better decisions as a committee because we don't all think alike. But we are united in our commitment to our dual mandate and in our belief that Fed independence is essential to the public interest, because it allows us to make tough decisions insulated from short-term political pressures. At FOMC meetings, each Committee member presents a current outlook for his or her region and the nation. For these assessments, we consult our researchers and add critical information that we learn from listening to our boards of directors, regional advisory councils and community leaders, such as you and others I'll meet on this visit. This trip includes a meeting with the Long Island Housing Partnership—and a visit to some distressed neighborhoods, a tour of the D'Addario string factory and lunch with its workers; and concludes with a tour and meeting at the Brookhaven National Laboratory. At the New York Fed, we continually track conditions in our District, and we have created a number of tools for that purpose. For example, my staff produces monthly indexes of economic activity for New York City, the entire state of New York, and New Jersey. These indexes are essentially measures of local output—similar to gross domestic product, or GDP, at the national level. These measures provide a more complete gauge of activity than the employment report, which is another important metric at the state level. We have also constructed a consumer credit panel to track local household credit conditions, including the amount and type of personal debt and whether payments are being made in a timely way. In addition, we have a periodic poll about the credit needs of small businesses, which are an important source of new jobs. We are just launching our latest survey that also includes questions about the skill needs of small businesses and if the right kinds of skilled labor are available. Almost 900 regional businesses responded to our last poll, of which roughly 5 percent were from Long Island. If you, as part of a small business, would like to participate in our current poll, please pass your card to my colleagues, who are in the audience, or see me after the speech and we will be glad to add you as a respondent. In December, we hosted a workshop for small businesses in the New York City metro area to provide information about how they can export their products and services. The Export-Import Bank, the Small Business Administration and the U.S. Department of Commerce were on hand to tell participants how to tap demand in the global marketplace and what government programs are available to enhance credit and to increase lines of working capital. In 2012, we're further developing our small business program. We hope to partner with many of you to support the small business sector. As you know, even states as wealthy as New York have large pockets of poverty. So, we target some key initiatives specifically to low- and moderate-income groups. Here on Long Island there are pockets that suffered greatly in the recession. In Nassau County, communities in Hempstead, Baldwin, Roosevelt and New Hyde Park have a foreclosure rate over four times the national average. * The same holds true for parts of Brentwood, Central Islip and Patchogue, in Suffolk County. We have worked hard to help neighborhoods that face high foreclosure rates. Over the past three years, my staff has come to Long Island to meet with housing counselors and legal services practitioners. We have provided housing advocates with the latest information on mortgage conditions, via mortgage briefs, roundtables, presentations and newsletters. We have now developed an online resource that shows delinquency and foreclosure conditions in neighborhoods each month. We believe that this site will be a useful complement, aiding the work of housing counselors and other parties seeking to help these communities. To share what we learn about our diverse District, we have a website, with detailed information about the region. I invite you to visit newyorkfed.org to explore our highly localized maps and information on small business, credit and housing conditions and even the latest job openings at the New York Fed. Finally, and crucially, in the aftermath of the financial crisis, we are working with our colleagues in Washington, D.C., and at other agencies to help put the nation's financial system on a firmer footing. Much has been done, yet much remains to be done and we are determined to keep at it. I recognize fully that there can be no return to pre-crisis business as usual—whether on the part of the financial sector or on the part of regulators like ourselves. All in all, there is a lot to keep myself and my colleagues busy. National Economic Conditions The incoming data on the U.S. economy has been a bit more upbeat of late, suggesting that the recovery may be finally establishing a somewhat firmer footing. Real GDP expanded at a 3 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2011, the fastest growth since the first half of 2010. The average monthly gain in nonfarm payroll employment moved up to 256,000 in January and February from 164,000 in the fourth quarter. Sales of light-weight motor vehicles rose to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 15.1 million in February, the highest since early 2008. The ISM nonmanufacturing index rose for the third consecutive month in February and now stands at its highest level in a year. Even the housing starts data have firmed somewhat, although from quite depressed levels. While these developments are certainly encouraging, it is far too soon to conclude that we are out of the woods. To begin with, the economic data looked brighter at this point in 2010 and again in 2011, only to fade as we got into the second and third quarters of those years. 1 Moreover, the United States has experienced unusually mild weather over the past few months, with the number of heating degree days in January and February about 17 percent below the average of the preceding five years. While this reduces the amount that households and businesses must spend for heating, I suspect that it temporarily boosts economic activity overall. For example, the mild weather is certainly conducive to higher than normal levels of construction activity, and we did see a surge in hours worked in that sector over the past few months. More importantly, real economic activity has yet to be strong enough on a sustained basis to make a big dent in the overall amount of slack in the U.S. economy. While it is true that growth was stronger in the fourth quarter, most of that growth was due to inventory accumulation. Growth of final sales was actually quite weak. Historically, a quarter in which inventory investment makes a significant growth contribution is typically followed by a quarter in which that growth contribution is modest or even negative. That appears to be what is shaping up for the first quarter of this year. Based on available data, current expectations are that real GDP will expand at around a 2 percent annual rate during the first quarter of 2012. Despite the increase of light vehicle sales, overall consumer spending has been sluggish. While growth of retail sales in February was reasonably strong in nominal terms, it was considerably less impressive when the large increase of gasoline prices that occurred that month is taken into account. Based on data for the first half of March, gasoline prices are continuing to move higher which will further sap consumers' real purchasing power. And growth of business investment spending, which was quite strong in the second and third quarters of 2011, entered the new year with little forward momentum. To put the recent pace of growth into perspective, we believe that the economy's long-run sustainable growth rate (what economists call the potential growth rate) is around a 2 1/4 percent annual rate. We need sustained growth above that rate to absorb the substantial amount of unused productive capacity. Thus, our recent growth rates are barely keeping up with our potential. Although the sharp decline in the unemployment from 9 percent last September to 8.3 percent in February suggests we are doing better than that, it is important to recognize that about half of that decline was due to a declining labor force participation rate. In fact, had the labor force participation rate not declined from around 66 percent in mid-2008 to under 64 percent in February, the unemployment rate would still be over 10 percent. Also, it appears that productivity growth has slumped recently. Although that means that a given amount of growth translates into bigger employment gains, it certainly is not an unmitigated good development. Also, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the economy still faces significant headwinds and there are some meaningful downside risks. In the headwinds department, I would include the run-up in gasoline prices mentioned earlier because that will sap purchasing power, the continued impediments to a strong recovery of the housing sector, and fiscal drag at the federal and state and local levels. In terms of downside risks, these include the risk that growth abroad disappoints and the risk of further disruptions to the supply of oil and higher oil prices. On the inflation front, the overall rate of increase of consumer prices, as measured by the 12-month change of the consumer price index slowed to 2.9 percent in February from a recent peak of 3.9 percent last September. Despite the recent rise of gasoline prices mentioned above that may interrupt this pattern, we expect this moderation in the growth rate of consumer prices to resume later this year. While the underlying core inflation rate, that strips out volatile food and energy prices, has been somewhat higher than expected a few months back, it appears that the annual rate of core inflation 2 has peaked and we expect it to begin to decline later this year. 3 Finally, inflation expectations, which play an important role in the inflation process, remain well anchored. By this I mean that people expect that the rate of inflation will continue to be relatively low for some time to come. Regional Economic Conditions So how is the recovery proceeding in the state and the region? As I mentioned, the New York Fed produces indexes that help us track economic activity in the region. Based on these measures, the economic recovery got underway in both New York State and New York City in late 2009, and economic activity has continued to expand through early 2012. The New York Fed also conducts the monthly Empire State Manufacturing Survey to monitor conditions for regional manufacturers. The most recent survey, for which a number of Long Island firms participated, points to continued expansion in manufacturing activity throughout the first quarter of 2012 and heightened optimism about the general business outlook. Recently released employment revisions indicate that the economic recovery has taken hold on Long Island. But there still is a long way to go. Employment on the island declined by a little over 4 percent in the downturn—a steep drop, to be sure, but only about two-thirds of the decline that occurred nationally. Since bottoming out in late 2009, employment here on the island has rebounded by almost 2 1/2 percent. So we've come a bit more than halfway back to the early 2008 peak. Moreover, these job gains have come despite ongoing job cuts in local government. While other parts of the region sustained job losses in local government starting in 2010, Long Island's just started in the spring of last year, creating a drag on the labor market overall. Nevertheless, the private sector has picked up the slack. This is most pronounced in professional and business services, finance, leisure and hospitality, and health care. Even the island's manufacturing sector has added jobs over the past year. Another sign that a recovery is taking hold on Long Island is that banks that were created just before or just after the financial crisis—while only a small portion of the local market—are starting to show signs of growth. Long Island's labor market has also been aided by its proximity to New York City. With a large portion of the island's workforce commuting to New York City, especially from Nassau County, the brisk job creation we've seen in the city has helped matters here as well. Unemployment here on the island topped out at 7.6 percent back in late 2009, and it has hovered around 7 percent for most of the past year—a high rate to be sure, but well below both the national and state levels. Turning to the housing market—there matters are more dreary. After more than doubling between 2000 and 2006, home prices on Long Island are down more than 20 percent from their peak and prices have yet to show any strong signs of bottoming out. This weakness is underscored by our latest quarterly consumer credit panel data. This dataset shows that mortgage delinquency rates on the island are much higher than in other parts of the state and continued to edge higher in the fourth quarter of last year. 4 The housing crisis also has also put pressure on local school finances. Historically, the island has been heavily dependent on local sources for its school funding, and the housing debacle has generated a sharp drop in local property tax revenue. State aid has been generally insufficient to make up for these losses and school administrators have been forced to cut both instructional and non-instructional spending. Despite some of these ongoing problems, I believe that the long-term outlook for Long Island's economic growth is quite positive. The island's workforce is particularly well educated, with well over a third of adults holding a college degree. It has a sizeable industrial base, which is concentrated in high-tech manufacturing. Moreover, Brookhaven Labs and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, as well as a fine array of academic institutions, provide a strong foundation for the island's tech sector and business sector more broadly. The recent move to create stronger ties between the business community, research labs and SUNY (State University of New York) is a welcome development. It has the potential to help leverage the island's existing assets to enhance the prospects for economic development. Conclusion To sum up, the incoming data on the U.S. economy has been a bit more upbeat of late, suggesting that the recovery may be getting better established. But, while these developments are certainly encouraging, it is far too soon to conclude that we are out of the woods in terms of generating a strong, sustainable recovery. On the inflation front, the year-over-year rate of consumer price inflation has slowed in recent months, and despite the recent rise of gasoline prices, we expect inflation to moderate further in 2012. Looking ahead, the key challenge for the Long Island economy will be to continue to prepare its residents for the best jobs being created here. Expanding educational access and opportunity and the skills that go along with it will go a long way to broadening participation in the economy to all residents and bolstering Long Island in the future. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. __________________________________________ 1 This recurring pattern has led some economists to question whether the depth and duration of the Great Recession has distorted the usual patterns of seasonal adjustment. 2 As measured by the 12-month change in core CPI. 3 See for instance, the behavior of the three- and six-month core CPI. 4 For more information, see the New York Fed's consumer credit panel. * The foreclosure rate reference for these communities was calculated with a partial subset of active loans. While communities in Hempstead, Baldwin and Roosevelt have foreclosure rates far higher than the national average, analysis of a larger pool of loans reveals that New Hype Park’s foreclosure rate is in line with the national average. Visit the New York Fed’s Regional Mortgage Conditions webpage for additional information. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

March 22, 2012 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Harvard Law School's Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century, Armonk, New York As prepared for delivery It is a great pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here. Today I will focus on two related aspects of the regulatory reform agenda that are complex and global in nature. First, I will discuss the efforts underway to reform the over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets. This includes creating strong incentives to standardize trades and clear those trades through central counterparties (CCPs) and improving disclosure and transparency through mandatory reporting of all OTC derivative trades to trade repositories. Second, I will discuss the global program to establish tougher standards for the regulation and oversight of financial market infrastructures (FMI)—focusing particularly on CCPs for over-the-counter derivatives. Over the past two years, two important standard setting bodies—the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) and the Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) have been developing a new package of standards called, Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures . The aim is to strengthen the resiliency and robustness of FMIs that are systemically important and are the backbone of the global financial system. I anticipate that the approval process will be completed and the finalized Principles document will be issued and broadly distributed sometime next month. As always, what I have to say here reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. Also, I speak for myself rather than for CPSS and IOSCO. Turning to my first topic, the financial crisis exposed many shortcomings with respect to the OTC derivatives market. For example, the use of OTC derivatives referencing private-label mortgage-backed securities that held poor quality subprime and alt-A mortgages multiplied the amount of gains and losses in the financial system. There were not only the losses on the actual mortgages, but also on the CDS that were linked to these mortgages through the OTC derivatives market. This increased the stress on the system when the referenced subprime and alt-A mortgages began to perform poorly. Moreover, the structural characteristics of the over-the-counter derivatives market itself amplified the shocks created by the housing bust in several ways. First, the collateral calls generated by sharp movements in the mark-to-market value of the OTC derivative trades drained liquidity buffers and provoked the fire sales of assets. These fire sales increased volatility and provoked still greater margin calls. This dynamic was one reason why the market prices of these assets overshot to the downside—that is they fell more than needed simply to reflect the increase in expected credit losses. In other words, the illiquidity risk premiums embedded into the prices of these assets became very large. Second, the bilateral nature of the OTC derivatives market—between the two parties to the contract—be it dealer and customer or dealer and dealer—created its own set of difficulties. When counterparties became concerned about the health of a particular dealer, they often moved their trades—via novation—to other dealers. They did this to protect themselves should the dealer subsequently fail. But this process was difficult to carry out quickly and in size. The cumbersome nature of the process disturbed market liquidity and function. It also tended to drain off the liquidity from the troubled dealers because these dealers often used the counterparty cash collateral to fund their own operations. When customers moved their business, the collateral balances departed with them and this worsened the funding crunch on the troubled dealers. Third, when a large counterparty, Lehman Brothers, filed for bankruptcy, it could no longer meet its obligations. The claims of Lehman’s customers, including those open OTC derivatives positions in which Lehman owed them money, were frozen. The lack of adequate segregation of the customers’ assets from the Lehman estate and the inability to move the outstanding obligations to other dealers—which we refer to as the lack of portability—created large problems for Lehman’s counterparties. Often Lehman’s clients were in the position that one side of a trade executed with Lehman was frozen, but the offsetting side remained open and exposed to volatile financial markets. This asymmetry contributed to the sharp increase in market volatility, the dramatic reduction in market liquidity, and the impairment in market function following the Lehman failure. Fear that this could happen again if another firm failed, encouraged flight from other dealers perceived by market participants to be relatively weak that might have large potential exposures. Of course, as if this were not bad enough, the opaqueness of the OTC derivatives market made the situation much worse. No one had a clear insight into the financial health of their counterparties. Although each market participant could calculate its bilateral exposures to a particular dealer and the particular dealer could understand its own exposure to each of its own counterparties, this didn’t answer the broader question: how exposed were the clients and dealers to others in the financial system through their derivatives trades and other open positions? Because there was no easy way to know who was in difficulty or not, the incentives were all on the side of assuming the worse—closing out open trades, hoarding liquidity, and retreating to the sidelines. The crisis had made it crystal clear that the regulatory regime had not kept pace with the rapid growth of the global OTC derivatives market. In assessing the shortcomings of the OTC derivatives market after the crisis, a global consensus has been reached. Although I will be over-simplifying in the interest of time, I view the following aspects of reform as the most important. First, there have to be strong incentives in the system—such as capital requirements on banks and securities dealers—to provide an impetus for dealers to standardize OTC derivatives trades whenever practical. The goal is fewer bespoke trades and more standardized trades. Second, the G20 leaders agreed that all standardized OTC derivative trades should be mandatorily cleared through CCPs by the end of 2012. Third, records for all OTC derivative trades—including bilateral bespoke trades—must be reported to trade repositories. The data as part of this reporting requirement would include key trade attributes and a legal entity identifier so that aggregate exposures could be readily calculated. Fourth, the two standard-setting bodies mentioned earlier—CPSS and IOSCO—would strengthen and broaden the principles for financial market infrastructures. Fifth, these Principles would be adopted globally, strengthening the resilience of the financial system. The logic behind these five elements of reform goes like this: Standardizing trades improves transparency and price discovery. This mitigates the opaqueness that helped to generate the illiquidity and loss of market function evident during the crisis. Requiring that such trades be cleared through CCPs is designed to reduce the aggregate amount of risk in the system. That is because the gross exposures can be netted down when all the dealers clear through one common central clearing party. In a CCP framework, the bilateral exposures of each dealer to one another are replaced by a single set of claims to and from the CCP. The idea is that because some dealers are likely to be long some trades to one dealer and short some trades to other dealers, passing both sets of trades through a single CCP can reduce the aggregate amount of risk in the system. This would occur as the long trades are netted out against the short trades, leaving only the remaining smaller net exposure of the dealer to the CCP. Inserting a CCP in between two counterparties to a trade can also help reduce the "run risk" faced by a potentially troubled dealer. As we saw during the crisis, market participants often abruptly pull their trades away from a dealer that they perceive to be weak, which in turn can have the self-fulfilling effect of magnifying market or liquidity pressures on the dealer. If, however, trades with the dealer are cleared through a CCP, direct exposures to the dealer are eliminated and replaced by exposures to the CCP itself. This risk shifting can reduce the incentives to suddenly halt trading with a dealer, for example, due to uncertainty about the dealer’s financial condition or future prospects. Mandatory reporting of trades to trade repositories is designed to ensure that the details of each contract are preserved and available to the regulatory authorities. Finally, the fact that CCPs will be central to the system dramatically increases their importance. In essence, global CCPs will be systemically important. Thus, for the system to be safer it is not sufficient to ensure that trades are standardized and that they are mandated to be cleared through CCPs, but also it is necessary that CCPs be “bullet proof.” They have to have the ability to perform and meet their obligations regardless of the degree of stress in the financial system and even if one or more of their participants were to fail in a disorderly manner. Hence, there is a compelling need for tougher principles that are broadly enforced. In addition, to ensure that this all works as well in practice as in theory, the Financial Stability Board, CPSS and IOSCO, and other regulatory authorities have emphasized the importance of four safeguards to ensure that mandatory, standardized clearing through CCPs will make the financial system more robust and resilient. The first safeguard is that the oversight of global CCPs needs to be cooperative—involving the securities regulators and central banks in the country in which the CCP operates (the home country) and the countries for which the CCP may be systemically important. Global CCPs are likely to be established—some are already up and running—that will clear different types of OTC derivatives such as interest rate swaps, credit default swaps, or commodity-based swaps that are traded around the world, both solely within one country or on a cross-border basis. Many regulators have important stakes in ensuring that a global CCP can meet its obligations. In addition to regulators of the country in which the CCP is headquartered, these include foreign regulators. These regulators may be interested parties for many reasons. For example, their currencies may be used in settling the obligations of the CCP, they may have counterparties to the CCP that are headquartered or do significant amounts of business in their country, or they may have FMIs that are linked to the CCP. I want to emphasize that effective cooperative oversight is essential. Otherwise, the risk is that the system will become overly fragmented, with a proliferation of national CCPs. In this case, many of the risk-reducing benefits from CCPs could be lost or severely attenuated. That is because fewer offsetting positions would likely be cleared through any particular CCP and this would reduce the scope for reducing large gross exposures into much smaller net positions. The second safeguard is to ensure fair, open and safe access to global FMIs around the world. It is important, for example, that global CCPs have rules that are not exclusionary or that unnecessarily entrench the position of whatever dealer, firm, or FMI is currently dominant in the market. The third safeguard is to establish rules to ensure that, if a major market participant were to fail, a CCP can liquefy its collateral quickly so that it can meet its obligations in a timely way. But this also needs to be done in a way that would not disrupt financial markets or the CCP’s participants. As I will discuss shortly, although there may be a potential role for central banks here, CCPs, at a minimum, must have their own liquidity resources as the first line of defense. Fourth, there needs to be a viable resolution regime for CCPs. This is needed to ensure that the CCP either can be recapitalized and recover or, if necessary, wound down in an orderly way without disrupting the provision of essential market services. Also, a resolution regime is necessary to ensure that a central bank that might lend to a CCP in extremis will be repaid. To help ensure that these safeguards are met, a major part of the reform effort is to establish a strong set of principles for financial market infrastructures. These principles must embody the four safeguards and ensure that the infrastructure can withstand any stresses that could plausibly occur. The process of developing such a set of principles began about two years ago and is now nearing completion. So why the new principles and what do they embody? During the crisis, financial market infrastructures performed very well. In fact, FMIs were actually a source of strength. They enabled market participants to settle obligations when they came due in a timely way. Also, their robustness gave confidence to market participants that they could continue to trade, knowing that the transactions would almost certainly be settled and cleared without difficulty. Despite this excellent record of performance during a period of unprecedented stress, there still is room for improvement. First, future stresses could be more severe or might come in different forms. This could expose vulnerabilities in FMIs that have, up to now, not been visible. Also, extraordinary interventions in the crisis to backstop market function or rescue key financial intermediaries may have prevented the stress level from reaching the point where FMIs couldn’t perform their functions. Because there can be no assurance that such interventions will necessarily occur in the future, it is important that the stability of the FMI architecture not depend on timely extraordinary interventions. Second, under the new regime of central clearing for standardized OTC derivatives trades, the role of FMIs will become even more important in the future. Moreover, the new regime will lead to the development of new types of FMIs. CCPs for OTC derivatives will become widespread—and trade repositories will be established. Principles are needed to underpin these new institutional arrangements. Third, for FMIs to be resilient they would undoubtedly need to have some ability to access central bank services, including the lender of last resort function. But, if FMIs had access to such services, this would create moral hazard. The best way to address this conundrum is to hold the FMIs to tougher global standards. Fourth, a stronger and better system of FMI governance and oversight can help to ensure that those systems that support a global market are subject to consistent standards regardless of the jurisdiction where they operate. Relying solely on a patchwork of differing national standards in a global world would not work well. It would encourage business to migrate to the lowest standard. Without establishing a global floor, there would otherwise be a “race for the bottom.” These are the major reasons why CPSS and IOSCO took on the task of strengthening and broadening the standards for FMIs. There are two major goals of this effort. The first goal is to strengthen the current standards by: 1) raising the bar for existing standards such as for governance, credit risk, liquidity risk, collateral and margin requirements; 2) including requirements for new areas such as segregation and portability, general business risk, links, tiering and disclosure; and 3) extending coverage to include trade repositories. As proposed in the consultation document, the Principles will significantly strengthen existing requirements for an FMI’s governance and financial resources. One way the Principles do this is by requiring FMIs to take a more comprehensive and proactive view of the roles they play, the risks they face, and their potential to support the stability of the broader financial system. In particular, as markets become even more interconnected, FMIs must approach their governance and risk management more holistically, in a manner consistent with their growing importance to the global markets and the stakeholders that they serve. Regarding an FMI’s financial standards, it is important that they be prepared to handle even greater potential disruptions and more extreme market conditions. For example, while an FMI must cover its largest current credit exposure to any single participant under pre-crisis standards, the Principles would require an FMI to collateralize its current credit exposures to all of its participants. Furthermore, for CCPs that face potential future credit exposures from the open contracts that they guarantee, the Principles impose rigorous stress testing and strengthened margin and default fund requirements. These requirements are to guard against a wide range of possible stress scenarios in extreme but plausible market conditions. The Principles also raise the bar for an FMI’s management of liquidity risk to ensure that systemically important payment obligations can be settled on time. For instance, when sizing its potential liquidity needs in the event of a participant default, an FMI should have sufficient liquid resources to cover not only the shortfall caused by the default of the individual legal entity that settles directly through the FMI, but also the shortfall that could arise from the failure of all affiliates of the direct participant. In addition, FMIs will need to address how potential uncovered liquidity shortfalls or credit losses would be allocated, and how the FMI would replenish any financial resources it uses in a stress event so that it can continue to operate in a safe and sound manner. The Principles also introduce a number of new requirements. Some of these address shortcomings that were observed during the crisis. For example, the Principles require CCPs to have segregation and portability arrangements that protect customer positions and collateral. An FMI will also be required to manage the risks it bears from and poses to, not only its participants and their customers, but also to other entities with which it does business such as linked FMIs, settlement banks, custody banks, and liquidity providers. Furthermore, the Principles will require FMIs to establish a dedicated financial cushion that could absorb unanticipated general business losses. This is to ensure that an FMI can continue to provide its critical services. The Principles also require that FMIs have plans for their recapitalization or orderly wind down, if that were to prove to be necessary. Finally, the coverage of the international standards has been expanded to trade repositories as a new category of FMI, to further complement the G-20 OTC derivatives initiative for mandatory trade reporting. The Principles that address trade repositories focus on their transparency and the disclosure of market data. This reflects the important and unique role they will play in disseminating information both to regulators and to the market more broadly. The second major goal is to promote consistent global enforcement of the standards. Toward this end, the Principles unify and harmonize three existing sets of standards— Core Principles for Systemically Important Payment Systems; Recommendations for Securities Settlement Systems; and Recommendations for Central Counterparties . As part of this effort, the Principles strengthen the “responsibilities of authorities.” This includes a new framework for cooperation among financial authorities. It calls for central banks, market regulators, and other relevant authorities to cooperate with each other, both domestically and internationally, and to support each other in fulfilling their respective mandates to promote the safety and efficiency of FMIs. This builds upon existing frameworks that have already been used successfully by CPSS and IOSCO for effective cooperation in the oversight of global institutions. Such cooperation can facilitate more comprehensive oversight, improve efficiency and effectiveness, reduce or eliminate any gaps in regulation, supervision, and oversight, and minimize potential duplication of effort and burden on both the FMIs and the cooperating authorities. Toward the goal of consistent global enforcement, the Principles are considered to be minimum requirements. In contrast, the three old sets of guidance were weaker, being recommendations rather than requirements. As recommendations, they could be ignored. In contrast, as the Principles make clear, countries that are members of CPSS and IOSCO are to apply the principles to “the fullest extent possible.” This means that regulation and legal frameworks are to be adjusted as needed in order to accommodate the standards. To ensure that this happens, CPSS and IOSCO are also developing disclosure and assessment regimes. The purpose is to facilitate a consistent set of disclosures by the different FMIs and a consistent set of assessment methodologies that can be used by the relevant international institutions, namely the International Money Fund and the World Bank, and by the relevant national authorities of the FMIs domiciled in their jurisdictions. When the Principles are published next month, CPSS and IOSCO will also issue a disclosure regime proposal and an assessment regime proposal. These will be put forward for a 60-day consultation period to give the market participants, FMIs, and regulators an opportunity to comment. Also, once the Principles are rolled out and countries start to implement the legal and regulatory changes necessary to put the Principles into practice, it is anticipated that CPSS and IOSCO will undertake a monitoring effort to see how it is going. The focus will be on evaluating how quickly and broadly the Principles are being embedded in national legal and regulatory frameworks. The Principles are important in supporting the G20 strategy of mandatory clearing of standardized OTC derivatives trades and in ensuring that the four safeguards discussed earlier for global CCPs and other FMIs are implemented. As I mentioned earlier, the new Principles lay out the responsibilities of authorities for cooperative oversight. Cooperation can take a variety of forms, including formal arrangements that are organized under memoranda of understandings, specific protocols or other documentation for the exchange of critical information, and informal arrangements for regular and ad hoc communications. Much work is currently underway to establish various forms of effective cooperation, particularly for individual CCPs and trade repositories that are becoming globally important. However, as the work toward meeting the G-20 commitments continues, much more work is needed to design and implement such arrangements for the relevant FMIs. In terms of the issue of access, explicit requirements for FMIs are embedded in the Principles. The Principles establish a framework that covers access by direct participants, indirect participants—i.e., those who trade indirectly through a direct participant, and access and links between FMIs. In terms of the lender of last resort issue, the Principles strengthen the requirements for FMIs in terms of such aspects of financial strength such as capital and liquidity, and operational and business risk. This implies that enforcement of the Principles should significantly mitigate any moral hazard issue that could arise if an FMI were able to obtain credit from a central bank. On resolution, the Principles contain explicit requirements to ensure that all systemically important FMIs have viable recovery plans and, if circumstances ever warrant, could be wound down in an orderly fashion without the disruption of the provision of key services. The Principles’ provisions for an FMI’s recovery and orderly wind down will inform upcoming work by CPSS-IOSCO on the potential role and attributes of official regimes for the resolution of FMIs. This work is underway and should be completed later this year. I’m pleased to see what has already been accomplished. But let’s be clear, when the Principles are published that won’t be the end. To quote Winston Churchill, it will only be “the end of the beginning”. Thereafter, the resolution, disclosure and assessment frameworks will need to be finalized later this year. The CPSS and IOSCO members will have to adopt the new Principles into their regulatory and legal frameworks, with a target date of year-end. The new Principles will then be put into effect next year, with FMIs expected to observe the new Principles as shortly thereafter as is feasible. This is obviously an ambitious schedule, but one that is fully consistent with the G20 leaders’ mandate. Finally, we should recognize that the global financial system is a complex one that is continuously evolving and that we are introducing many significant changes into that system. We have to recognize that there may be trade-offs between some of our objectives, and that the system may evolve in ways that we do not expect. There may be unintended consequences. Maybe the major dealers will not standardize as many trades as is desirable or, perhaps, CCPs will develop in too fragmented a manner so that the netting of risk doesn’t occur to the extent potentially feasible. Or the development of global CCPs could have unanticipated negative consequences for market structure, competition and/or efficiency. We must be open-minded about the potential need for mid-course corrections. We will need to ensure that the incentives are right to get the greatest amount of risk reduced in the most efficient manner. Currently, for example, we are evaluating how the changes in terms of the Basel capital and liquidity standards for banks will interact with the changes in the OTC derivatives regime in terms of influencing the incentives for standardizing OTC trades and mandatory clearing through CCPs. But we shouldn’t kid ourselves—we’ll be off in our forecast. Thus, we must be ready to make adjustments as this process unfolds and we learn more. As long as regulators, FMIs, and market participants make the effort, we should be able to make the financial system much safer, resilient, and transparent. The changes in train, if properly executed, should, over time, significantly reduce the shortcomings in the OTC derivatives market that exacerbated the financial crisis. Properly enacted and implemented, net exposures should be smaller because of the netting that occurs through the CCP process. Transparency into counterparty risk should be greatly improved via disclosure requirements and the ability to aggregate trade information in trade repositories, and end user trading positions should be much better protected by segregation and portability requirements and a more robust financial market infrastructure. Although there is still much to do as part of this process, I’m optimistic that we are on the right road. We just need to continue to push ahead and not forget the lessons learned from the financial crisis. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. External links Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems International Organization of Securities Commissions By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Testimony on the Economic and Fiscal Challenges Facing Europe - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Testimony Testimony on the Economic and Fiscal Challenges Facing Europe March 27, 2012 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Testimony before the Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy and Technology, Committee on Financial Services, United States House of Representatives, Washington, D.C. As prepared for delivery Introduction Chairman Paul, Ranking Member Clay, and members of the Subcommittee, my name is Bill Dudley, and I am President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. It is an honor to testify today about the economic and fiscal challenges facing Europe, and the Federal Reserve’s efforts to support financial stability in the United States. Financial stability enables U.S. businesses and households to maintain their access to credit and ensures sustained economic growth. This is why promoting financial stability is an important objective of the Federal Reserve, and other central banks around the world. Let me preface these remarks by stating that the views expressed in my written and oral testimony are solely my own and do not represent official views of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or any other part of the Federal Reserve System. Additionally, because I am precluded by law from discussing confidential supervisory information, I will not be able to speak about the financial condition or regulatory treatment or rating of any individual financial institution. The U.S. economy is currently expanding at a moderate pace, and strains in global financial markets, although having eased recently, continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. Because developments in Europe will have an important bearing on the prospects for growth and jobs here in the U.S., the Federal Reserve is monitoring the situation there closely. This is also why we have taken special steps in recent months, together with other central banks, to support the flow of credit to households and businesses. Europe The economic situation in Europe has been unsettled for the better part of two years, with pressure on sovereign debt markets and local banking systems. High debts, large deficits and slow growth in several European countries have called into question the sustainability of the entire euro area. The resulting strains in European markets have affected the U.S. economy. The euro area has the capacity, including the fiscal capacity, to overcome its challenges. However, the politics are very difficult, both because the problem has many dimensions, and because many different countries and institutions in the euro area have to coordinate their actions in order to achieve a coherent and effective policy response. Europe's leadership has affirmed its commitment to the European Union and its single currency union on numerous occasions. And the leadership is working harder than ever to achieve greater coordination in areas such as fiscal policy. A more robust and resilient European Union would be a welcome development for the United States. Three recent developments are especially encouraging in that regard. First, liquidity concerns have eased significantly following the European Central Bank’s (ECB) long-term refinancing operations in December and February. Through this program, the ECB provides three-year loans to European banks at low rates, accepting a wide array of collateral in return. Hundreds of banks accessed the program in each operation, and the ECB lent nearly €1 trillion in total. As a result, the cost of funding throughout Europe has declined since the program began, the euro has stabilized, and the sovereign bond market has improved. Changes in the ECB’s collateral rules and reserve requirements have also had a positive impact. Second, earlier this month, the Greek government worked with European leaders and its largest creditors to restructure the bulk of its €206 billion of outstanding privately-held bonds. This not only reduced Greece’s total indebtedness, it helped calm persistent worries that a disorderly Greek default could become the trigger for a global economic crisis. Shortly after the debt restructuring, the EU approved a €130 billion aid package for Greece. Together, these measures will provide key support to Greek leaders as they pursue the difficult fiscal reforms that are essential over the long term. Third, leaders in most euro area countries have approved a new treaty designed to increase fiscal coordination. The new rules already appear to be making a difference. Both Spain and Italy recently completed 2012 budgets that move their deficits closer to EU targets. Further, Spain and Italy took their fiscal actions in close consultation with finance ministers from other countries in the euro area, demonstrating a healthy ability to work together. While difficult work still lies ahead, countries in the euro area have made meaningful progress toward achieving long-term fiscal sustainability. Looking to the future, the difficult work that remains also presents special risks—both for Europe and the United States. If Europe fails to chart an effective course forward, this could have a number of negative implications here. In particular, there are three areas of potential risk that I would like to highlight for the Subcommittee today. First, if economic conditions in Europe were to weaken significantly, demand for U.S. exports would decrease. This would hurt domestic growth and have a negative impact on U.S. jobs. It is important to recognize that the euro area is the world’s second largest economy after the U.S. and an important trading partner for us. Also, Europe is a significant investor in the U.S. economy, and vice versa. Thus, what happens in Europe has significant implications for our economy. Second, deterioration in the European economy could put pressure on the U.S. banking system. As the recent round of stress tests revealed, U.S. banks are much more robust and resilient than they were a few years ago. They have bolstered their capital significantly, built up their loan loss reserves and have significantly larger liquidity buffers. The direct net exposures of U.S. banks to the so-called "peripheral" European countries are actually quite modest. The good news in the United States means that we are better able to handle bad news from Europe. With that said, the exposures of U.S. banks climb sharply when one also considers their exposures to the core European countries and to the overall European banking system. U.S. money market mutual funds, in particular, have significant European holdings. This means that if the crisis were to broaden further and intensify, it would put pressure on the capital and liquidity buffers of U.S. banks and other financial institutions. Third, severe stresses in European financial markets would disrupt financial markets here, which could harm the real economy. Stress in the financial markets causes banks to more carefully husband their balance sheets. When that phenomenon occurs, the availability of credit to U.S. households and businesses becomes constrained. Such conditions could also cause equity prices to fall, impairing the value of Americans’ pension and 401(k) holdings. This would damage the U.S. recovery and result in slower output growth and less job creation. At a time when U.S. unemployment is very high, this is a particularly unacceptable outcome. In the extreme, U.S. financial markets could become so impaired that the flow of credit to households and businesses would dry up. U.S. Dollar Swaps In today’s globally integrated economy, banks headquartered abroad play an important role in providing credit and other financial services in the United States. About $1 trillion in worldwide dollar financing comes from foreign banks, $700 billion in the form of loans within the U.S. For these banks to provide U.S. dollar loans, they have to maintain access to U.S. dollar funding. At a time when it is already hard enough for American families and firms to get the credit they need, we have a strong interest in making sure that these banks can continue to be active in the U.S. dollar markets. Banks headquartered outside the U.S. make extensive use of dollars in their financing activities. In part, this results from the fact that the U.S. dollar is the world's number one currency—a status that brings with it many benefits for our country. It is in our national interest to make sure that non-U.S. banks remain able to access the U.S. dollar funding they need to continue financing their U.S. dollar assets. If access to dollar funding were to become severely impaired, this could necessitate the abrupt, forced sales of dollar assets by these banks, which could seriously disrupt U.S. markets and adversely affect American businesses, consumers and jobs. One way we can help to support the availability of dollar funding, and ensure that credit continues to flow to American households and businesses, is by engaging in currency swaps with other central banks. Such swaps are a policy tool the Federal Reserve has used to support dollar liquidity for nearly fifty years. Most recently, the Federal Reserve established dollar swap lines with major central banks during the global financial crisis of 2008, and reactivated them in May 2010. Last November, the FOMC, cooperating with five other central banks, reduced the rate being charged on these swaps to increase usage. The swaps are intended to create a credible backstop to support—but not supplant—private markets. Banks with surplus dollars are more likely to lend to banks in need of dollars if they know that the borrowing bank will be able to obtain the dollars it needs to repay the loan, if necessary, from its central bank. Ultimately, these dollar swaps are designed to support financial stability, and avoid an unnecessary tightening in financial conditions, so that economic activity and job creation in the United States can continue to recover. Our principal aim is to protect U.S. banks, businesses and consumers from adverse economic trends abroad. I am pleased that the swaps seem to be working. In conjunction with the ECB’s long-term refinancing operations, the swaps have helped European banks avoid the significant liquidity pressures we feared a few months ago and have reduced the risk that they would need to sell off their U.S. dollar assets abruptly. Conclusion In sum, I am hopeful that Europe can effectively address its current fiscal challenges. The Federal Reserve is actively and carefully assessing this situation and the potential impact on the U.S. economy. At this time, although I do not anticipate further efforts by the Federal Reserve to address the potential spillover effects of Europe on the United States, we will continue to monitor the situation closely. Thank you for your invitation to testify today, and I look forward to answering your questions. Quick Links Central Bank Liquidity Swaps By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

April 12, 2012 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Center for Economic Development, Syracuse, New York As prepared for delivery Good morning, I am pleased to be here in Syracuse at the Center for Economic Development. It is always a pleasure to speak with business and community leaders because of the important role you play in helping to shape the economy of the region. I thank you all for inviting me here today. I try to get out of my office in New York City as much as I can to get a sense of regional economic conditions across the second Federal Reserve District. I was last here in Syracuse in 2010 and, more recently, I traveled to West Point and the Capital region and Long Island. These visits are just as important as any trip I might take to Washington, D.C., to help formulate monetary policy, or to Switzerland, to help shape international bank regulation. Each visit within the region helps me to deepen the relationships with the people I represent. I believe that the understanding of issues and concerns that I gain today will help ensure that the Fed’s policy decisions reflect the public interest. Today, I want to talk a bit about the Fed—what we do and why we do it. Then I’ll provide some thoughts about the economic outlook nationally and locally. After that, I’ll be happy to answer any questions you have about what the Fed does and why, and about the economic outlook. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as the FOMC. What the New York Fed Does By way of introduction, I will briefly review what my colleagues and I do at the New York Fed on behalf of the Second District. I have the great fortune to serve as the vice chair of the FOMC that meets eight times a year in Washington to set interest rates and make other decisions about monetary policy. The members of this committee all strive to set policy to advance the mandate given to us by Congress to promote the maximum level of employment consistent with price stability. Sometimes we have different views on the specific policy choice at hand, and you should view this as completely appropriate: these are hard questions—particularly during difficult economic circumstances such as we face today. In fact, I think we make better decisions as a committee because we don't all think alike. But we are united in our commitment to our dual mandate and in our belief that Fed independence is essential to the public interest. That independence allows us to make tough decisions insulated from short-term political pressures. At FOMC meetings, each Committee member presents a current outlook for his or her region and the nation. For these assessments, we consult our researchers and add critical information that we learn from listening to our boards of directors, regional advisory councils, community leaders and other key stakeholders, such as you and others I'll meet on this visit. For example, last month members of our small business advisory council told us that for the first time in several years, employees were leaving for other jobs and that they would need to replace those who left for better opportunities elsewhere. The fact that some people with jobs felt confident enough to seek and take other job opportunities was another signal to us that the job market may be improving—although, to be sure, we read such signals cautiously. To help me gather more information about the region, I will be meeting this morning with PathStone, a community development and human service organization serving farmers and low-income families and communities, then meeting with students and faculty at the Maxwell School at Syracuse University, and then having lunch with faculty of the Maxwell School and the university officials who manage the tech transfer process. This afternoon, I will drive to Skaneateles Falls to tour Welch Allyn, a manufacturer of diagnostic equipment, and meet with the president and CEO, Dr. Julie Shimer. Dr. Shimer also recently became the chair of the Empire State Development Corporation and I am looking forward to our discussion about the challenges and opportunities for economic development in Upstate New York. Tomorrow, I will address the Buffalo-Niagara Partnership at their Movers & Shakers Breakfast, speak with staff of the Empire Justice Center, meet with Lt. Governor Bob Duffy, convene a meeting of our Upstate Advisory Board, whose members are major leaders in the upstate economy, and visit the Roswell Park Cancer Institute to learn about their role in economic development in western New York and in the broader world arena. My colleagues and I at the New York Fed continually track conditions in our District, and we have created a number of tools for that purpose. For example, my staff produces monthly indexes of economic activity for New York City, the state of New York and New Jersey. These indexes are essentially measures of local output—similar to gross domestic product, or GDP, at the national level. The measures provide a more complete gauge of activity than the employment report, which is another important metric at the state and regional levels. We have also constructed a consumer credit panel to track local household credit conditions at the county and even the zip code level, including the amount and type of personal debt and whether payments are being made in a timely way. In addition, we conduct a periodic poll about the credit needs of small businesses in the region, which are an important source of new jobs. We are just launching our latest poll that also includes questions about the skill needs of small businesses and whether the right kinds of skilled labor are available. Almost 900 businesses responded to our last poll, some of which were from this area. If you, as a representative of a small business, would like to participate in our current poll, please pass your card to my colleagues, who are in the audience, or see me after the speech and we will be glad to add you as a respondent. Results from our prior polls stressed the problem of access to capital. In response we held two workshops at the Bank in December. In the first workshop, senior officers from the Export-Import Bank, the Small Business Administration and the Department of Commerce described the various loan programs available to small businesses from their agencies, as well as programs to help identify markets. The second workshop reviewed the business plans of 40 small businesses and matched them with potential lenders. We plan to hold a similar workshop in Upstate New York this year. As you know, even states that are wealthier, such as New York, have large pockets of poverty. So, we target some of our work specifically to low- and moderate-income groups. We have worked hard to help neighborhoods that face high foreclosure rates, although much remains to be done. We have provided housing advocates with the latest information on mortgage conditions, via mortgage briefs, roundtables, presentations and newsletters. We have developed an interactive online tool that shows monthly delinquency and foreclosure conditions, which we believe will aid the work of housing counselors and other parties seeking to help these communities. It is available on our website along with data and information useful to policymakers, business people and the public. We use our website to share what we learn about our diverse District, and you will find extensive detailed information about the region at the site. I invite you to visit newyorkfed.org to explore our highly localized maps and information on small business, credit and housing conditions, and even the latest job openings at the New York Fed. Finally, and crucially, in the aftermath of the financial crisis, we are working with our colleagues in Washington, D.C., and at other agencies to help put the nation's financial system on a firmer footing. Our supervisors are working hard to ensure that our District’s banks are operating safely and soundly. Although much has been done, we are not finished and are determined to keep at it. I recognize fully that there can be no return to pre-crisis business as usual—whether on the part of the financial sector or on the part of regulators like ourselves. All in all, there is a lot to keep myself and my colleagues busy. National Economic Conditions Now I’d like to turn to the national and regional economy. The incoming data on the U.S. economy generally has been a bit more upbeat over the past few months, suggesting that the recovery may be finally establishing a somewhat firmer footing. Real GDP expanded at a 3.0 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2011, the fastest growth since the first half of 2010. The average monthly job gain was 212,000 in the first quarter of 2012, up from 164,000 in the fourth quarter. Sales of light-weight motor vehicles were about 14 ½ million at an annual rate in the first quarter, the best quarter in four years. Survey measures of business activity have rebounded from their dips in the middle of last year and are now at levels that typically indicate solid overall growth. Even housing starts have firmed somewhat in the last few months, although they remain at depressed levels. While these developments are certainly encouraging, it is still too soon to conclude that we are out of the woods, as underlined by the March labor market release. To begin with, the economic data looked brighter at this point in 2010 and again in 2011, only to fade later in those years. Moreover, the United States experienced unusually mild weather over the first quarter, with the number of heating degree days more than 20 percent below the average of the preceding five years, which may have pulled forward some economic activity and hiring. In this regard, the somewhat softer March labor market report that was released last Friday may reflect the earlier positive influence of the mild weather on job creation in January and February, although other less sanguine interpretations are also plausible. We thus will need to see more data to determine the extent to which the March data represent a transitory weather-related setback. Regardless of the importance of the mild winter in distorting the recent economic data, real economic activity has yet to be strong enough on a sustained basis to make a big dent in the overall amount of slack in the U.S. economy. While growth was stronger in the fourth quarter, most of it was due to inventory accumulation. Growth of final sales remained quite weak. Historically, quarters in which inventory investment makes significant growth contributions are typically followed by quarters in which that growth contribution is modest or even negative. That appears to be what is shaping up for the first quarter of this year. Based on available data, our current expectations are that real GDP will expand at around a 2 ¼ percent annual rate during the first quarter of 2012. Even with the robust increase of light vehicle sales, overall consumer spending in the first quarter appears to be rising at a similar moderate rate. At the same time, real disposable income has been flat over the past three months, and the large increase of gasoline prices is likely further sapping consumers’ real purchasing power. And growth of business investment spending, which softened in the fourth quarter of 2011, may have been even a little softer in the first quarter of this year. To put the recent pace of growth into perspective, we believe that the economy’s long-run sustainable growth rate—what economists call the potential growth rate—is around a 2 ¼ percent annual rate. We need sustained growth above that rate to absorb the still substantial amount of unused productive capacity. Thus, our recent growth rates are barely keeping up with our potential. Even though the unemployment rate has declined sharply from 9 percent last September to 8.2 percent in March, it is still unacceptably high. In addition, many other measures of the labor market remain weak. The labor force participation rate, the percentage of people employed, and the total number of hours worked in the economy all dropped sharply during the recession and remain well below their pre-recession levels, even taking into account the impact of demographic shifts. Also, it appears that productivity growth has slumped recently. Although that means that a given amount of growth translates into bigger employment gains, it certainly is not an unmitigated positive development. Also, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the economy still faces significant headwinds and that there are some meaningful downside risks. In the headwinds department, I would include the run-up in gasoline prices mentioned earlier because that will sap purchasing power, the continued impediments to a strong recovery from ongoing weakness in the housing sector, and fiscal drag at the federal and state and local levels. In terms of downside risks, these include the risk that growth abroad disappoints and the risk of further disruptions to the supply of oil and higher oil prices. On the inflation front, the overall rate of increase of consumer prices, as measured by the 12-month change of the price index for personal consumption expenditures slowed to 2.3 percent in February from a recent peak of 2.9 percent last September. Even though the recent rise of gasoline prices mentioned above could interrupt this pattern, we expect this moderation of overall inflation to resume later this year. While the underlying core inflation rate, that strips out volatile food and energy prices, has been somewhat higher than expected a few months back, it appears that the annual rate of core inflation 1 has peaked and we expect it to begin to decline later this year. 2 Finally, inflation expectations, which play an important role in the inflation process, remain well anchored. By this I mean that people expect that the rate of inflation will continue to be relatively low for some time to come. Regional Economic Conditions So how is the recovery proceeding in the state and region? As I mentioned, the New York Fed produces indexes that help us track economic activity in the region. Based on these measures, the economic recovery that began in New York State in late 2009 has continued through early 2012, and even gained some momentum. Across Upstate New York, broadly speaking, the cycle of recession and recovery has been much less pronounced than in the nation, and even the state as a whole. This pattern has been true in Syracuse, as well. Employment fell by a little over 4 percent during the downturn—a steep drop, to be sure—but only about two-thirds of the decline that occurred nationally. This is quite a change from the region’s past recessions, which have tended to be longer and deeper than the nation’s. One reason why Upstate New York weathered the economic storm a bit better than the nation is the resiliency of its housing markets. Like much of Upstate New York, Syracuse’s housing market has been relatively stable and did not experience a boom-bust cycle like much of the rest of the nation. In fact, since the peak of the national housing market in early 2006, home prices in Syracuse have increased by close to 10 percent, compared with a decline of more than 30 percent nationally. As a result, the drop off in economic activity that is connected, directly and indirectly, to the performance of the housing sector has not been as severe here as it was in many other places. This stability is underscored by our latest quarterly consumer credit panel data, which shows that total household debt burdens have remained relatively low by national standards and that mortgage delinquency rates are lower in the Syracuse region than in other parts of the state and nation. However, while the national recovery has started to gain some momentum in recent months, job growth in Syracuse has remained somewhat weak. To date, the region has regained only about a third of the roughly 13,000 jobs that were lost during the downturn. So the recovery has been disappointing thus far. Despite the weak overall job growth, the region continues to undergo substantial economic restructuring. And, in fact, many parts of the economy are growing. Most prominently, the business services sector has added about 2,000 jobs since the recession ended, and the leisure and hospitality sector has also expanded. As a result of the economic restructuring in Syracuse, health and education are now among the most important industries in the region, employing roughly a fifth of all workers. While the “eds and meds ” sector experienced some job losses last year, it is generally less susceptible to downturns than other sectors of the economy, and expanded before, during and after the Great Recession. No doubt, the area’s many local colleges and universities play an important role in this regard. Syracuse’s colleges and universities deserve special attention because they are important regional assets that can help Syracuse continue to actively participate in the knowledge economy. Our own research at the New York Fed has shown that higher- education institutions can help to build their local area’s skilled workforce, which is critical to the long-run economic success of any region. These institutions produce highly skilled labor and help their regions innovate by creating new knowledge and inventions through academic research and development. It can be especially beneficial for local businesses to take advantage of the research facilities available at local colleges and universities. Partnerships between private industry and higher-education institutions are an important ingredient in this regard. Going forward, I believe these partnerships will become more important than ever—particularly for places like Syracuse that continue to experience economic restructuring. Fortunately, this region already has a strong higher education industry in place. Conclusion To sum up, the incoming data on the U.S. economy has been a bit more upbeat of late, suggesting that the recovery may be getting better established. But, while these developments are certainly encouraging, it is far too soon to conclude that we are out of the woods in terms of generating a strong, sustainable recovery. On the inflation front, the year-over-year rate of consumer price inflation has slowed in recent months, and despite the recent rise of gasoline prices, we expect inflation to moderate further in 2012. Here in Syracuse, while the recovery to date has not been as strong as we would like, the region’s vibrant health and education sector provides a solid base for longer-term growth. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. __________________________________________ 1 As measured by the 12-month change in the core PCE deflator. 2 See for instance, the behavior of the three- and six-month changes in the core PCE deflator. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

April 13, 2012 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Buffalo-Niagara Partnership, Buffalo, New York As prepared for delivery Good morning, I am pleased to be here in Buffalo to address the Buffalo-Niagara Partnership. It is always a pleasure to speak with the business community because of the leadership role you play in the economy of the region. I thank you all for inviting me here today. I try to get out of my office in New York City as much as I can to get a sense of regional economic conditions across the second Federal Reserve District. I was last here in Buffalo in 2010 and, more recently, I traveled to West Point and the Capital region and Long Island. These visits are just as important as any trip I might take to Washington, D.C., to help formulate monetary policy, or to Switzerland, to help shape international bank regulation. Each visit within the region helps me to deepen the relationships with the people I represent. I believe that the understanding of issues and concerns that I gain today will help ensure that the Fed’s policy decisions reflect the public interest. Today, I want to talk a bit about the Fed—what we do and why we do it. Then I’ll provide some thoughts about the economic outlook nationally and locally. After that, I’ll be happy to answer any questions you have about what the Fed does and why, and about the economic outlook. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee, also known as the FOMC. What the New York Fed Does By way of introduction, I will briefly review what my colleagues and I do at the New York Fed on behalf of the Second District. I have the great fortune to serve as vice chair of the FOMC that meets eight times a year in Washington to set interest rates and make other decisions about monetary policy. The members of this committee all strive to set policy to advance the mandate given to us by Congress to promote the maximum level of employment consistent with price stability. Sometimes we have different views on the specific policy choice at hand, and you should view this as completely appropriate: these are hard questions—particularly during difficult economic circumstances such as we face today. In fact, I think we make better decisions as a committee because we don't all think alike. But we are united in our commitment to our dual mandate and in our belief that Fed independence is essential to the public interest. That independence allows us to make tough decisions insulated from short-term political pressures. At FOMC meetings, each Committee member presents a current outlook for his or her region and the nation. For these assessments, we consult our researchers and add critical information that we learn from listening to our boards of directors, regional advisory councils and community leaders, such as you and others I'll meet on this visit. For example, last month members of our small business advisory council told us that for the first time in several years, employees were leaving for other jobs and that they would need to replace those who left for better opportunities elsewhere. The fact that some people with jobs felt confident enough to seek and take other job opportunities was another signal to us that the job market may be improving—although, to be sure, we read such signals cautiously. To help me gather more information about the region, yesterday, I had breakfast in Syracuse with business and community leaders at the Center for Economic Development. Then I met with the staff of PathStone, a community development organization, met faculty and students at the Maxwell School of Syracuse University and had lunch with university officials who manage the tech transfer process. In the afternoon, we drove to Skaneateles Falls to tour Welch Allyn, a manufacturer of medical diagnostic instruments. Dr. Julie Shimer is the president and CEO. Dr. Shimer was also recently appointed chair of the Empire State Development Corporation, and we talked about challenges and opportunities for economic development in New York State. After this morning’s gathering, I will speak with staff of the Empire Justice Center, meet with Lt. Governor Bob Duffy, convene a meeting of our Upstate Advisory Board, whose members are major leaders in the upstate economy, and visit the Roswell Park Cancer Institute to learn about their role in economic development in western New York and in the broader world arena. My colleagues and I at the New York Fed continually track conditions in our District, and we have created a number of tools for that purpose. For example, my staff produces monthly indexes of economic activity for New York City, the state of New York and New Jersey. These indexes are essentially measures of local output—similar to gross domestic product, or GDP, at the national level. These measures provide a more complete gauge of activity than the employment report, which is another important metric at the state level. We have also constructed a consumer credit panel to track local household credit conditions at the county and even the zip code level, including the amount and type of personal debt and whether payments are being made in a timely way. In addition, we conduct a periodic poll about the credit needs of small businesses, which are an important source of new jobs. We are just launching our latest poll that also includes questions about the skill needs of small businesses and whether the right kinds of skilled labor are available. Almost 900 regional businesses responded to our last poll, some of which were from this region. If you, as a representative of a small business, would like to participate in our current poll, please pass your card to my colleagues, who are in the audience, or see me after the speech and we will be glad to add you as a respondent. Results from prior polls stressed the problem of access to capital. In response we held two workshops at the Bank last December. In the first workshop, senior officers from the Export-Import Bank, the Small Business Administration and the Department of Commerce described the various loan programs available to small businesses from their agencies, as well as programs to help identify markets. The second workshop reviewed the business plans of 40 small businesses and then matched them with potential lenders. We plan to hold a similar workshop in Upstate New York this year. As you know, even states that are wealthier, such as New York, have large pockets of poverty. So, we target some of our work specifically to low- and moderate-income groups. We have worked hard to help neighborhoods that face high foreclosure rates, although much remains to be done. We have provided housing advocates with the latest information on mortgage conditions, via mortgage briefs, roundtables, presentations and newsletters. We have now developed an interactive online tool that shows monthly delinquency and foreclosure conditions, which we believe will aid the work of housing counselors and other parties seeking to help these communities. It is available on our website along with other data and information useful to policymakers, business people and the general public. We use our website to share what we learn about our diverse District, and you will find detailed information about the region at the site. I invite you to visit newyorkfed.org to explore our highly localized maps and information on small business, credit and housing conditions and even the latest job openings at the New York Fed. Finally, and crucially, in the aftermath of the financial crisis, we are working with our colleagues in Washington, D.C., and at other agencies to help put the nation's financial system on a firmer footing. Our supervisors are working hard to ensure that our District’s banks are operating safely and soundly. Although much has been done, we are not finished and are determined to keep at it. I recognize fully that there can be no return to pre-crisis business as usual—whether on the part of the financial sector or on the part of regulators like ourselves. All in all, there is a lot to keep myself and my colleagues busy. National Economic Conditions Now I’d like to turn to the national and regional economy. The incoming data on the U.S. economy generally has been a bit more upbeat over the past few months, suggesting that the recovery may be finally establishing a somewhat firmer footing. Real GDP expanded at a 3.0 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2011, the fastest growth since the first half of 2010. The average monthly job gain was 212 ,000 in the first quarter of 2012, up from 164,000 in the fourth quarter. Sales of light-weight motor vehicles were about 14 ½ million at an annual rate in the first quarter, the best quarter for vehicle sales in four years. Survey measures of business activity have rebounded from their dips in the middle of last year, and are now at levels that typically indicate solid overall growth. Even housing starts have firmed somewhat in the last few months, although they remain at depressed levels. While these developments are certainly encouraging, it is still too soon to conclude that we are out of the woods. To begin with, the economic data looked brighter at this point in 2010 and again in 2011, only to fade later in those years. Moreover, the United States experienced unusually mild weather over the first quarter, with the number of heating degree days more than 20 percent below the average of the preceding five years, which may have pulled forward some economic activity and hiring. In this regard, the somewhat softer March labor market report that was released last Friday may reflect the earlier positive influence of the mild weather on job creation in January and February, although other less sanguine interpretations are also plausible. We thus will need to see more data to determine the extent to which the March data represent a transitory weather-related setback. Regardless of the importance of the mild winter in distorting the economic data, real economic activity has yet to be strong enough on a sustained basis to make a big dent in the overall amount of slack in the U.S. economy. While growth was stronger in the fourth quarter, most of it was due to inventory accumulation. Growth of final sales remained quite weak. Historically, quarters in which inventory investment makes significant growth contributions are typically followed by quarters in which that growth contribution is modest or even negative. That appears to be what is shaping up for the first quarter of this year. Based on available data, our current expectations are that real GDP will expand at around a 2 ¼ percent annual rate during the first quarter of 2012. Even with the robust increase of light vehicle sales, overall consumer spending in the first quarter appears to be rising at a similar moderate rate. At the same time, real disposable income has been flat over the past three months, and the large increase of gasoline prices is likely further sapping consumers’ real purchasing power. And growth of business investment spending, which softened in the fourth quarter of 2011, may have been even a little softer in the first quarter of this year. To put the recent pace of growth into perspective, we believe that the economy’s long-run sustainable growth rate—what economists call the potential growth rate—is around a 2 ¼ percent annual rate. We need sustained growth above that rate to absorb the still substantial amount of unused productive capacity. Thus, our recent growth rates are barely keeping up with our potential. Even though the unemployment rate has declined sharply from 9 percent last September to 8.2 percent in March, it is still unacceptably high. In addition, many other measures of the labor market remain weak. The labor force participation rate, the percentage of people employed, and the total number of hours worked in the economy all dropped sharply during the recession and remain well below their pre-recession levels, even taking into account the impact of demographic shifts. Also, it appears that productivity growth has slumped recently. Although that means that a given amount of growth translates into bigger employment gains, it certainly is not an unmitigated positive development. Also, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the economy still faces significant headwinds and that there are some meaningful downside risks. In the headwinds department, I would include the run-up in gasoline prices mentioned earlier because that will sap purchasing power, the continued impediments to a strong recovery from ongoing weakness in the housing sector, and fiscal drag at the federal and state and local levels. In terms of downside risks, these include the risk that growth abroad disappoints and the risk of further disruptions to the supply of oil and higher oil prices. On the inflation front, the overall rate of increase of consumer prices, as measured by the 12-month change of the price index for personal consumption expenditures, slowed to 2.3 percent in February from a recent peak of 2.9 percent last September. Even though the recent rise of gasoline prices mentioned above could interrupt this pattern, we expect this moderation of overall inflation to resume later this year. While the underlying core inflation rate, that strips out volatile food and energy prices, has been somewhat higher than expected a few months back, it appears that the annual rate of core inflation 1 has peaked and we expect it to begin to decline later this year. 2 Finally, inflation expectations, which play an important role in the inflation process, remain well anchored. By this I mean that people expect that the rate of inflation will continue to be relatively low for some time to come. Regional Economic Conditions So how is the recovery proceeding in the state and the region? As I mentioned, the New York Fed produces indexes that help us track economic activity in the region. Based on these measures, the economic recovery that began in New York State in late 2009 has continued through early 2012, and even gained some momentum. Across Upstate New York, the cycle of recession and recovery has been much less pronounced than in the nation, which means that the region has been more stable in recent years than many other places around the country. This has been particularly true in Buffalo, which experienced an employment decline of about 3½ percent during the downturn—a significant loss, to be sure—but well below the over 6 percent decline that occurred nationally. One reason why Upstate New York weathered the storm better than the nation as a whole is the resiliency of its housing markets. Like much of Upstate New York, Buffalo’s housing market has proven to be more stable than many other parts of the country. In fact, since the peak of the national housing market in early 2006, home prices in the Buffalo area have increased by about 10 percent, compared with a decline of more than 30 percent nationally. As a result, the drop-off in economic activity that is connected, directly and indirectly, to the performance of the housing sector has not been as severe here as in many other places around the country. This stability is underscored by our latest quarterly consumer credit panel data, which shows that total household debt burdens have remained relatively low by national standards and that mortgage delinquency rates are lower in the Buffalo area than in other parts of the state and nation. The recovery is proceeding in Buffalo, slowly but surely. So far, the region has gained back nearly 12,000 of the roughly 20,000 jobs it lost during the downturn. This is somewhat faster progress than the nation has made, although, in part, that’s because the downturn was less severe here. One particularly good bit of news is that for the first time in decades, manufacturing has been a source of job growth in the region, rather than decline, adding more than 3,000 jobs over the past few years. That’s nearly twice the pace of growth of the U.S. manufacturing sector. That said, it is somewhat worrying that the pace of the recovery locally has actually slowed in recent months just as the national recovery has started to gain some momentum. Despite this recent slowdown, I believe there are reasons to be optimistic about Buffalo’s longer-term outlook. In particular, the decades long economic restructuring that has occurred in the region has resulted in a more diversified economy. While the region still maintains a strong manufacturing presence, it is no longer the main source of jobs in the area. In its place, the health and education sectors have emerged as important sources of job opportunity and economic development potential. These sectors have provided stability to the region through the recession and recovery. The recent announcement of Governor Cuomo’s $1 billion economic development pledge to the region is another positive development. This commitment represents a tremendous opportunity for the region to accelerate the economic transformation already underway. Therefore, it is important for the community to think strategically about how best to use these funds to leverage the region’s existing strengths. Buffalo’s colleges and universities deserve special attention within this strategy. Not only do these institutions produce highly skilled labor, they also promote innovation by creating new knowledge and inventions through academic research and development. It can be especially beneficial for local businesses to take advantage of both the knowledge created and the availability of research facilities at local colleges and universities. Partnerships between private industry and higher-education institutions are an important ingredient in this regard. Going forward, I believe these partnerships will become more important than ever—particularly for places like Buffalo that continue to undergo economic restructuring. Fortunately, the region has a strong higher education sector in place. Conclusion To sum up, the incoming data on the U.S. economy has been a bit more upbeat of late, suggesting that the recovery may be getting better established. But, while these developments are certainly encouraging, it is far too soon to conclude that we are out of the woods in terms of generating a strong, sustainable recovery. On the inflation front, the year-over-year rate of consumer price inflation has slowed in recent months, and despite the recent rise of gasoline prices, we expect inflation to moderate further in 2012. Here in Buffalo, the economic restructuring has positioned the region’s health and education sector as a potentially solid base for longer-term growth. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. __________________________________________ 1 As measured by the 12-month change in core PCE deflator. 2 See for instance, the behavior of the three- and six-month changes in the core PCE deflator. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
