1 Presentation to the Anchorage Economic Development Corporation Anchorage, Alaska By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on August 18, 2016 Longview: The Economic Outlook Good afternoon and welcome; it’s a pleasure to be here. This is my first time in Alaska and I am looking forward to learning a lot about the local economy during my visit here. Today I’ll give an overview of the national economy and where I see things going, as well as talk about the subject back at the forefront of everyone’s Fed conversations: interest rates. This is becoming an annual ritual: In August everyone keeps asking what the Fed will do in September. I’m asked enough about it to just wish that someone would wake me up when September ends. Of course, then they’d start the next annual ritual, asking about December, so there’s no avoiding it. All that talk about September and December reminds me that I should have already issued the standard disclaimer, so here goes: The views expressed here today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. A broad economy With that out of the way, I’ll turn to the Fed’s dual mandate, which is maximum employment and price stability. I know everyone here understands what the Fed does, but I often find myself returning to the basics these days, as discussions of America’s economy and the role of monetary policy take 2 center stage. So please forgive me if it seems I’m just roaming for the moment, but it’s important to remember who does what and why. The Fed makes monetary policy, which has a powerful influence on the economy, but it also has its limits: It operates in a relatively constricted area and uses a restricted set of tools. Most importantly, we don’t deal with taxes or spending, debts or deficits; instead, we deal primarily with the quantity of money and the rates at which it is lent. As a Fed policymaker, I see virtually everything through the lens of our dual mandate: What does it mean for jobs? For inflation? I represent the largest Federal Reserve district, made up of the nine western states, which comprises roughly 20 percent of the U.S. economy, and about 36 percent of its geography, with the gap between the two numbers largely explained by the great expanse of land here in Alaska. With such a large and diverse region, it may not be surprising that when I listen to people from around the district talk about conditions in their areas, it can sometimes sound like they live in completely different countries. There’s an old adage about the ocean being merely a collection of billions and billions of drops of water. In the same vein, the overall American economy is a collection of multiple smaller economies. So perceptions of economic health vary, as do reactions to economic changes—welcome to a new kind of tension. Lower gas prices may be great for people in Idaho, for instance, because they put more money in people’s pockets, which then gets spent in the local economy. In Alaska and other oil-producing states, they have the 3 opposite effect—depressing tax revenue, hiring, investment, and spending. So I understand that, in some ways, the economy can appear to be a walking contradiction. Part of what makes the Fed System effective is that, while we’re making national policy, we’re actively gathering input and information from regions all over the country. I don’t just see the blistering hot markets like Seattle and San Francisco, I also see areas negatively affected by the drop in oil prices, like Anchorage, or that were hit harder by the housing crisis than their neighbors, like Las Vegas and Phoenix. So I listen to all areas of my district, and they feed into my overall policy perspective. But, despite this wide range of economic experience and the ups and downs in the western states, on a macro level things are pretty good, and the American economy is strong. Employment With that in mind, I’d like to turn first to national employment. Our goal is not to have an unemployment rate of zero, instead, it’s to be near the “natural rate” of unemployment: That’s the rate we can expect in a healthy economy. I see that number as about 5 percent, which means that with the unemployment rate at 4.9 percent, we’re right on target. The unemployment rate is obviously not the only measure of labor market health, but the multiple indicators tend to move together and are sending similar signals, with almost universal improvements across them all. Even the metric many people have been worried about, the labor force participation rate, is not the 21st century breakdown some people have feared; in fact, it’s 4 back pretty close to what I see as normal. The participation rate takes the labor force and divides it by everyone in the United States over the age of 16, which covers a lot of people who aren’t working or looking for a job for perfectly normal reasons; overall, the low participation rate can be explained by demographic factors and longer-term trends, such as baby boomers retiring and young people staying longer in school.1 The numbers are actually so positive, it’s time to adjust the way we talk and think about them. I should know better by now, but even if I change the channels for an hour or two, I’m constantly surprised by the commentary that seems to miss the larger playing field. In a robust labor market, we simply don’t need to create as many jobs as we did when we were trying to climb out of the hole dug for us by the recession. Over the past few years, we’ve seen outstanding numbers—in 2014 and 2015 the economy added nearly 3 million jobs a year, and 2016 is on track to deliver about another 2¼ million jobs. That’s great news, but the fact is we won’t need as much job growth going forward. We’re pretty much at full employment now, so the future is less about meeting a goal and more about maintaining a result. That means creating enough new jobs to keep up with the increase in the size of the labor force. That number depends on things like the number of people retiring this year or graduating from school and entering the workforce. The current pace of job gains is well 1 Aaronson et al. (2014). 5 above what we need, which I put to be somewhere around 80,000 a month, although estimates range from 50,000 to around 100,000.2 So this year’s pace of 186,000 jobs a month is over twice as fast as we need to keep up with labor force growth, and, quite honestly, is unsustainable in the long run. We should expect the pace of job gains to slow, and no one should be alarmed when it does—we should only be alarmed, frankly, if we don’t see that necessary slowdown. While we’re on the subject of employment, I’d like to issue a plea to my friends in the commentariat to not fixate on each individual data point, even an important one like the jobs number. And here’s where I get to trot out my most overused line: I and the rest of the Fed policymakers love saying we’re “data dependent.” It’s a constant refrain and it’s absolutely true. But there’s a difference between being data dependent and being data-point dependent, as one of my colleagues put it. No one should get caught up on a particularly bad—or a particularly good—jobs report. Or a month’s inflation numbers. Or even quarterly GDP growth. All the indicators should be examined in their entirety to tell us the state of the economy and where it’s likely headed. Individual reports, and even short-term trends, can give a false perception. There are a few things to keep in mind when looking at the data. One is the standard disclaimer that gets lost in the headlines, that the first round of numbers is preliminary and can be very noisy. Another is 2 See for example Aaronson, Brave, and Kelley (2016) from the Chicago Fed. 6 that getting caught up in monthly or even quarterly changes is unhelpful—one good jobs report doesn’t spell instant success, just as one bad inflation report doesn’t make us an economic basket case. We should, instead, try to understand and parse these sorts of month-to-month movements. Instead of simply labeling them as noisy, we look for the source of the cacophony. There’s a lot of analysis involved in getting to the bottom of some of it. Which answers one of life’s great mysteries: Why do economists exist? We’re here to dig through the data and uncover hidden trends. Doing that, we can see external forces at work—for example, even after two revisions, the May jobs report showed just 24,000 new jobs, causing speculation that the economy might be walking down the boulevard of broken dreams. But that report was inordinately affected by special factors, including the Verizon strike and the effects of weather. After adjusting for these, job gains remained solidly above trend, so the report was less shocking than some commentators made it out to be. Inflation Turning to the other side of the ledger, inflation is on course to meet our 2 percent goal. Although it’s been persistently below target over the past several years, recent data look more favorable. Over the past year, the strengthening of the dollar and falling energy prices have pushed inflation down, but these influences should fade over time. To cut through some of the noise, it’s useful to look at measures of inflation that strip out volatile prices and provide a clearer view of the underlying trend. Those measures suggest that underlying inflation is in the 7 1½ to 1¾ percent range. We’re not quite at our target, but the strength of the labor market should help us along. The outlook One of the reasons I’m confident in our progress is that my U.S. forecast today is not much different than it was a month ago, or, frankly, than it was in December when we first raised rates. I continue to see evidence that, overall, the economic expansion remains on track. Consumer spending is strong, the labor market is running apace, and household balance sheets are improving. All in all, I see a strong domestic economy. Internationally, Brexit has been dominating the headlines, and people have been worried that it might push the U.K. into recession and how it might weigh on Europe. But there’s no sign that it will have enough of an impact to knock our economy off course. In fact, from a global standpoint, the discussion about the effects of Brexit is a reminder that we’re doing a lot better than most of the rest of the world. Everyone’s favorite topic: Rate hikes Now is when I come around to the subject of interest rates. In the context of a strong domestic economy with good momentum, it makes sense to get back to a pace of gradual rate increases, preferably sooner rather than later. I have a few reasons for saying that. 8 First, Milton Friedman famously taught us that monetary policy has long and variable lags.3 Research shows it takes at least a year or two for it to have its full effect.4 So the decisions we make today must take aim at where we’re going, not where we are. I liken it to a car: When you’re nearing the intersection, you ease off the gas so you can be ready to stop. You don’t wait until you get right in front of the red light; that would force you to slam on the brakes, and might propel you into the middle of the intersection. Likewise, if we wait until we see the whites of inflation’s eyes, we don’t just risk having to slam on the monetary policy brakes, we risk having to throw the economy into reverse to undo the damage of overshooting the mark. And that creates its own risks of a hard landing or even a recession. Second, experience shows that an economy that runs too hot for too long can generate imbalances, ultimately leading to either excessive inflation or an economic correction and recession. In the 1960s and 1970s, it was runaway inflation. In the late 1990s, the expansion became increasingly fueled by euphoria over the “new economy,” the dot-com bubble, and massive overinvestment in tech-related industries. And in the first half of the 2000s, irrational exuberance over housing sent prices spiraling far beyond fundamentals and led to massive overbuilding. If we wait too long to remove monetary accommodation, we hazard allowing these imbalances to grow, at great cost to our economy. 3 Friedman (1961). 4 Havranek and Rusnak (2013). 9 Finally, an earlier start to raising rates would allow a smoother, more gradual process of normalization. This gives us space to fine-tune our responses to any surprise changes in economic conditions. If we wait too long, the need to play catch-up wouldn’t leave much room for maneuver. Not to mention, it could roil financial markets and slow the economy in unintended ways. Monetary policy has absolutely played a crucial role in getting us back on track.5 We’ve achieved our mandate of full employment and we’re heading towards 2 percent inflation. But, it’s important to recognize what monetary policy can and can’t do—not to mention what it should and shouldn’t. The job of monetary policy is to get the economy to full strength with maximum employment and steady 2 percent inflation, using the tools available to us. As I said earlier, that’s a relatively limited kit and is restricted largely to money in the system and the rates at which it is lent. How the economy develops and performs in the long run depends on a host of other factors that are outside our purview and ability to influence. What comes next is addressing long-run trends in productivity and the quality of the labor force, and those are determined by the investments we make in technology and education, by tax policies and long-term fiscal decisions.6 That’s what’s going to shape the economy over the next decade, and that conversation extends far beyond the Federal Open Market Committee meeting room. 5 Williams (2014). 6 See Fernald and Jones (2014) regarding technology and education; see also Williams (2016). 10 New normal As we look to the future, we should be aware of what economic strength will look like. Some might ask, if accommodative policy helps the economy so much, why don’t we just keep rates low forever? The answer is that it’s not economically healthy and it’s not sustainable. The Fed can’t deliver, say, 3 or 4 percent growth for the next 10 years just because of easy monetary policy. We have to operate within the established economic environment and foster growth within those parameters. As I said earlier, we’re only going to need somewhere around 80,000 new jobs a month to keep up with the growing labor force. Some may call this disappointing, and it was when we were climbing out of the hole the recession left. But this is the new normal, as is trend growth of a little over 1½ percent going forward. If we want to bend the curve, it’s not going to be through monetary policy. It’s going to be through legislative policies that have a chance at fundamentally changing the direction of growth—like longer-term investments in human and physical capital like education and infrastructure. Conclusion The Cliff’s Notes version is this: Despite the very real struggles that some parts of the country, including Alaska, are facing, the broader national economy is in good shape: We’re at full employment, and inflation is well within sight of, and on track to reach, our target. Under these conditions, it makes sense for the Fed to gradually move interest rates toward more normal levels. 11 References Aaronson, Daniel, Scott A. Brave, and David Kelley. 2016. “Is There Still Slack in the Labor Market?” Chicago Fed Letter 2016(359). https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/chicago-fed-letter/2016/359 Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. 2014. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197–255. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/projects/bpea/fall-2014/fall2014bpea_aaronson_et_al.pdf Fernald, John G., and Charles I. Jones. 2014. “The Future of U.S. Economic Growth.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 104(5, May), pp. 44–49. Friedman, Milton. 1961. “The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 69(5), pp. 447−466. Havranek, Tomas, and Marek Rusnak. 2013. “Transmission Lags of Monetary Policy: A Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(4, December), pp. 39–75. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q4a2.htm Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings. http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2014/01/16-monetary-policy-zero-lower-bound-williams Williams, John C. 2016. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23, August 15. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/august/monetary-policy-and-low-r-star-natural-rate-of-interest/

1 Presentation to the Hayek Group, Reno, Nevada By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on September 6, 2016 Whither Inflation Targeting? Good evening; it’s a pleasure to be here to discuss the economy and monetary policy with the Hayek Group. I’ll start with a quick overview of the U.S. economic outlook and what it means for monetary policy. Spoiler alert: The punch line is that the economy has climbed back to full strength, and it therefore makes sense to move monetary policy gradually back to normal. That brings me to the second topic of my talk: What is “normal” monetary policy? After nearly eight years of very low or even negative interest rates and massive doses of quantitative easing around the world, it’s not clear that we can, or should, go back to the old ways of doing things. At this point I need to emphasize that the views I express here today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The economic outlook viewed through the lens of the dual mandate As is well known, the Fed’s dual mandate is maximum employment and price stability. As a Fed policymaker, I see virtually everything through the lens of these two objectives: What does it mean for jobs, for inflation? I’ll start with maximum employment. Our goal is not to have an unemployment rate of zero. Instead, it’s to be near the “natural rate” of unemployment: That’s the rate we can expect in a healthy economy. It’s impossible to know exactly what that number is, but economists 2 generally put it between 4¾ and 5 percent today.1 With the unemployment rate at 4.9 percent, we’re right on target. Of course, the unemployment rate isn’t the only measure of labor market health, and it’s reassuring that a range of indicators have been improving and are sending similar signals. In particular, one measure of the labor market that I look to is what regular people—by that, I mean not just economists—say when they are asked how hard it is to find a job. Those responses are right in line with the signal we’re getting from the unemployment rate.2 That’s the good news about where we are, and I expect things will get even better. So far this year, we’re on pace to add nearly 2¼ million jobs, which is over twice the number that we need to keep up with the trend increase in the size of the labor force. Labor force growth depends on things like the number of people retiring this year or graduating from school and entering the workforce. I put the trend at somewhere around 1 million jobs per year.3 With job gains far outpacing labor force growth, I expect the unemployment rate to continue to edge down over the next year, bottoming out near 4.5 percent—a very strong labor market by any standard. Turning to the other side of the ledger, the Fed’s monetary policy committee—the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC for short—has set a long-run goal of 2 percent inflation.4 Inflation has been running persistently below that goal for several years. Over the past couple of years, the strengthening of the dollar and declines in energy prices have pushed inflation down, but these influences should fade over time. To cut through some of the noise, it’s useful to look at measures of inflation that strip out volatile prices and provide a clearer view of 1 In the June 2016 Summary of Economic Projections, the central tendency of estimates of the long-run level of the unemployment rate ranged between 4.7 and 5 percent (Board of Governors 2016a). The Congressional Budget Office estimates the natural rate to be 4¾ percent as of August (CBO 2016). The median estimate from the Survey of Professional Forecasters in August 2016 was 4.8 percent (https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/2016/survq316). The Blue Chip Economic Indicators estimate is 4.9 percent as of March 2016. 2 Data are from the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Survey (https://www.conference- board.org/data/consumerconfidence.cfm). See Weidner and Williams (2011). 3 Estimates range from 600,000 to 1.2 million. See, for example, Aaronson, Brave, and Kelley (2016). 4 Board of Governors (2016b). 3 the underlying trend. These suggest that underlying inflation is in the 1½ to 1¾ percent range. We’re not quite at our target yet, but the combination of fading transitory factors and a strong economy should help us get back to our 2 percent goal in the next year or two. To sum up, I remain confident about the road we are on. Consumer spending is strong, the labor market is running apace, and household balance sheets are improving. All in all, I see a solid domestic economy with good momentum going forward. What it means for interest rates So, what does this mean for interest rates? In the context of a strong economy with good momentum, it makes sense to get back to a pace of gradual rate increases, preferably sooner rather than later. Let me be clear: In arguing for an increase in interest rates, I’m not trying to stall the economic expansion. It’s just the opposite: My aim is to keep it on a sound footing so it can be sustained for a long time.5 History teaches us that an economy that runs too hot for too long can generate imbalances, potentially leading to excessive inflation, asset market bubbles, and ultimately economic correction and recession. A gradual process of raising rates reduces the risks of such an outcome. It also allows a smoother, more calibrated process of normalization that gives us space to adjust our responses to any surprise changes in economic conditions. If we wait too long to remove monetary accommodation, we hazard allowing imbalances to grow, requiring us to play catch-up, and not leaving much room to maneuver. Not to mention, a sudden reversal of policy could be disruptive and slow the economy in unintended ways. What is normal monetary policy? Although the U.S. economy has managed to recover from the global financial crisis and subsequent events, it has been a painfully long and hard struggle, necessitating extraordinary 5 See Williams (2016a) for further discussion. 4 monetary policy actions. Many other countries have not been as fortunate and are still in the midst of prolonged economic challenges, calling forth even more aggressive policies, including negative interest rates and expanded quantitative easing programs. Even after the present problems are overcome, new realities pose significant challenges for the conduct of monetary policy in the United States and elsewhere. Foremost is the significant decline in the natural rate of interest, or r* (r-star), over the past quarter-century to historically low levels. The natural interest rate is the short-term real (inflation-adjusted) interest rate that balances monetary policy so that it is neither accommodative nor contractionary in terms of growth and inflation. While a central bank sets its short-term interest rate, r-star is a function of factors beyond its influence. The daunting challenge for central banks is how to deliver stable inflation in a low r-star world. This conundrum shares some characteristics and common roots with the theory of secular stagnation; in both scenarios, interest rates, growth, and inflation are persistently low.6 How low can rates stay? A variety of economic factors have pushed natural interest rates very low and they appear poised to stay that way.7 This is the case not just for the United States but for other economies as well. In a recent paper, Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and I estimated the inflation-adjusted natural rate for four major economies: the United States, Canada, the euro area, and the United Kingdom.8 In 1990, estimates ranged from about 2½ to 3½ percent. By 2007, on the eve of the global financial crisis, these had all declined to between 2 and 2½ percent. By 2015, all four 6 Summers (2015). 7 See Williams (2015), Hamilton et al. (2015), Kiley (2015), Lubik and Matthes (2015), and Laubach and Williams (2016). 8 Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2016). Estimates are available at: http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/economists/jwilliams/Holston_Laubach_Williams_estimates.xlsx 5 estimates had dropped sharply, to 1½ percent for Canada and the United Kingdom, nearly zero for the United States, and below zero for the euro area. The underlying determinants for these declines are related to the global supply and demand for funds, including shifting demographics, slower trend productivity and economic growth, emerging markets seeking large reserves of safe assets, and a more general global savings glut.9 The key takeaway from these global trends is that interest rates are going to stay lower than we’ve come to expect in the past. This does not mean they will be zero, but when juxtaposed with pre-recession normal short-term interest rates of, say, 4 to 4½ percent, it may be jarring to see the underlying r-star guiding us towards a new normal of 3 to 3½ percent—or even lower. Importantly, this future of low interest rates is not due to easy monetary policy; instead, it is the rate expected to prevail when the economy is at full strength and the stance of monetary policy is neutral. The critical implication of a lower natural rate of interest is that conventional monetary policy has less room to stimulate the economy during an economic downturn, owing to a lower bound on how low interest rates can go. This will necessitate a greater reliance on unconventional tools like central bank balance sheets, forward guidance, and potentially even negative policy rates.10 In this new normal, recessions will tend to be longer and deeper, recoveries slower, and the risks of unacceptably low inflation and the ultimate loss of the nominal anchor will be higher.11 We have already gotten a first taste of the effects of a low r-star, 9 Council of Economic Advisers (2015), International Monetary Fund (2014), Rachel and Smith (2015), and Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2016). 10 Some commentators advocate trying to eliminate or significantly reduce the lower bound on interest rates by eliminating paper currency or effectively making currency bear a negative interest rate at times. See Marvin Goodfriend (2016) and references therein. In my remarks, I assume that paper currency and other considerations continue to put a lower limit on interest rates. 11 See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) and Chung et al. (2012) for discussions of the effects of the lower bound. Reifschneider (2016) provides an assessment of the ability of unconventional monetary policies to mitigate the effects of the lower bound in the future. Cœuré (2016) discusses these issues in the European context. 6 with uncomfortably low inflation and growth despite very low interest rates. Unfortunately, if the status quo endures, the future is likely to hold more of the same—with the possibility of even more severe challenges to maintaining price stability and full employment. Low r-star and strategies for mitigation There are actions that central banks and governments can undertake to avoid this fate. These include fiscal and other policies aimed at raising the natural interest rate, as well as alternative monetary, fiscal, and other policies that are more likely to succeed in maintaining a strong economy and stable inflation in the face of a low natural rate. In these remarks, I will focus on options related to monetary policy.12 Some historical context is in order. The inflation wars of the 1970s and 1980s led to a broad consensus regarding monetary policy among academics and policymakers that central banks are responsible and accountable for price stability. This was often acknowledged through the formal adoption of an inflation targeting framework with an explicit numerical inflation goal.13 Over the past 25 years, over two dozen central banks around the world have adopted a variant of inflation targeting. Although inflation targeting central banks that aimed for a low inflation rate generally have been successful at stabilizing inflation in the past, such an approach is not as well-suited for a low r-star era. There simply may not be enough room for central banks to cut interest rates in response to an economic downturn when both natural rates and inflation are very low. Given this reality, central banks and governments should critically reevaluate their monetary policy frameworks to identify potential improvements in the context of a low r-star. 12 See Williams (2016b) for further discussion of the roles of fiscal and other policies to affect the level of r-star and its effects on the economy. 13 See Williams (2014) and references therein. 7 Although there are many potential alternative approaches to consider, I will focus here on two, which can be considered together or in isolation to address this issue. The most direct attack on low r-star would be for central banks to pursue a somewhat higher inflation target. This would imply a higher average level of interest rates and thereby give monetary policy more room to maneuver.14 The logic of this approach argues that a 1 percentage point increase in the inflation target would offset the deleterious effects of an equal-sized decline in r-star. Note that raising the inflation target by 1 or even 2 percentage points would not imply a return to the high rates of inflation of the 1970s. Instead, it would be a return to inflation rates that prevailed in the early 1980s through the early 1990s, when inflation tended to run between 3 and 4 percent in the United States. Of course, consideration of this approach would need to balance these benefits against the costs and challenges of achieving and maintaining a somewhat higher inflation rate. A second alternative would be to replace the inflation target with a flexible price-level or nominal GDP target, where the central bank targets a steadily growing level of prices or nominal GDP, rather than the rate of inflation. These approaches have a number of potential advantages over standard inflation targeting. For one, they may be better suited to periods when the lower bound constrains interest rates because they automatically deliver the “lower for longer” policy prescription the situation calls for.15 Because they provide a clear metric by which to judge whether the economy is above or below the stipulated goal, they may help improve the systematic conduct of policy and its communication and public understanding, especially when interest rates are constrained by the lower bound. 14 Williams (2009), Blanchard, Dell’Arricia, and Mauro (2010), Ball (2014). 15 Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003). 8 In addition, these alternative approaches are better designed for a world where r-star changes over time. For example, in a nominal GDP targeting regime, a decline in r-star caused by slower trend real GDP growth is offset by higher average inflation, mitigating the effect on the interest rate buffer available to respond to economic downturns. More generally, these approaches appear to be more robust to unpredictable and hard-to-measure movements in r- star.16 Finally, price and nominal GDP targeting have a built-in protection against debt deflation.17 These approaches aim to return prices or nominal GDP to a predictable, steadily growing path, meaning that borrowers have more assurance about the value of the dollars they pay back. Of course, like a higher inflation target, these approaches also have potential disadvantages that must be carefully scrutinized when considering their relative costs and benefits. Conclusion Although it has been a long, hard road back from the recession, the American economy is finally back in good shape and headed in the right direction. We’re at full employment, and inflation is well within sight of and on track to reach our target. Given the progress we have made and signs of continued solid momentum in the economy, and consistent with our agreed- upon monetary policy approach, it makes sense for the Fed to gradually move interest rates toward more normal levels. Looking toward the future, I have stressed the need to study and consider new approaches to monetary policy better suited for a low r-star world. Any shift in monetary policy strategy requires extensive analysis, consideration, and debate. But, time is not on our side. We have 16 See Orphanides and Williams (2002). 17 Koenig (2013), Sheedy (2014). 9 witnessed the extreme difficulties of achieving price stability and full employment with a low r- star. I firmly believe that now is the time for experts and policymakers around the world to actively study and assess the pros and cons of alternative proposals, so that we are better prepared for the challenges related to persistently low natural real rates of interest. Finally, thoroughly reviewing the key aspects of inflation targeting is certainly necessary, and could go a long way towards mitigating the obstructions posed by low r-star. But that is where monetary policy meets the boundaries of its influence. We’ve come to the point on the path where central banks must share responsibilities. There are limits to what monetary policy can and, indeed, should do. The burden must also fall on fiscal and other policies to do their part to help create conditions conducive to economic stability. Thank you. 10 References Aaronson, Daniel, Scott A. Brave, and David Kelley. 2016. “Is There Still Slack in the Labor Market?” Chicago Fed Letter 2016(359). https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/chicago-fed-letter/2016/359 Ball, Laurence. 2014. “The Case for a Long-Run Inflation Target of Four Percent.” IMF Working Paper 14/92 (June). https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2014/wp1492.pdf Blanchard, Olivier, Giovanni Dell’Ariccia and Paolo Mauro. 2010. “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 42(s1), pp.199–215. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016a. “Summary of Economic Projections.” June 15. https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20160615.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016b. “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” Amended January 26. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_20160126.pdf Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas. 2016. “Global Imbalances and Currency Wars at the ZLB.” Manuscript, UC Berkeley, March 10. Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams. 2012. “Have We Underestimated the Probability of Hitting the Zero Lower Bound?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44, pp. 47–82. Cœuré, Benoît. 2016. “The ECB’s Operational Framework in Post-Crisis Times.” Speech by Member of the Executive Board of the ECB at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 40th Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 27. https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160827.en.html Congressional Budget Office. 2016. “An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2016 to 2026.” Report, August. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/51908 Council of Economic Advisers. 2015. “Long-Term Interest Rates: A Survey.” Report, July. https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/interest_rate_report_final_v2.pdf Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford. 2003. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2003(1, Spring), pp. 139–211. Goodfriend, Marvin. 2016. “The Case for Unencumbering Interest Rate Policy at the Zero Bound.” Presented at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 40th Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, August 26. https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/sympos/2016/econsymposium-goodfriend- paper.pdf Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West. 2015. “The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings, October 30. https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-equilibrium-real-funds- rate-past-present-and-future/ 11 Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2016. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2016-11, June. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working-papers/wp2016- 11.pdf International Monetary Fund. 2014. World Economic Outlook, April. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2014/01/index.htm Kiley, Michael T. 2015. “What Can the Data Tell Us About the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate?” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington, DC: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.077 Koenig, Evan F. 2013. “Like a Good Neighbor: Monetary Policy, Financial Stability, and the Distribution of Risk.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(2, June), pp. 57–82. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q2a3.htm Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams. 2016. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux.” Business Economics, 51(2, July), pp. 57–67. Lubik, Thomas A., and Christian Matthes. 2015. “Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Brief 15-10, October. https://www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/economic_brief/2015/eb_15-10 Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2002. “Robust Monetary Policy Rules with Unknown Natural Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2002-2, pp. 63–145. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/robust-monetary-policy-rules-with-unknown-natural-rates/ Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith. 2015. “Secular Drivers of the Global Real Interest Rate.” Bank of England Staff Working Paper 571, December. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/research/Pages/workingpapers/2015/swp571.aspx Reifschneider, David. 2016. “Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions.” FEDS working paper 2016-68. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2016.068 Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams. 2000. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 32(4, November), pp. 936–966. Sheedy, Kevin D. 2014. “Debt and Incomplete Financial Markets: A Case for Nominal GDP Targeting.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 301–361. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea- articles/debt-and-incomplete-financial-markets-a-case-for-nominal-gdp-targeting/ Summers, Lawrence H. 2015. “Demand Side Secular Stagnation.” American Economic Review 105(5, May), pp. 60–65. Weidner, Justin, and John C. Williams. 2011. “What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-5 (February 14), update. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/el2011- 05-update.pdf Williams, John C. 2009. “Heeding Daedalus: Optimal Inflation and the Zero Bound.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2009-2, pp. 1–37. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/heeding-daedalus- optimal-inflation-and-the-zero-lower-bound/ 12 Williams, John C. 2014. “Inflation Targeting and the Global Financial Crisis: Successes and Challenges.” Presentation to the South African Reserve Bank Conference, Pretoria, October 31. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2014/october/inflation- targeting-global-financial-crisis/ Williams, John C. 2015. “The Decline in the Natural Rate of Interest.” Business Economics 50(2, April), pp. 57–60. Williams, John C. 2016a. “Longview: The Economic Outlook.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-24 (August 22). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/august/longview-economic-outlook-anchorage-speech/ Williams, John C. 2016b. “Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23 (August 15). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/august/monetary-policy-and-low-r-star-natural-rate-of-interest/
