Perspectives on Risks – Both Economic and Cyber By Eric S. Rosengren April 4, 2016 Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Speech Audio (mp3) more share share share share Commenting on the economy, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren on Monday said that financial market expectations of only a very slow removal of monetary policy accommodation could, in his view, prove unduly pessimistic. In reaction to volatility in both foreign and domestic markets earlier this year, federal funds rate futures fell significantly, reflecting expectations for only a very gradual increase in short-term interest rates. Futures markets assign a very high probability of one or zero increases in rates by the end of this year. "My own sense is that financial markets may have reacted too strongly," Rosengren said. With financial market volatility subsiding, Rosengren expressed some surprise that the expected path of monetary policy embedded in futures markets is so low. "A weak forecast doesn't seem to explain the path expected for the funds rate," he said. "As I see it, the risks seem to be abating that problems from abroad would be severe enough to disrupt the U.S. recovery. Financial-market volatility has fallen, and most economic forecasts do not reflect expected large spillovers from continued headwinds from abroad." Rosengren said it increasingly appears that the U.S. has weathered foreign shocks quite well. "I personally expect that a stronger economy, at essentially full employment and with gradually rising inflation, will lead to more tightening than is currently priced into the futures market expectations for the next two years," Rosengren said. Rosengren was quick to emphasize that his outlook still calls for a gradual pace of increases and that, as always, the path should depend on incoming economic data. Turning to cybersecurity, Rosengren noted that the risks in the cyber realm are, unfortunately, not abating. While banks must continue to evolve with and invest in financial services innovations, Rosengren said, they are staying attuned to and strategic about the cyber risks that come with online and mobile delivery. In Rosengren's view, banking organizations need to continue to evolve as these risks morph, and as new innovations and expectations of convenience introduce new challenges to security. In setting the context for the remainder of the day’s program on cybersecurity, Rosengren said "Cyber risks make it imperative that we all work together to ensure that resiliency, monitoring, detection, and recovery capabilities are operational in the financial system." Rosengren was speaking at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 2016 Cybersecurity Conference collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Speech Audio (mp3)

Are Financial Markets Too Pessimistic About the Economy? By Eric S. Rosengren April 18, 2016 Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share In a speech at Central Connecticut State University, Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said the U.S. economy is fundamentally sound, weathering headwinds from abroad, and likely to perform better than the domestic economies of most trading partners. "This represents an outlook strong enough to engender further decline in the unemployment rate, even with some gradual normalization of interest rates," Rosengren said. However, pricing in the federal funds futures market implies just three-quarters of a percentage point in increases by the end of 2018—one quarter of a percentage point increase in each of the next three years. This is inconsistent with Rosengren’s forecast—and that of many forecasters—for continued moderate growth in the U.S. economy. "While I believe that gradual federal funds rate increases are absolutely appropriate, I do not see that the risks are so elevated, nor the outlook so pessimistic, as to justify the exceptionally shallow interest rate path currently reflected in financial futures markets," Rosengren said. Looking at longer-term market rates, Rosengren also noted that market rates on 10-year Treasury securities are below 2 percent. If the Fed is successful in averaging 2 percent inflation over the next 10 years, then investors are accepting a negative real rate of return. In Rosengren’s view, it is quite appropriate to probe how low unemployment—currently at 5 percent—can go, given that the inflation rate is below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent target and wages are only increasing modestly. One reason for probing how low the unemployment rate can go is that it will encourage more people to return to the labor force. But given these conditions, an interest rate path as shallow as implied in futures markets could introduce risks of overheating. "A large, rapid decline in unemployment could be risky, as an overheating economy would eventually produce inflation rising above our 2 percent goal." "I would prefer that the Federal Reserve not risk making the mistake of significantly overshooting the full employment level, resulting in the need to rapidly raise interest rates—with potentially disruptive effects and an increased risk of a recession." "At the Boston Federal Reserve Bank we have been expecting only a slow decline in the unemployment rate, a forecast in part predicated on people being drawn into the labor force," Rosengren said. "Our model has assumed that real GDP growth somewhat over 2 percent will be consistent with some gradual further decline in the unemployment rate." Rosengren delivered the American Savings Foundation Distinguished Lecture at Central Connecticut State University. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)

Exploring the Economy's Progress and Outlook By Eric S. Rosengren May 12, 2016 Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said it will be appropriate to continue the gradual normalization of interest rates if incoming economic data continue to be consistent with improvement in labor markets and inflation getting closer to the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target. He was speaking to the Greater Concord Chamber of Commerce, in New Hampshire. Referring to April's employment report, Rosengren said that while it was a bit below market expectations, it still reflected relatively strong employment growth at a time when the U.S. economy is close to what most economists consider full employment. Should April's payroll employment growth continue, it “should be strong enough to bring some further tightening of labor markets," he added. Rosengren also acknowledged diminished headwinds from abroad, and a tentative upward trend in average hourly earnings. He reiterated his earlier perspectives – that the market remains too pessimistic about the fundamental strength of the U.S. economy, and the likelihood of removing monetary accommodation is higher than is currently priced into financial markets. Rosengren also acknowledged the benefits of probing the natural rate of unemployment to see how low it might be, given the benefit to workers. “We have seen workers rejoin the labor force, many of them previously having given up looking for work." However, Rosengren continued, there can be potential costs to accommodation if rates stay too low for too long, potentially encouraging speculative behavior. The commercial real estate market is one area where Rosengren has particular concern, noting that prices now exceed the peaks reached prior to the financial crisis, and growth in mortgage debt on multifamily properties is up sharply from lows reached in 2010. “History shows that most periods of serious financial instability involve a scenario in which debt is high relative to a volatile underlying asset, and the value of the asset subsequently declines," Rosengren said. He cited the scenario that played out in New England in the late 1980s and early 1990s, and said “it is important that we take actions early enough to avoid a repetition of that experience." Rosengren also noted the limits in monetary policy's ability to fine tune the economy, saying it has “proven difficult" to calibrate policy so as to gradually increase the unemployment rate, gently nudging it back toward full employment. “The lesson is that policymakers should avoid significantly overshooting their best estimates of the natural rate of unemployment," he said. “Waiting too long to have more normalized rates risks possibly overshooting on the unemployment rate, and needing to tighten more quickly than would be desirable." collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and Comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)
