WSJ Op-Ed: How the Unfettered Fed Flattened the Phillips Curve Insulating the central bank from politics made it possible to keep inflation and unemployment low May 21, 2018 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO WSJ Op-Ed: How the Unfettered Fed Flattened the Phillips Curve Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Economists seem to have a puzzle on their hands: As the job market recovers, why hasn’t inflation picked up? Known as the Phillips curve, the inverse relationship between unemployment and inflation was first posited in 1958. Until the early 1980s the Phillips curve predicted price and wage growth with reasonable accuracy, but since then the economy has wandered far from the traditional relationship. Wages and inflation haven’t grown nearly as much as it would predict, given the sinking jobless rate. There is, however, no reason for alarm: This “flattened” Phillips curve isn’t the result of any mysterious change in the structure of the economy. Rather, the fact that inflation and employment no longer move together is a positive reflection of the Federal Reserve’s increased independence. First, let’s distinguish between the “measured” Phillips curve and the “underlying” Phillips curve. The former is drawn empirically by comparing the unemployment rate with data on the actual inflation recorded in the economy. This curve is flatter than it used to be, simply because the Fed has gotten better at managing inflation. When unemployment shot up from 4.6% in 2007 to 10% in 2009, the normal curve predicted deep deflation. But the Fed’s aggressive interventions stabilized core inflation, which never fell below 0.9%. The measured Phillips curve might steepen again if the Fed decided to ignore high inflation and mandate low interest rates, as it did in the 1960s and early 1970s. But this scenario is unlikely because all the members of the Federal Open Market Committee, including me, are committed to achieving the Fed’s 2% inflation target. On the other hand, the “underlying” Phillips curve represents the intrinsic relationship between inflation and the fundamental supply and demand for labor. Even when the Fed keeps actual inflation in check, inflationary pressures can build, and the underlying Phillips curve might remain steep. But even here, evidence suggests policy makers have a lot of influence. The underlying Phillips curve began to flatten, or lose its power to forecast inflation, in the mid-1980s, and the trend has continued. The change occurred just after the Fed, under the leadership of Paul Volcker, raised interest rates dramatically to crush inflation, causing a deep recession in the process. The hands-off response of President Reagan and Congress contrasted starkly with the run-up to the 1972 election, when President Nixon had pressured the Fed to maintain expansionary policies. Since the Volcker era, Republicans and Democrats alike have repeatedly confirmed their commitment to independent monetary policy. As market participants have gained confidence that the Fed will make decisions based on economic data rather than short-term political considerations, inflation has become more predictable, and wages and prices have become less subject to short-term changes in employment. This confidence is also reflected in the markets for long-term federal bonds, even though financing the government is Treasury’s job and not the Fed’s. In 1980, when the ratio of publicly held federal debt to gross domestic product was 26%, investors demanded a 12% yield to lend money to the government for 10 years. Today, with publicly held debt to GDP at 77%, investors nonetheless demand only a 3% yield for the same bond. Today’s flat Phillips curve and low long-term interest rates are not mysteries. They are products of a bipartisan political consensus that allows the Fed to focus on achieving its inflation and employment objectives rather than short-term political goals. If Americans want to keep this economic expansion going, we all should recognize the important role Fed independence plays in keeping inflation in check. See Neel Kashkari’s Op-Ed in the Wall Street Journal. More On Monetary Policy Region & Community More On Monetary Policy Region & Community Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Is remote work declining? What the latest data show Article AI adoption in business grows steadily but unevenly Article Related Content Recessions in Perspective Data Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Financial Times Op-Ed: The Fed should not move too quickly to raise rates Despite recovery in the US labour market, we need more evidence that wages are rising May 21, 2018 Author Neel Kashkari President and CEO Financial Times Op-Ed: The Fed should not move too quickly to raise rates Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Subscribe Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter In the ten years following the global financial crisis, the US labour market has largely recovered, with the unemployment rate falling from a peak of 10 per cent in 2009 to 3.9 per cent today, an 18-year low. US firms widely report difficulty finding qualified workers to fill job openings. As in other advanced economies, the US recovery took place after the Federal Reserve undertook extraordinary monetary policies, including keeping interest rates unusually low and quantitative easing bond-buying programmes. While some economists predicted these policies would lead to runaway inflation, the opposite has happened: inflation and wage growth have been surprisingly low. Despite the tight US job market, total pay is only growing at 2.7 per cent annually, compared to 3.5 per cent before the crisis. Similarly, inflation has now finally reached the Federal Open Market Committee’s target of 2 per cent, after consistently undershooting it for the past six years. We on the FOMC estimate that the economy is running at full potential when the unemployment rate is around 4.5 per cent. With unemployment even lower now, why is wage growth so low? Labour markets in other advanced economies shed some light on what is happening in America. The headline US unemployment rate captures only those who are actively looking for work. For example, it ignores people who are out of the labour force because they have given up looking for a job. Apparently, the Great Recession was so traumatic that it pushed many Americans out of the labour force altogether. However, as the economy has slowly recovered, we have seen people return to work years after losing their jobs. It could be that the 3.9 per cent measure doesn’t capture the true slack in the labour market and that additional, hidden slack explains today’s modest wage growth. A better measure of labour market tightness appears to be the employment-to-population ratio of prime-age workers, those age 25 to 54 years old. By focusing on prime-age adults, this measure of how many people are actually working helps adjust for demographic trends such as ageing. Today the US prime-age employment-to-population ratio is 79.2 per cent, down from 80.0 per cent in early 2007. That drop suggests that approximately 1m additional prime-age Americans would be available to work if the US labour market recovered to its pre-recession strength. But if you look at international comparisons, there is an astonishing contrast between the US and other developed economies. The percentage of prime-age Americans who are working has been trending down over the past few decades, while the same ratio has climbed to new highs in the UK, Canada and Germany. Each of these countries is experiencing falling fertility rates and an ageing population just like the US. Why is American employment falling while it is climbing elsewhere? Economists offer various theories to explain this. Some are specific to the US: many Americans are addicted to drugs; too many have criminal records; workers don’t have the skills needed for the available jobs. Alternative explanations, such as the rise of Chinese manufacturing and of automation, should affect other advanced economies as much as they do the US, and those hypotheses would suggest that employers lack demand for workers, rather than that people are unwilling to work. As the American job market has tightened, many companies are taking extra steps to attract workers, such as providing training, or eliminating drug and criminal background checks for certain positions. The truth is, we don’t know how much slack still remains in the US labour market. But international labour markets offer a hopeful sign that many more Americans might choose to work if wages picked up. People are already responding to a strong job market in positive ways. The number of working-age Americans who reported not being able to work because of a disability increased steadily for 20 years until 2014, when, remarkably, the numbers began rapidly falling. People who were once thought lost from the job market returned to work. A continuation of these trends would be positive for both workers and the US economy as a whole, and it would mean that a rapid rise in inflation is further away than we might believe. This analysis has important implications for monetary policy. It suggests that as we return interest rates to normal levels, we should shift only to a neutral policy stance, and not move too quickly, until we see more evidence that wages are climbing and that we really are at maximum employment. See Neel Kashkari's Op-Ed in the Financial Times. More On Wages, Income, Wealth Employment & Labor Markets Monetary Policy Region & Community More On Wages, Income, Wealth Employment & Labor Markets Monetary Policy Region & Community Related Content Preparing workers for an uncertain AI future Article Off the sidelines and into the low-hire economy Article Conversations with the Fed: Workers’ Experiences with Unemployment Insurance Event Related Content Preparing workers for an uncertain AI future Article Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Escanaba, MI President Kashkari gave brief remarks, followed by an open-mic Q&A with the audience moderated by Dr. Laura Coleman, President of Bay College. May 21, 2018 | 4:30 p.m. CT Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Escanaba, MI | Bay College Joseph Heirman Center Escanaba , Michigan Neel Kashkari President and CEO Town Hall with Mpls Fed President Neel Kashkari in Escanaba, MI Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Share Facebook LinkedIn Twitter Do you have a question about how the Federal Reserve affects you? Wondering about economic disparities, regulating big banks, or the Fed's recent interest rate decisions? Curious about how the Minneapolis Fed gathers data and informs its work within the Federal Reserve System? Join us for a conversation with Minneapolis Fed President Neel Kashkari on these topics and more in Escanaba, MI on May 21 at 5:30 pm EST (4:30 pm CT). President Kashkari is a member of the Federal Open Market Committee, the body of the Federal Reserve System that sets national monetary policy. Since taking over as President of the Minneapolis Fed in January 2016, he has spearheaded several new initiatives, including releasing a plan to end the "Too Big to Fail" problem and launching the Federal Reserve's new Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, housed at the Minneapolis Fed. President Kashkari will give brief remarks, followed by an open-mic Q&A with the audience moderated by Dr. Laura Coleman, President of Bay College. This town hall forum with President Kashkari was a public event and discussion held in Escanaba, Michigan on May 21, 2018 . Video: Full Event Sign up for news and events Sign up for emails to get the latest news, research, and information from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
