The Economic Outlook, Monetary Policy, and Getting Back to Normal Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Cleveland Association for Business Economics, CFA Society Cleveland, and the Risk Management Association, Northern Ohio Chapter Cleveland, Ohio September 24, 2014 1 Introduction Good afternoon and thank you for that very kind introduction. I also thank the Cleveland Association for Business Economics, CFA Society Cleveland, and the Risk Management Association for inviting me to speak today. I am pleased to say that a number of Cleveland Fed employees are members of your fine organizations and some are here with us today. I am now into my fourth month on the job as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. In that short time, in addition to getting to know Cleveland and the rest of the Fourth District, I have attended and voted at three meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC. As most of you know, the FOMC is the body within the Federal Reserve System responsible for setting monetary policy. Our latest meeting was just last week. In addition to our usual policy statement describing the Committee’s monetary policy decision, the FOMC released its Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, which summarizes each FOMC participant’s economic projections for output growth, unemployment, and inflation based on his or her individual view of appropriate monetary policy. The FOMC also released updated information on the approach it plans to take to return monetary policy to more normal territory, in terms of both the level of interest rates and our policy tools. So there is a lot for us to talk about today, and I would like to take this opportunity to discuss my views on the economy, monetary policy, and normalization. Of course, these are my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook The economy is now in its sixth year of expansion, and while it has had its ups and downs, it has made significant progress toward fulfilling the Federal Reserve’s goals of price stability and maximum employment. Real output growth rebounded sharply in the second quarter, growing at more than a 4 percent annual pace, after falling slightly more than 2 percent in the first quarter due to the harsh winter 2 weather. I expect real GDP to expand at about a 3 percent annual pace in the second half of this year and over 2015 and 2016. This is a moderate pace of growth, but it is somewhat above my estimate of longer- run trend growth, which I put at around 2.5 percent. I believe several factors support above-trend growth over the next couple of years. Household and business balance sheets have improved and so have consumer and business confidence, which should support spending. In addition, monetary policy remains highly accommodative. And I expect labor markets, which have shown significant progress, will continue to strengthen and help sustain consumer spending. Of course, there are risks around this forecast. These include geopolitical risks, which have escalated in recent weeks, as well as weakness in some economies abroad. Despite the risks, it’s my view that our economy is on firmer ground than it has been for some time. My output projections of 3 percent in 2015 and 2016 put me at the upper end of the central tendency of FOMC participants’ new projections for 2015 and just above the upper end for 2016. The central tendency is obtained by dropping the lowest and highest three projections from among the FOMC participants. For 2015, the central tendency is 2.6 to 3.0 percent, and for 2016, it is 2.6 to 2.9 percent. I note that my 2.5 percent estimate for longer-run growth is also somewhat more optimistic than the central tendency of 2.0 to 2.3 percent. Of course, there is always a good deal of uncertainty around estimates of trend growth, perhaps even more so today in the aftermath of such a deep recession. I lowered my estimate of trend growth after the Great Recession, but perhaps not far enough given the low productivity growth we’ve experienced over the past couple of years. On the other hand, I think it is premature to discount the future too much. It is good to remember the experience of the 1990s when over a period of several years, many forecasters revised down trend growth estimates only to subsequently revise them up significantly in response to strong productivity growth. As I mentioned, labor market conditions have improved significantly over the expansion. Admittedly, the recovery in jobs has been much slower than anyone would have liked, and the August payroll 3 employment increase was a bit of a disappointment, coming in at 142,000 jobs, after six months of increases greater than 200,000. But I think it’s important not to overreact to one month’s number. The monthly data can be volatile, and the payroll data get revised. Monthly payroll gains have averaged 215,000 jobs so far this year, somewhat stronger than last year’s pace. The unemployment rate currently stands at 6.1 percent, down significantly from a peak of 10 percent in October 2009, and more than a percentage point lower than a year ago. The improvement has been faster than many economists and policymakers, including some on the FOMC, had anticipated. For example, last September, according to the central tendency of their projections, FOMC participants were projecting that the unemployment rate would be 6.4 to 6.8 percent in the fourth quarter of this year. But the unemployment rate is already lower than that. Other measures of unemployment or underemployment have also improved over time. These improved measures include those that track people who are working part time but would prefer a full-time job, and those that track the long-term unemployed – people who have been out of work for more than six months. More progress needs to be made and I anticipate that it will be made. My outlook is that as the expansion continues, firms will continue to add to their payrolls and the unemployment rate will continue to decline. I expect that by the end of next year, the unemployment rate will fall to around 5.5 percent, which is my estimate of the longer-run, or natural, rate of unemployment, and remain near there in 2016. Like longer-run growth estimates, there is considerable uncertainty around estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate. These estimates depend on demographics, production technology, and other structural factors, and can vary over time. My estimate is on the upper end of the central tendency of 5.2 to 5.5 percent of the FOMC’s projections of longer-run unemployment. This means that I am projecting a somewhat faster return to full employment than some of my colleagues. Turning to inflation, although it remains below the FOMC’s goal of 2 percent, inflation measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures has increased to 1.6 4 percent this year from 1.2 percent last year. Consistent with a pickup in economic growth and expectations of inflation remaining well anchored, my projection is that inflation will gradually move back toward the FOMC’s 2 percent goal by the end of 2016. Of course, this projection is dependent on appropriate monetary policy. So let me turn to that now. Monetary Policy In response to the financial crisis and deep recession, the Federal Reserve has run an extraordinarily accommodative monetary policy to promote our goals of price stability and maximum employment. The FOMC has kept its policy rate – the federal funds rate – at essentially zero since the end of 2008, and it has also used forward guidance to communicate the anticipated future path of policy. In addition, to exert downward pressure on long-term interest rates, the FOMC has purchased longer-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities, expanding the Fed’s balance sheet nearly five-fold since before the crisis. The current program of longer-term asset purchases, commonly called quantitative easing or QE, began in September 2012. At that time, the unemployment rate was about 2 percentage points higher than it is today. Based on the cumulative progress in labor markets since that time, this year the FOMC began tapering the amount of assets it has been buying each month. Remember that tapering is not tightening. That is, the FOMC has continued to add accommodation, just at a reduced pace. Based on the realized and anticipated continued improvement in the economy, I supported the FOMC’s decision last week to reduce the pace of purchases by another $10 billion, to $15 billion per month, and to indicate that if incoming information broadly supports the Committee’s outlook, the program would end at our meeting next month. I also supported the Committee’s decision to maintain the 0-to-¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate. As the economic expansion continues, eventually monetary policy will need to return to a 5 more normal stance. Indeed, the September SEP shows that the Committee believes it will be appropriate for the policy rate to increase over the next several years, with most participants expecting economic progress toward our goals to warrant the first rate increase in 2015. As one can see by looking at the SEP, there is some diversity of views about the appropriate path of interest rates. That is to be expected. Monetary policy must be dependent on the realized and expected evolution of the economy, and differences in the outlook across FOMC participants can result in different views of appropriate policy. In addition, policymakers will calibrate their views on appropriate policy to changes in their outlook over time. This is what is meant by policy not being on a preset course: It should respond to changes in the realized and anticipated course of the economy. Indeed, this is a part of the Committee’s forward guidance, which remained unchanged last week. The guidance indicates that in determining how long to maintain the current target range for the fed funds rate, the FOMC will assess both realized and expected progress toward our objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation, and we will look at a wide range of information in making that assessment. The guidance then indicates that, based on that assessment, the Committee continues to anticipate that it will likely be appropriate to maintain the current 0-to-¼ percent target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends. I would prefer this second part of the forward guidance be reformulated. Even though the Committee has emphasized that policy is contingent on the state of the economy, in my view, the “considerable time” part of the guidance tends to focus the public’s attention on a calendar-time for liftoff rather than on the changes in economic conditions that will help determine changes in appropriate policy. I believe the Summary of Economic Projections is a better vehicle to convey information about the anticipated timing of liftoff, as it ties policy paths to the economic outlook. But I acknowledge there is a range of views about forward guidance. 6 With the fed funds rate effectively at zero, forward guidance has been used as a tool of monetary policy to add policy accommodation. Indicating that the future path of short-term interest rates will be low for a long time can put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, thereby spurring current economic activity even when the policy rate is at the zero lower bound. But in more normal times, away from the zero lower bound, I view forward guidance more as a communications device that conveys to the public how policy is likely to respond to changes in economic conditions. As such, I would like to see the forward guidance evolve over time to give more information about the conditions we systematically assess in calibrating the stance of policy to the economy’s actual progress and anticipated progress toward our dual-mandate goals, and to the speed with which that progress is being achieved. A faster than expected pace of progress toward our goals would argue for a faster return to normal – that is, an earlier liftoff and more rapid funds rate increases than currently anticipated by the Committee – while a more subdued pace would argue for a slower return – a later liftoff and less rapid increases. I believe that effective communication about the contingent nature of our policy will be a key ingredient as we move back toward more normal monetary policymaking. Normalization Principles and Plans In that vein, I was very supportive of the FOMC’s release of updated information about its plans for the eventual normalization process. The release of this information was certainly not a signal of a change in the stance of policy. Rather, it was intended to provide the public with the FOMC’s current thinking on how the process is expected to go. Some of the elements are the same as the broad exit strategy principles first laid out by the Committee in June 2011. Others are necessarily new because the size and composition of the Fed’s balance sheet are quite a bit different than they were in 2011. Of course, there is likely to be some learning-by-doing as normalization proceeds, and the FOMC is prepared to adjust details of the plans if warranted by economic and financial developments. Nonetheless, the FOMC has reached a general consensus on several aspects of the process. 7 Just as it did before the Great Recession, the FOMC will communicate the stance of monetary policy using the federal funds rate – the market rate at which banks borrow and lend reserve balances overnight to one another. We will set a target range for the funds rate, as we are doing now, and when economic conditions and the economic outlook warrant less accommodative monetary policy, we will raise the target range. But the tools the FOMC will use to bring the funds rate up to the target range will have to be different than before the crisis because the level of excess reserves held by banks is now much larger. The extraordinary accommodation and nontraditional policy tools the Fed used to address the financial crisis and deep recession have left the Fed holding nearly $4.5 trillion in assets, compared to about $900 billion before the crisis. Banks have on deposit at the Fed more than $2.7 trillion in reserves over and above what they need to meet regulatory requirements. Before the financial crisis, the level of excess reserves was less than $2 billion. With this many reserves in the system, the Fed will use the interest rate it pays on excess reserves as the main tool for moving the funds rate into the target range. When the Fed raises the rate it pays on excess reserves, this will put upward pressure on the federal funds rate since banks will be unlikely to accept a lower rate in the market than they could get by depositing their funds at the Fed. We expect that while reserves are so plentiful, the fed funds rate will trade somewhat below the interest rate on excess reserves. So we could set the excess reserves rate at the upper end of the fed funds target range. In addition, the Fed will use other tools as needed to ensure adequate control of the policy rate. One of these tools is an overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility. Basically, with overnight reverse repos, the Fed lends securities from its large portfolio overnight in return for liquidity from eligible counterparties. Offering this alternative investment should help put a floor on the fed funds rate. But there is the potential that in times of market stress too much liquidity could be drawn from the private market to the Fed’s facility, thereby exacerbating financial market stress. To limit this possibility, the FOMC has been considering and testing different design features, and as the FOMC indicated, the 8 overnight reverse repo facility will be used only to the extent necessary and will be phased out when it is no longer needed to help control the fed funds rate. The Fed might also use other supplementary tools like term deposits to absorb some of the excess reserves in the banking system. The Fed’s ability to pay interest on excess reserves, with these supplementary tools providing backup if needed, will allow the Fed to move interest rates up to target when it is appropriate to do so, despite the large size of our balance sheet. But over the longer run, the Fed’s balance sheet will return to a more normal size and composition. The Fed will hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively and the securities it does hold will primarily be Treasury securities. Holding a broad asset class like Treasuries minimizes the effect of the Fed’s asset holdings on the allocation of credit to particular sectors of the economy or classes of borrowers. To return to a more normal balance sheet, the FOMC intends to reduce security holdings in a gradual and predictable way, primarily by not reinvesting repayments of principle on securities it holds and letting the securities mature and run off the balance sheet. The FOMC expects to stop the reinvestments only after it begins to increase the fed funds rate. I support that ordering because I would rather the first signal of a change in the stance of monetary policy be conveyed by a change in the fed funds rate target range – our key way of communicating changes in policy – rather than by a change in reinvestment strategy. At this point the FOMC doesn’t anticipate selling the agency mortgage-backed securities on its balance sheet as part of the normalization process, although it might engage in limited sales in the longer run to reduce or eliminate residual holdings. If so, the timing and pace of any sales would be communicated to the public in advance. At this point, I do not view asset sales as a necessary tool for controlling interest rates. But once normalization is underway, I would be open to considering a gradual path of asset sales 9 over time as a way to return the balance sheet more quickly to the more normal size and composition we anticipate it to have over the longer run. Conclusion In summary, the economy has made substantial progress toward the Fed’s goals of maximum employment and price stability. As the economy returns to more normal territory, monetary policymakers are prudently planning for the eventual normalization of the stance and framework for conducting monetary policy. Last week the FOMC provided its post-meeting policy statement, new economic projections, and updated information on the process it anticipates using to normalize policy. I believe such communications can play an important part in how well the trip back to normal goes by increasing the public’s understanding of the anticipated evolution of the economy and the process of returning to normal. In the end, a return to normal policy means the economic expansion with stable prices is sustainable without the support of extraordinary monetary policy – and that is a very good place to be.

Forward Guidance in Extraordinary Times, in Normal Times, and Betwixt the Two Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Money Marketeers of New York University, Inc. New York, NY November 6, 2014 1 Good evening and thank you very much for the invitation to speak to the Money Marketeers. I understand that a long line of Federal Reserve presidents and governors have addressed your distinguished group and I am very honored to follow in their footsteps. Tonight I will discuss the role of communications in Fed policymaking, focusing on the FOMC’s forward guidance on the future path of policy. Of course, my remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Benefits of Clear Communication in Monetary Policymaking Eleven years ago today, Alan Greenspan, then Chairman of the Federal Reserve, gave an economic outlook speech. The next day’s headline in The New York Times read as follows: “Greenspan Hints at End to Low Rates,” while the headline in The Wall Street Journal read: “Greenspan Suggests Continued Patience on Rates.”1 That one speech generated such contradictory messages illustrates the challenges monetary policymakers face when communicating with the public. Yet despite the challenges, over the past two decades the Federal Reserve has been on a journey to enhance its policy communications. That journey continues today because there are good reasons to believe that better communication will lead to better economic outcomes. Clear communication and transparency can make monetary policy more effective by helping households and businesses make better economic and financial decisions. When policymakers are clear about the goals of monetary policy and the economic information that is important in their forecasts and policy decisions, the public will have a better idea of how monetary policy is likely to change as economic conditions evolve. Moreover, people will have a better sense of how policy will react not only to anticipated changes in conditions but also to unanticipated economic developments. Such knowledge helps households and firms make better saving, borrowing, investment, and employment decisions. 1These were the original headlines in the November 7, 2003 print editions. 2 Transparency about monetary policy plays another important role: it gives the public the information it needs to hold the central bank accountable for its policies. After all, in order to evaluate the central bank’s policy decisions, the public has to know the basis for those decisions. Accountability is essential in a democracy, and it can also promote better policymaking. In the U.S., Congress has given the Fed a mandate to promote price stability and maximum employment, and it has given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of those goals. A body of research both here and abroad shows that when central banks formulate monetary policy free from government interference and are held accountable for their decisions, better economic outcomes result. Of course, it has taken some time for central banks, including the Fed, to recognize the benefits of increased transparency. Twenty years ago the FOMC relied on open market operations rather than policy statements to signal shifts in the stance of monetary policy. It wasn’t until 1994 that the FOMC began to explicitly announce changes in its fed funds rate target and added more description about the state of the economy and the rationale for its decisions. Since then, the Fed has taken a number of additional steps to improve the public’s understanding of monetary policy. The FOMC now releases the votes of individual members and the preferred policy choices of any dissenters in its post-meeting statement, and it has expedited the release of the minutes of its meetings. And I think anyone who has looked at the minutes over time will notice that they have grown meatier, discussing in more detail the consensus view of policymakers, the perceived risks to the outlook, and also the range of views expressed around the table. Over time, the FOMC has increased the information it provides on its economic outlook. Economic projections, which are now contained in the Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, are released four times a year instead of twice a year. The projections include more economic variables and a longer forecast horizon, as well as the policy paths that underlay participants’ projections. 3 Another important step toward enhanced communications came in 2012 when, for the first time, the FOMC laid out the guiding principles it follows in setting monetary policy. A key part of those principles was the establishment of an explicit numerical goal for inflation over the longer run. The goal is 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation. Being explicit about the inflation objective reflects the FOMC’s desire to be transparent and communicate clearly to the public. But it also underscores the FOMC’s commitment to price stability and thereby helps anchor the inflation expectations of households and businesses at the target. Inflation expectations are an important determinant of actual inflation. So having an explicit target helps promote price stability. Perhaps one of the most valuable additions to the FOMC’s communications arsenal is the press briefing the Chair of the Committee holds four times a year to present the FOMC’s economic projections. The briefings, which started in 2011, provide a vehicle for the Chair to expand on the information contained in the FOMC’s post-meeting statement. She can highlight things that are too complex to discuss in the relatively short FOMC statement, and she can give a sense of alternative views as well. Indeed, the Chair did that at her September press briefing when she discussed various members’ views on forward guidance, to which I now turn. Forward Guidance in Extraordinary Times The FOMC’s forward policy guidance has received considerable attention. During the unusual economic circumstances of the past six years, the FOMC has provided forward guidance to help the public better understand the anticipated future path of interest rates. The formulation of the forward guidance has changed over time, from qualitative guidance, to calendar dates, to economic thresholds, and to a blend of state-contingent and date-based guidance. Let’s walk through those changes. 4 In December 2008, the FOMC began with qualitative guidance indicating that it anticipated that weak economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the fed funds rate for “some time.” In March 2009, “some time” became “extended period.” In August 2011, the FOMC changed its qualitative forward guidance to a calendar date when it said that it anticipated an exceptionally low fed funds rate at least through mid-2013. That date was later extended to late 2014, and then to mid-2015. The FOMC changed the formulation of its forward guidance from calendar dates to thresholds in December 2012. The Committee said that it anticipated that the 0-to-¼ percent target range for the fed funds rate would be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remained above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead was projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continued to be well anchored. A year later, in December 2013, the FOMC blended state-contingent forward guidance with an element of calendar-date forward guidance. First, the FOMC indicated that in determining how long to maintain highly accommodative monetary policy, it would consider information in addition to the unemployment rate and PCE inflation, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The FOMC then translated this into time, saying that based on its assessment of these factors, the 0-to-¼ percent target range for the funds rate would likely be appropriate “well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal.” In March of this year, the thresholds were replaced with guidance that linked the path of policy to the Committee’s assessment of both realized and expected progress toward its dual-mandate objectives. The guidance continued to provide a time element by indicating that based on the FOMC’s assessment, the 5 funds rate target will likely remain 0-to-¼ percent for “a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer- run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored.” I note that the recent business cycle was not the first time the FOMC has used forward guidance. In August 2003, in the midst of elevated perceived risks of deflation, the Committee indicated that it believed policy accommodation could be maintained for a “considerable period.” As deflation risks eased and economic conditions changed during that cycle, the forward guidance evolved as well, eventually indicating that the FOMC would be firming policy. The common element in both of these forward guidance episodes is that they happened during periods of unusual economic circumstances: in the earlier instance, a deflation scare; in the later instance, the financial crisis, ensuing very deep recession, and subsequent slow recovery. In extraordinary economic times, forward guidance can be thought of as more than a communications device. It is a tool of monetary policy that has the potential to increase the degree of monetary policy accommodation, especially when interest rates are essentially at their zero lower bound. By reducing uncertainty about the future path of policy, forward guidance helps lower interest rates by reducing the premiums investors demand to compensate them for interest-rate uncertainty. In addition, in theory, if the central bank indicates that the future path of short-term interest rates will be low for a long time – perhaps lower and for longer than would have been consistent with the central bank’s past behavior – this can also put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, thereby spurring current economic activity. According to the theory, if people believe that the central bank will keep rates very low, they will expect higher economic activity and higher inflation in the future. When households, businesses, and market participants are assured of better economic prospects in the future, they should be 6 more willing to make investments in capital and labor today rather than delaying them, and this will help the current economy. Note, though, that for forward guidance to have this effect, the public must believe that the central bank is setting policy differently than it has in the past and also that the central bank is committed to implementing this particular policy. If, instead, the public believes that the central bank is behaving as usual, it could misinterpret a very low policy rate as suggesting a gloomier outlook, and this would work to depress current activity – the exact opposite of the intended effect. In addition, before they will change their behavior and start spending today, households and firms have to believe that the central bank is committed to behaving in this unusual way. How to increase the credibility of such a commitment continues to be a subject of economic research.2 Forward Guidance in Normal Times So, in extraordinary economic times, forward guidance can be viewed as an additional monetary policy tool. But in more normal times, away from the zero lower bound, I view forward guidance more as a communications device that conveys to the public how policy is likely to respond to changes in economic conditions. In other words, in normal times, forward guidance will focus less on when policy will be changed or even the particular path of future policy, and more on the rationale for policy decisions. To the extent that households and businesses understand how policymakers are likely to react to economic developments – whether anticipated or unanticipated – their policy expectations will better align with those of policymakers. As I discussed earlier, this alignment can make policy more effective. 2 The literature has suggested different mechanisms for increasing the credibility of this commitment, including temporarily increasing the inflation target, targeting nominal GDP instead of inflation, and targeting the price level instead of inflation. For an excellent discussion of forward guidance, as well as other policies at the zero lower bound, see Michael Woodford, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest -Rate Lower Bound,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, 2012 (www.kc.frb.org/publicat/sympos/2012/Woodford_final.pdf). 7 In the late 1980s and 1990s, the public had a pretty good sense of how the FOMC’s policy would respond to economic developments, the so-called reaction function. They were able to get a handle on the FOMC’s reaction function because after the great inflation of the 1970s, the FOMC became more predictable and systematic in how it reacted to changes in economic activity and inflation.3 As a result, forward guidance was rarely used. But the Great Recession required the Fed to behave in a way quite distinct from its past behavior, and consequently, there is less understanding about how policymakers are likely to react to incoming economic information than there was earlier. So in my view taking steps to enhance the public’s ability to understand the rationale behind the FOMC’s decisions has value. As our economy returns to normal, I would like the forward guidance used during the extraordinary times of the past six years to evolve into our offering a clearer sense of the FOMC’s reaction function. I believe the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections, with suitable amendments, could play a central role in helping the public better understand how policy is likely to respond to economic developments. Before I offer three possible avenues for consideration, let me again note that these are my own views and do not necessarily represent the views of my colleagues on the FOMC, including those who serve with me on the FOMC’s subcommittee on communications. Right now, the SEP provides information on the range of projections of real output growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation across participants, as well as the policy paths that individual participants view as appropriate for achieving those projections. But there is no linkage across the variables. For example, there is no way to see whether a person low in the range of unemployment rate 3 For a discussion, see John B. Taylor, “Monetary Policy During the Past 30 Years with Lessons for the Next 30 Years,” luncheon address at the Cato Institute’s 30th Annual Monetary Conference on Money, Markets and Government: The Next 30 Years, Washington, D.C., November 15, 2012. 8 forecasts is high in the range of inflation projections. Rather than presenting ranges, the SEP could be enhanced by linking the variables for each participant’s projection so that the public could see what each policymaker is projecting for growth, unemployment, and inflation, and what policy path he or she believes will achieve those outcomes. This could be done without revealing the identities of the participants and would convey information on each individual policymaker’s reaction function. A second enhancement would be to more plainly communicate the degree of uncertainty around the projections. Currently, the divergence of views among participants is presented in the SEP. But the divergence across projections is different from the uncertainty any one individual would put around his or her outlook. Even if there were no divergence, so that each participant was projecting the same economic outcome and policy path, it would be incorrect to assume that the participants were therefore certain about that outcome or policy path. The SEP does give a sense of the number of participants who see balanced risks around their projections and whether the degree of uncertainty is higher or lower than average. But giving the public a better sense of the probabilities associated with the projections would be valuable. That brings me to a third potential avenue to help clarify communications. While the SEP provides important information on the diversity of views among participants, trying to increase the information we provide on the consensus view would be worthwhile. It is the consensus view that is reflected in the policy statement after FOMC meetings. Presenting more information on the consensus economic outlook that underlies the Committee’s policy decisions would help clarify the statement. I realize this will not be an easy task. The Committee experimented with developing a consensus forecast in 2012.4 It turned out not to be the right time because policy comprised several elements, including the funds rate path, asset purchases, and forward guidance, as well as the fact that there was considerable diversity of views about the economy’s structure and dynamics during those extraordinary economic times. However, we will 4 See the minutes from the July, September, and October 2012 FOMC meetings (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm#11655). 9 eventually return to a more normal policy-setting environment, and in such an environment, the Committee might be more successful in developing such a consensus forecast, which could form a basis for explaining policy decisions and alternative views. Forward Guidance Betwixt and Between Extraordinary and Normal Times Of course, we are not there yet. So perhaps the more immediate question is what should forward guidance look like during the transition from extraordinary times to normal times? After several years of nontraditional monetary policy, the transition toward a more normal economy is likely to entail some uncertainty about monetary policy setting. I believe clear policy communications can and should play a key role in reducing that uncertainty. To that end, I favor the Committee being as clear as it can be that monetary policy will be contingent on the state of the economy. I favor putting less focus on a particular calendar date for liftoff. This is why I believe the FOMC’s addition to its forward guidance last week was an important step in the right direction. It was a clear statement that if incoming information indicates faster than anticipated progress toward the Committee’s employment and inflation objectives, then increases in the target range for the fed funds rate are likely to occur sooner than the FOMC currently anticipates. And if progress is disappointing, then increases are likely to be later. I think this is an important message to convey to the public. I believe it would also be helpful over time to provide more information in our statement and other communications about the conditions we systematically assess in calibrating the stance of policy to the economy’s actual progress and anticipated progress toward our dual-mandate goals, and to the speed with which that progress is being made. That is, the FOMC should explain how and why we came to our assessment that realized and expected progress toward our goals is pointing to a particular policy path. I realize that there is a plethora of incoming economic data and information, and they can send confusing signals. Our communications should help the public to better understand policymakers’ consensus 10 assessment of what is signal versus noise in the data. What changes in the data and other economic information do we view as material enough to change our medium-run economic outlook or the risks around that outlook? Systematically providing the public with such information will allow people to anticipate how policy is likely to change in response to economic developments that affect the outlook. Conclusion In summary, I have laid out some possible improvements to the Federal Reserve’s policy communications. Such improvements cannot happen overnight – after all, we have been on a journey toward better communication for quite some time and I expect us to continue on that journey. Although there is a diversity of views on the Committee, I believe there is enough common ground to encourage us to seek progress along the lines I am suggesting. I believe our efforts will be rewarded because clear communications will lead to better economic outcomes and help make the trip back to normal a smoother ride.

Forward Guidance and Communications in U.S. Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Imperial Business Insights Series Imperial College London, U.K. November 20, 2014 1 Good evening and thank you very much for the invitation to speak in the Imperial Business Insights Series. I have learned that this successful series is now in its third year and it has brought speakers to the podium to discuss a wide range of topics in the major themes of finance, innovation, and entrepreneurship. Tonight I will speak about forward guidance and monetary policy communications. I think it is clear that this topic is related to finance, but I submit that it is also related to the two other themes of your series: innovation and entrepreneurship. Since the onset of the 2008 financial crisis, policymakers have had to be quite innovative in addressing the challenges facing the global economy. They have had to be entrepreneurial in developing new economic models and monetary policy tools to help navigate the uncharted waters of the past six years. Tonight, I’ll give my views on one of those tools, forward guidance, and the role it plays as a part of the broader communications provided by monetary policymakers. Of course, my remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Federal Reserve Structure and Governance To understand the importance of monetary policy communications in the United States, it helps to understand a little about the structure of the institution responsible for setting monetary policy. That institution, the Federal Reserve System, was established by Congress in the Federal Reserve Act, which was signed into law in 1913. We like to say that the Federal Reserve is a decentralized central bank, which is independent within the government and not independent from the government. The structure is one of balance. Congress designed the Federal Reserve System to alleviate concerns that it would become dominated by financial interests in New York or political interests in Washington. The design includes representation from the rest of the nation, balancing public-sector and private-sector interests, and Wall Street and Main Street concerns. The Federal Reserve System has 12 regional Reserve Banks and a seven-member Board of Governors in Washington that oversees those Banks. The governors, who serve the public, are appointed by the 2 president of the United States and confirmed by the Senate, the upper house of Congress. Governors serve staggered 14-year terms, which span several terms of the president and members of Congress. The length of the term is intended to insulate the governors from short-term political influence and allows them to take a longer-run perspective when setting monetary and financial regulatory policy. The chairman and vice chairman of the Board of Governors are chosen by the president and confirmed by the Senate from among the sitting governors for four-year terms. They can be reappointed until their terms as governors expire. The 12 Reserve Banks operate in the public interest. They are distributed around the country in locations that were the centers of economic activity back when the Fed was established.1 Each Reserve Bank has a nine-member board of directors. The directors of the Reserve Banks are chosen in a nonpolitical process. Three directors represent banks and six are nonbankers who represent business, agricultural, industrial, and public interests in the Districts they serve. The nonbank directors are responsible for choosing the Bank’s president, who is subject to approval by the Fed’s Board of Governors. The body within the Federal Reserve System responsible for setting monetary policy is the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, which was established in the Banking Act of 1935 and holds eight regularly scheduled meetings per year in Washington. This 12-member Committee is made up of the seven members of the Board of Governors, the president of the New York Fed, and four other Reserve Bank presidents, who serve on a rotating basis. As president of the Cleveland Fed, I vote every other year, as does the Chicago Fed president. The other presidents vote every third year. I note, though, that presidents who happen not to be voting members at the moment still participate in FOMC meetings. Thus, by design, the discussions at our meetings contain a mosaic of economic information and analysis from all parts of the country. I make it a point to bring in the information my staff and I have gleaned 1Some Reserve Banks also have Branches. For example, the Cleveland Fed has a Branch in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and a Branch in Cincinnati, Ohio. Each Branch of a Reserve Bank has a board of directors of five or seven members. 3 about economic and financial conditions from the businesses and banks in my District, as well as from our directors. This regional information, along with national data and analysis, plays an important part in our setting of national monetary policy in pursuit of our goals. Those monetary policy goals were given to the Fed by Congress. The Federal Reserve Act says that the Fed should conduct monetary policy to “promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.” When prices are stable and the economy is at full employment, long-term interest rates are typically at moderate levels, so it is often said that the U.S. Congress has given the Fed a dual mandate. Note, this is in contrast to the Bank of England, which has a single mandate to deliver price stability, and subject to that, to support the government’s economic objectives, including those for growth and employment. While Congress has set the Fed’s goals, it has also given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions in pursuit of those goals. That is, monetary policy decisions do not have to be approved by the president or Congress. It was the FOMC, rather than Congress, which established for the first time in 2012 a numerical goal for inflation over the longer run. This goal is 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, or PCE inflation, and it’s the level the FOMC feels is most consistent with its congressional mandate. The Bank of England also has independence. The 1998 Bank of England Act granted the bank independence in setting interest rates, although the government sets the inflation target, which is announced each year by the Chancellor of the Exchequer. There are many other examples of independent central banks, which is perhaps not too surprising, since a body of research both in the U.S. and elsewhere shows that when central banks formulate monetary policy free from government interference and are held accountable for their decisions, better economic outcomes result. 4 That is one reason that I believe clear communication about monetary policy is so important. Independence in setting monetary policy is worth preserving because it yields more effective policy. But accountability must go hand-in-hand with independence. A central bank cannot expect to remain independent from the political process unless it is transparent about the basis for its policy decisions. Because it takes time for monetary policy to affect the economy, the public won’t be able to immediately see whether a policy action was a good one. So it is incumbent upon policymakers to explain the rationale for those decisions, including their evaluation of economic conditions as well as their outlook for the economy. The Benefits of Clear Communication in Monetary Policymaking But clear communication is not necessarily easy. Eleven years ago, Alan Greenspan, then chairman of the Federal Reserve, gave an economic outlook speech. The next day’s headline in The New York Times read as follows: “Greenspan Hints at End to Low Rates,” while the headline in The Wall Street Journal read: “Greenspan Suggests Continued Patience on Rates.”2 That one speech generated such contradictory messages illustrates the challenges monetary policymakers face when communicating with the public. Yet despite the challenges, over the past two decades the Federal Reserve has been on a journey to enhance its policy communications. Clear communication and transparency can make monetary policy more effective by helping households and businesses make better economic and financial decisions. When policymakers are clear about the goals of monetary policy and the economic information that is important in their forecasts and policy decisions, the public will have a better idea of how monetary policy is likely to change as economic conditions evolve. Moreover, people will have a better sense of how policy will react not only to anticipated changes in conditions but also to unanticipated economic developments. Such knowledge helps households and firms make better saving, borrowing, investment, and employment decisions. 2These were the original headlines in the November 7, 2003 print editions. 5 The Federal Reserve has been increasing the amount and type of information it provides to the public on its policy decisions. Twenty years ago the FOMC relied on open market operations rather than policy statements to signal shifts in the stance of monetary policy. It wasn’t until 1994 that the FOMC began to explicitly announce changes in its fed funds rate target and added more description about the state of the economy and the rationale for its decisions. Now that statement includes the votes of individual members and the preferred policy choices of any dissenters. The Committee provides minutes of its meetings three weeks after the meeting has concluded, and a full transcript with a five-year lag. The FOMC provides information on individual participants’ economic outlook and policy paths in the Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, which are released four times a year. Since 2011, the chair of the Committee has held press briefings four times a year to present these economic projections. The briefings allow the chair to expand on the information contained in the FOMC’s post-meeting statement. She can highlight things that are too complex to discuss in the relatively short FOMC statement, and she can give a sense of alternative views as well. Indeed, Chair Janet Yellen did that at her September press briefing when she discussed various members’ views on forward guidance, to which I now turn. Forward Guidance in Extraordinary Times The FOMC’s forward policy guidance has received considerable attention. During the unusual economic circumstances of the past six years, the FOMC has provided forward guidance to help the public better understand the anticipated future path of interest rates. The formulation of the forward guidance has changed over time, from qualitative guidance, to calendar dates, to economic thresholds, and to a blend of state-contingent and date-based guidance. Let’s walk through those changes. In December 2008, the FOMC began with qualitative guidance indicating that it anticipated that weak economic conditions were likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the fed funds rate for “some time.” In March 2009, “some time” became “extended period.” In August 2011, the FOMC changed its 6 qualitative forward guidance to a calendar date when it said that it anticipated an exceptionally low fed funds rate at least through mid-2013. That date was later extended to late 2014, and then to mid-2015. The FOMC changed the formulation of its forward guidance from calendar dates to thresholds in December 2012. The Committee said that it anticipated that the 0-to-¼ percent target range for the fed funds rate would be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remained above 6½ percent, inflation between one and two years ahead was projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continued to be well anchored. A year later, in December 2013, the FOMC blended state-contingent forward guidance with an element of calendar-date forward guidance. First, the FOMC indicated that in determining how long to maintain highly accommodative monetary policy, it would consider information in addition to the unemployment rate and PCE inflation, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments. The FOMC then translated this into time, saying that based on its assessment of these factors, the 0-to-¼ percent target range for the funds rate would likely be appropriate “well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal.” In March of this year the thresholds were replaced with guidance that linked the path of policy to the Committee’s assessment of both realized and expected progress toward its dual-mandate objectives. The guidance continued to provide a time element by indicating that based on the FOMC’s assessment, the funds rate target will likely remain 0-to-¼ percent for “a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored.” 7 The Federal Reserve was not alone in using forward guidance. The Bank of Canada, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, the Swedish Riksbank, and the Bank of England have all provided some form of forward guidance on the anticipated future path of policy. Nor was the Fed alone in changing the formulation of its forward guidance over time. For example, when the Bank of England introduced forward guidance in August 2013, it was formulated in terms of economic thresholds. The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) said that it intended not to raise the policy rate or reduce the size of its balance sheet at least until the unemployment rate had fallen to 7 percent unless any one of the following three conditions were breached: if inflation 18 to 24 months ahead was 0.5 percentage point or more above the 2 percent target, if medium-term inflation expectations were no longer sufficiently well anchored, or if the Financial Policy Committee judged that the stance of monetary policy posed a significant threat to financial stability that couldn’t be mitigated with other tools. In February of this year, as the unemployment rate approached 7 percent, the MPC replaced this threshold forward guidance with guidance indicating that, despite the sharp fall in unemployment, policymakers saw further scope to reduce spare capacity in the economy before raising the policy rate. The MPC provided more information in its Inflation Report on the factors that, in addition to the unemployment rate, would help determine the timing and pace with which policy accommodation would be removed. Thus, the evolution in guidance away from thresholds occurred both in the U.S. and in the U.K. as unemployment rates came down. In extraordinary economic times, like the ones we’ve experienced in recent years, forward guidance can be thought of as more than a communications device. It is a tool of monetary policy that has the potential to increase the degree of monetary policy accommodation, especially when interest rates are essentially at their zero lower bound. By reducing uncertainty about the future path of policy, forward guidance helps 8 lower interest rates by reducing the premiums investors demand to compensate them for interest-rate uncertainty. In addition, in theory, if the central bank indicates that the future path of short-term interest rates will be low for a long time – perhaps lower and for longer than would have been consistent with the central bank’s past behavior – this can also put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, thereby spurring current economic activity. According to the theory, if people believe that the central bank will keep rates very low, they will expect higher economic activity and higher inflation in the future. When households, businesses, and market participants are assured of better economic prospects in the future, they should be more willing to make investments in capital and labor today rather than delaying them, and this will help the current economy. Note, though, that for forward guidance to have this effect, the public must believe that the central bank is setting policy differently than it has in the past and also that the central bank is committed to implementing this particular policy. If, instead, the public believes that the central bank is behaving as usual, it could misinterpret a very low policy rate as suggesting a gloomier outlook, and this would work to depress current activity – the exact opposite of the intended effect. In addition, before they will change their behavior and start spending today, households and firms have to believe that the central bank is committed to behaving in this unusual way. How to increase the credibility of such a commitment continues to be a subject of economic research.3 Forward Guidance in Normal Times 3 The literature has suggested different mechanisms for increasing the credibility of this commitment, including temporarily increasing the inflation target, targeting nominal GDP instead of inflation, and targeting the price level instead of inflation. For an excellent discussion of forward guidance, as well as other policies at the zero lower bound, see Michael Woodford, “Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest -Rate Lower Bound,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY, 2012 (www.kc.frb.org/publicat/sympos/2012/Woodford_final.pdf). 9 So, in extraordinary economic times, forward guidance can be viewed as an additional monetary policy tool. But in more normal times, away from the zero lower bound, I view forward guidance more as a communications device that conveys to the public how policy is likely to respond to changes in economic conditions. In other words, in normal times, forward guidance will focus less on when policy will be changed or even the particular path of future policy, and more on the rationale for policy decisions. To the extent that households and businesses understand how policymakers are likely to react to economic developments – whether anticipated or unanticipated – their policy expectations will better align with those of policymakers. As I discussed earlier, this alignment can make policy more effective. In the late 1980s and 1990s, the public had a pretty good sense of how the FOMC’s policy would respond to economic developments, the so-called reaction function. They were able to get a handle on the FOMC’s reaction function because after the great inflation of the 1970s, the FOMC became more predictable and systematic in how it reacted to changes in economic activity and inflation.4 As a result, forward guidance was rarely used. But the Great Recession required the Fed to behave in a way quite distinct from its past behavior, and consequently, there is less understanding about how policymakers are likely to react to incoming economic information than there was earlier. So in my view taking steps to enhance the public’s ability to understand the rationale behind the FOMC’s decisions has value. As our economy returns to normal, I would like the forward guidance used during the extraordinary times of the past six years to evolve into our offering a clearer sense of the FOMC’s reaction function. I believe the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections, with suitable amendments, could play a central role in helping the public better understand how U.S. monetary policy is likely to respond to economic 4 For a discussion, see John B. Taylor, “Monetary Policy During the Past 30 Years with Lessons for the Next 30 Years,” luncheon address at the Cato Institute’s 30th Annual Monetary Conference on Money, Markets and Government: The Next 30 Years, Washington, D.C., November 15, 2012. 10 developments. I will offer three possible avenues for consideration, and let me note again that my views are not necessarily shared by others on the FOMC, including those who serve with me on the FOMC’s subcommittee on communications. First, the FOMC’s Summary of Economic Projections could link the variables across each participant’s forecast. Currently, the SEP provides information on the range of projections of real output growth, the unemployment rate, and inflation across FOMC participants, as well as the policy paths that individual participants view as appropriate for achieving those projections. But there is no linkage across the variables. For example, there is no way to see whether a person low in the range of unemployment rate forecasts is high in the range of inflation projections. Rather than presenting ranges, the SEP could be enhanced by linking the variables for each participant’s projection so that the public could see what each policymaker is projecting for growth, unemployment, and inflation, and what policy path he or she believes will achieve those outcomes. This could be done without revealing the identities of the participants and would convey information on each individual policymaker’s reaction function. Second, the SEP could more plainly communicate the degree of uncertainty around the projections. Currently, the divergence of views among participants is presented, but the divergence across projections is different from the uncertainty any one individual would put around his or her outlook. Giving the public a better sense of the probabilities associated with the projections would be valuable. Third, while the SEP provides important information on the diversity of views among participants, trying to increase the information we provide on the consensus view would be worthwhile. After all, it is the consensus view that is reflected in the policy statement after FOMC meetings. Presenting more information on the consensus economic outlook that underlies the Committee’s policy decisions would help clarify the statement. I realize this will not be an easy task. Indeed, the Committee experimented 11 with developing a consensus forecast in 2012.5 However, the Bank of England’s Inflation Report shows that such a consensus forecast with confidence bands around the projections can be done in a way that enhances policy communications. As we return to a more normal policy-setting environment, the FOMC might be successful in developing its own consensus forecast, which could form a basis for explaining policy decisions and alternative views. Forward Guidance Betwixt and Between Extraordinary and Normal Times Of course, we are not there yet. So perhaps the more immediate question is what should forward guidance look like during the transition from extraordinary times to normal times? After several years of nontraditional monetary policy, the transition toward a more normal economy is likely to entail some uncertainty about monetary policy setting. I believe clear policy communications can and should play a key role in reducing that uncertainty. So let me offer three suggestions to improve our communications. First, I favor the FOMC being as clear as it can be that monetary policy will be contingent on the state of the economy. This is why I believe the FOMC’s addition to its forward guidance at its October meeting was an important step in the right direction. It was a clear statement that if incoming information indicates faster than anticipated progress toward the Committee’s employment and inflation objectives, then increases in the target range for the Fed’s policy rate are likely to occur sooner than the FOMC currently anticipates. And if progress is disappointing, then increases are likely to be later. I think this is an important message to convey to the public. Second, I believe it would be helpful over time to provide more information in our statement and other communications about the conditions we systematically assess in calibrating the stance of policy to the economy’s actual progress and anticipated progress toward our dual-mandate goals, and to the speed with 5 See the minutes from the July, September, and October 2012 FOMC meetings (www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm#11655). 12 which that progress is being made. That is, the FOMC should explain how and why we came to our assessment that realized and expected progress toward our goals is pointing to a particular policy path. Third, because there is a plethora of incoming economic data and information, which can send confusing signals, our communications, rather than merely providing an accounting of the changes in economic conditions, should help the public to better understand policymakers’ consensus assessment of what is signal versus noise in the data. What changes in the data and other economic information do we view as material enough to change our medium-run economic outlook or the risks around that outlook? Systematically providing the public with such information will allow people to anticipate how policy is likely to change in response to economic developments that affect the outlook. Conclusion In summary, I have laid out some possible improvements to the Federal Reserve’s policy communications. Such improvements cannot happen overnight – after all, we have been on a journey toward better communication for quite some time and I expect us to continue on that journey. Although there is a diversity of views on the Committee, I believe there is enough common ground to encourage us to seek progress along the lines I am suggesting. I believe our efforts will be rewarded because clear communications will lead to better economic outcomes and help make the trip back to normal a smoother ride.

The Nexus of Macroprudential Supervision, Monetary Policy, and Financial Stability Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2014 Financial Stability Conference: “Measurement Challenges in Macroprudential Policy Implementation: Essential Data Elements for Preserving Financial Stability” The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research Washington, DC December 5, 2014 1 Introduction Good morning. I am very pleased to participate in this conference co-organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research. I want to thank Stephen Ong and Joe Haubrich from the Cleveland Fed and Mark Flood and Greg Feldberg from the OFR for putting together such an interesting program. I also thank the editors of the Journal of Financial Stability, which will be publishing a special volume of the journal with some of the papers from the conference. This is the second in what I hope is a series of conferences co-sponsored by the Cleveland Fed and the OFR. I very much value the collaboration between our institutions, which share a similar mission of fostering financial stability in our nation. I believe avenues such as this conference, which bring together researchers, financial sector supervisors, and policymakers from around the globe, provide important ways for us to share different perspectives on the complex subject of financial stability. This dialogue can lead to a better understanding of what we know and what we still need to learn, a crucial step on the road to more effective policymaking. This morning, I’d like to share my perspectives as a monetary policymaker on the important task of fostering financial stability in the post-crisis environment. It may seem strange that the nexus between monetary policy and financial stability is still an open question. The Federal Reserve itself was created a hundred years ago after the financial panics that beset the country in the late 1800s and early 1900s. After the severe 1907 banking panic, the idea that a central bank might contribute to a more stable financial system gained traction and the Federal Reserve Act was signed into law in 1913. Yet, today, after the severe financial crisis of 2008, we are again rethinking the role of central banks in promoting financial stability. In my remarks today, I will highlight some of the changes in the approach to bank supervision we have undertaken since the financial crisis and then discuss the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability in the post-crisis world. Of course, these will be my views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 2 Macroprudential Supervision Financial institutions are able to provide valuable credit, risk-management, and liquidity services to businesses and households because they are designed to take risks and are highly leveraged compared with nonfinancial businesses. But this risk-taking and leverage raise the possibility of systemic problems that could threaten the functioning of the financial system, hurt real economic activity, and impose significant economic costs. The pain inflicted by the 2008 financial crisis and deep recession that followed is still being felt by many in our economy. Financial sector supervisors and policymakers can learn many lessons from the crisis and its aftermath, and the country has taken a number of steps to help ensure we do not have a repeat occurrence. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, signed into law in 2010, includes a number of provisions to strengthen the supervisory framework, and financial institution regulators themselves are changing the way they go about monitoring risks. Wanting to promote financial stability is not new, but in addition to microprudential supervision, which promotes the safety and soundness of individual institutions, there is now more recognition of the importance of identifying and monitoring emerging risks to the stability of the financial system as a whole and taking appropriate steps to contain these systemic risks. In this macroprudential approach, examiners and supervisors are taking a more horizontal view in which a particular risk is evaluated across institutions rather than only at one institution at a time. Under the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve and other financial regulatory agencies were directed to augment the microprudential supervision of individual institutions with a macroprudential approach to supervision designed to address systemic risk. The Financial Stability Oversight Council, with representation from federal and state financial system regulators, was created to coordinate the government's efforts to identify and respond to systemic risks by establishing prudential standards for systemically important firms. The Office of Financial Research, also a product of the Dodd-Frank Act, has the important task of improving the quality of financial data, which are a crucial ingredient supporting policymakers’ efforts to better understand the financial landscape and to spot systemic risks. 3 The regulatory reforms aim to foster financial stability in two ways: first, by lowering the probability of a financial crisis, and second, by reducing the costs imposed on the rest of the economy when a shock hits the financial system. Falling mainly in the first category are the new higher standards for financial institution capital and leverage requirements, liquidity requirements, concentration limits, standards for corporate governance including executive compensation, and the stress tests. Falling mainly in the second category are Dodd-Frank’s requirement that a systemically important financial institution provide a resolution plan or living will detailing how it would wind down the firm should it fail, and the act’s Title II provisions establishing an orderly liquidation authority to resolve troubled nonbank financial companies. Developing a system to effectively resolve systemically important financial institutions in a way that avoids causing problems that cascade throughout the financial system is a key task on the agenda for promoting financial stability. Ironically, we will have a more stable financial system if we build a system that allows insolvent institutions to fail, and less regulatory intervention to prevent closure of these firms. An effective resolution method will give managers and creditors the incentive to monitor the risks their institution is taking to avoid losses. Indeed, one of the lessons of the crisis was that incentives matter and regulation itself creates incentives. Sometimes these incentives work to promote financial stability. But sometimes regulations, no matter how well intentioned, can create counterproductive incentives – so-called unintended consequences. For example, at least some part of the strong growth in financial intermediation that occurred outside of the regulated banking system was driven by the desire to avoid regulation. Another example is suggested by the recent discussion surrounding the European Union’s cap on bonuses paid to bankers. U.K policymakers expressed concerns that the cap may not have the desired effect of limiting total compensation, and thereby limiting risk-taking, but instead may result merely in a shift to other types of uncapped compensation, such as fixed salaries, or may spur banks to move operations outside of the EU. 4 One guiding principle we should follow in any regulation is to pay attention to the incentives created by the regulatory system we have put into place. Explicit and implicit rules and the ways they are implemented create incentives. These incentives influence the behavior of all market participants: the financial intermediaries and their investors and customers, and the regulators. A second principle to follow in regulation is to avoid working against market forces. Instead, we should design a system that harnesses market discipline to work with improved regulation. I view Dodd-Frank’s establishment of the OFR to collect financial firm data, as well the act’s permission to compel more public disclosures, as encouraging the transparency needed for market discipline. Although there is still more work to be done, regulators are making progress in developing tools to implement the macroprudential approach to promoting financial stability. In general, the macroprudential tools can be classified into two categories: structural tools and cyclical tools. The structural tools aim to build the resiliency of the financial system throughout the business cycle. These tools include the Basel III risk-based capital requirements, minimum liquidity requirements, central clearing for derivatives, and living will resolution plans. In contrast, the cyclical tools are aimed at mitigating the systemic risk that can build up over the business cycle. The seminal model of Kiyotaki and Moore shows how these risks can be amplified and propagated.1 In their model, because borrowers cannot be forced to repay, all lending is collateralized. When the economy is performing well, the value of the collateral increases, which supports further borrowing and higher output. But when a negative shock hits the economy and output declines, collateral values also fall, which means borrowing falls, which depresses output even further. Thus, the collateral constraint is a mechanism that amplifies and propagates the effects of temporary shocks on the economy. 1 Nobu Kiyotaki and John Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105, 1997, pp. 211-248. 5 Brunnermeier and Sannikov build on the Kiyotaki and Moore model.2 In their model, an economic boom increases bank capital levels high enough so that credit is amply available to borrowers. This lowers the volatility of both output and asset prices. The lower volatility induces banks to increase their leverage and lend even more, so much so that the system is now vulnerable to a negative shock. These models illustrate that systemic risk is endogenous, determined by the choices of the model’s decision makers, and that systemic risk varies across the cycle. Macroprudential tools aimed at addressing these emerging risks include the countercyclical capital buffer, the capital conservation buffer, and stress test scenarios. The countercyclical capital buffer allows regulators to increase risk-based capital requirements when credit growth is judged to be excessive and leading to rising systemic risk. The capital conservation buffer ensures that banks raise capital above regulatory minimums in good times so that when they cover losses in bad times, their capital ratio will stay at or above the regulatory minimum. The stress tests can include scenarios that become more severe during strong economic expansions. Other possible cyclical tools, not yet established in the U.S. but used in other countries, include loan-to-value ratio limits and debt-to-income ratio limits that vary over the cycle. In some countries, these macroprudential tools have been targeted at particular sectors like housing credit or household credit. For example, Canada tightened loan-to-value and debt-to income limits on mortgage lending over the 2009 to 2012 period.3 Beginning in 2010, Israel also implemented a package of macroprudential tools to restrict the supply of housing credit.4 Spain introduced dynamic loan-loss 2 Markus K. Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov, “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector,” American Economic Review 104, 2014, pp. 379-421. 3 See Ivo Krznar and James Morsink, “With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility: Macroprudential Tools at Work in Canada,” IMF Working Paper WP/14/83, May 2014. 4 See Stanley Fischer, “Macroprudential Policy in Action: Israel,” in George A. Akerlof, Olivier J. Blanchard, David Romer, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds., What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the Crisis (Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press), 2014, pp. 87-98. 6 provisioning in 2000.5 This method builds up reserves during good economic times according to the historical losses experienced by the asset classes held in the bank’s portfolio. This buffer is then available to absorb losses in bad times. Assessing the performance of these macroprudential tools is an area of ongoing research. It is complicated by the fact that there is relatively little experience with the use of these tools, and econometrically, it is difficult to isolate the effects of the macroprudential tools from the effects of changes in monetary policy and fiscal policy that occurred at the same time. For example, according to Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer, the Bank of Israel did not have good empirical estimates of the effectiveness of the different macroprudential measures.6 Moreover, gauging success may depend on your metric. While the Spanish banking system had the highest ratio of loan-loss reserves to nonperforming assets in western Europe in 2006,7 and so was in a better position to handle losses, the provisioning did not prevent a housing bubble in Spain. A study by economists at the IMF examining the effectiveness of macroprudential tools in reducing systemic risk in 49 countries found mixed results.8 The authors concluded that many of the most frequently used tools were effective in reducing the pro- cyclicality of credit and leverage, but the effectiveness depended on the type of shock hitting the financial sector. This study and others suggest that the macroprudential approach has promise, but that the jury is still out on just how effective the tools will be. To me, this underscores the importance of our continued vigilance 5 See Eliana Balla and Andrew McKenna, “Dynamic Provisioning: A Countercyclical Tool for Loan Loss Reserves,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 95, Fall 2009, pp. 383-418. 6 See Stanley Fischer, “Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We?” Martin Feldstein Lecture, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, July 10, 2014. 7 See Balla and McKenna, p. 403. 8 See C. Lim, F. Columba, A. Costa, P. Kongsamut, A. Otani, M. Saiyid, T. Wezel, and X. Wu, “Macroprudential Policy: What Instruments and How to Use Them? Lessons from Country Experiences,” IMF Working Paper WP/11/238, October 2011. 7 in monitoring the buildup of risks in the financial system. Better monitoring of these risks will be aided by the data being collected by the OFR and the metrics being developed in the Federal Reserve System and elsewhere, such as the Cleveland Fed’s financial stress index,9 which summarizes movements in a number of financial variables associated with stress. It is important to remember, however, that many of these metrics quantify correlations in the data rather than telling us something about the structure of the underlying financial markets or what has caused the movement in the metric and whether it requires a policy response. For this, one needs structural general equilibrium economic models that seriously incorporate financial markets and the possibility of financial stress, borrower defaults, and financial institution failures. These models need to be fairly complex. Before the financial crisis we may have convinced ourselves that we could rely on representative agent models, linearized around a steady state, with one interest rate. But the nature of the financial crisis pointed out the inadequacies of these models for understanding the impact of severe financial stress on the real economy. By their nature, financial crises involve nonlinearities, potentially multiple equilibria, and financial frictions that limit arbitrage. So our models need to include these features. Macroprudential tools focus on the allocation of credit in the economy and work through redistribution. To study the effects of such tools, our models need to include heterogeneous agents – entities with different rates of risk tolerance and time preference – and multiple interest rates. 10 Of course, monetary policy also entails some redistributions of income and wealth, and understanding the dynamics of the effects of monetary policy also requires the use of more complex models.11 There is an ongoing research effort at central banks around the world in developing models that can be used to 9 The Cleveland Financial Stress Index is updated daily at http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/data/financial_stress_index/. 10 For an informative discussion of the nature of the models, see Eric M. Leeper and James M. Nason, “Bringing Financial Stability into Monetary Policy,” November 11, 2014. 11 Yves Mersch, member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, discusses some of this research in “Monetary Policy and Economic Inequality,” keynote speech, Corporate Credit Conference, Zurich, October 17, 2014. 8 evaluate how policymakers should incorporate financial stability concerns into monetary policymaking, the subject to which I now turn. Monetary Policy and Financial Stability The severity of the financial crisis and ensuing recession renewed the discussion of how central banks should respond to developing systemic risk. During this episode, we saw that financial imbalances can build up even in a low-inflation environment. While price stability may promote financial stability, it is not a sufficient condition. We also saw that when financial markets are not functioning well, the transmission of monetary policy to the economy can be disrupted, and this can undermine its effectiveness in achieving the goals of price stability and maximum employment. In addition, the FOMC has recognized that nonconventional monetary policy, including large-scale asset purchases and the extended period of essentially zero interest rates, could pose potential risks to financial stability by affecting market functioning and spurring risk-taking in a search for yield, and the Committee continues to monitor these potential risks.12 Thus, our recent experience has shined a bright light on the interactions between monetary policy and financial stability and has led to some reassessment of the proper relationship between the two. Before the crisis, the conventional approach generally taken by the Fed was to use monetary policy to respond to asset price movements – whether driven by fundamentals or not – only to the extent that those movements contained information about inflation and output growth. Monetary policy would not try to limit the size of imbalances as they developed, but would opt to mop up the consequences of a correction after the fact. 12 See “Developments Related to Financial Stability,” in the Monetary Policy Report, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 15, 2014, pp. 22-23. 9 But others argued for a more activist approach, with monetary policy being used to try to stem developing imbalances before they caused harm to the real economy. BIS and OECD economist William White characterized these approaches as “clean” or “lean.”13 That is, should monetary policy clean up the mess after a bubble bursts, or should it lean against a bubble that appears to be forming? Former Federal Reserve Governor Randy Kroszner used another colorful metaphor: should monetary policy act as a fire extinguisher or a smoke detector?14 In my view, the divisions between these two views are sometimes overstated. Both sides recognize that central banks have a responsibility to promote financial stability, acting as the lender of last resort to solvent financial institutions with good collateral. Both sides agree that monetary policy should take financial conditions into account as part of the economic environment and that asset prices play an important role in the monetary policy transmission mechanism, potentially affecting both aggregate demand and inflation, but that monetary policy should not target asset prices. Neither side argues that monetary policy should respond to small misalignments of financial conditions and economic fundamentals, but both would support a monetary policy response to the extent that imbalances in credit and financial markets pose risks to price stability over the medium and longer run. Looked at in this way, the differences between the two viewpoints are perhaps more a matter of degree and nuance. Rather than frame the discussion in terms of whether or not the central bank should attempt to pop an asset price or credit bubble, I would prefer that we frame the discussion in terms of the risks to macroeconomic and financial system stability. Financial crises can arise from high levels of optimism about the economy, which can lead to a rapid expansion in credit, which feeds into higher asset prices and a lower cost of capital, which then leads to further credit and economic expansion. Eventually, if the 13 See William R. White, “Should Monetary Policy ‘Lean or Clean’?,” Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute Working Paper No. 34, August 2009. 14 See Randall S. Kroszner, “What Should Central Banks Do? Comments on Charles Goodhart’s ‘The Changing Role of Central Banks,’” remarks at the BIS Annual Research Conference, Lucerne, June 2010. 10 expectations turn out to be overly optimistic, investments won’t pay off, confidence will collapse, credit supply will fall, and there can be a rapid decline in prices and a pullback in credit.15 This need not be a bubble: the optimistic expectations formulated may have been based on the information available at the time. But the rapid rise in prices can lead to a bubble by generating behavior that is consistent only with continuing rises in prices. For example, as asset prices rise, lenders may begin to lower credit standards and rely on further appreciation of asset prices to cover any potential credit losses rather than on borrowers’ ability to repay. This can continue until losses start to overtake asset price appreciation. Whether the original rapid rise in asset prices was generated by a bubble or not is less important than the observation that asset price dynamics can yield undesirable outcomes for the economy. The central bank needs to assess whether the risk of macroeconomic and financial system instability has risen, not whether there’s a bubble. In deciding whether or not to intervene by taking an action against a growing imbalance, policymakers need to balance the expected improvement in future economic conditions against the potential cost of unduly limiting credit extension. In the case of the recent collapse in the housing market, policymakers underestimated the breadth and depth of the negative impact this would have on the rest of the economy and the financial system. To the extent that we misjudged the impact, there is a larger potential gain to more carefully monitoring financial market conditions, implementing structural macroprudential tools aimed at lowering systemic risk, and being open to taking offsetting action should imbalances develop. But what tool should policymakers use? There is ongoing discussion on this issue. At this point, given the state of our knowledge, I would opt to use the macroprudential tools as the first line of defense, since they can be more targeted to the markets and institutions where the risks are emerging. Whether monetary policy would be as effective is debatable. While interest rates affect the fundamental value of 15 See Frederic S. Mishkin, “How Should We Respond to Asset Price Bubbles?,” speech at the Wharton Financial Institutions Center and Oliver Wyman Institute’s Annual Financial Risk Roundtable, Philadelphia, May 15, 2008. 11 assets, it is not clear they affect the speculative or bubble portion. The impact may depend on the underlying nature of the financial imbalance. Indeed, in the Gali model, raising interest rates to combat a bubble can actually further inflate it.16 In addition, monetary policy tends to be a blunt instrument. Of course, depending upon the nature and breadth of the financial shock, this might be a desirable attribute. As former Federal Reserve Governor Jeremy Stein said, one benefit of using monetary policy is that “it gets in all the cracks,” meaning that a change in interest rates would affect all financial institutions and markets, whether regulated or not.17 In a situation in which the macroprudential tools proved to be inadequate and risks to financial stability continued to grow, monetary policy should be on the table as a possible defense. I note, however, that in this case, the blurring between financial stability goals and monetary policy goals would be high: if we assessed the risks to financial stability to be sufficiently great, achieving our dual mandate goals would be in jeopardy as well. This is an illustration that, in most cases, the goals of price stability, maximum employment, and financial stability are complementary. Conclusion In summary, well-functioning financial markets and institutions are valuable assets to our economy. The painful experience of the global financial crisis and ensuing severe recession underscores the importance of doing all we can to keep the financial system healthy. Policymakers and regulators are expanding their data-collection efforts and developing metrics to better monitor financial market conditions and to assess emerging financial market stress and systemic risks. We are augmenting microprudential supervision with new macroprudential tools aimed at making the financial system more resilient. And we are 16 See Jordi Gali, “Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles,” American Economic Review 104, 2014, pp. 721-752. 17 See Jeremy C. Stein, “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses,” remarks at “Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Research Symposium, St. Louis, February 7, 2013. 12 developing the types of macroeconomic models that will allow us to evaluate different policies to promote financial stability. Progress is being made, but there is more work to do. Efforts like this conference, which bring together the best and the brightest in the field to share their expertise, play an essential role in furthering this agenda. I urge you to continue your important work on this front so that we can improve our policymaking to promote economic and financial stability.
