January 09, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at The Future of Inflation Targeting, Bank of England, London, U.K. As prepared for delivery Introduction Good afternoon, and happy new year. Monetary policy frameworks are complex, technical, and rarely make it into the public consciousness. But they are of vital importance to economic prosperity. And as we stand on the brink of a new decade, it is critically important that we understand how the frameworks central banks choose influence economic outcomes, both today and in the future. When Andy Haldane invited me to be on the panel, he posed the provocative question: What will monetary policy frameworks look like 30 years from now? As a policymaker, I try to avoid making predictions for the future. But given that I will assuredly be an ex-central banker in the year 2050, I think I’m safe to have free rein! That said, I should still give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or others in the Federal Reserve System. In my remarks today, I’ll discuss how the monetary policy landscape has evolved, and what that means for inflation targeting in 2020, 2050, and beyond. The History of Inflation Targeting Before I look forward, it’s worth looking back and highlighting that it’s now 30 years since the inception of inflation targeting. In 1989, the central bank of the small country of New Zealand announced that the main objective of its monetary policy was to target the inflation rate. 1 In the subsequent decades, most central banks in major economies coalesced around this approach of aiming for a low, publicly announced inflation rate. For the past three decades, this approach has been remarkably successful at keeping inflation low and stable. 2 The inflation targets have acted as a nominal anchor for inflation expectations, which play a big role in determining actual inflation. For anyone who was trying to get a mortgage at a double-digit interest rate or seeing prices go up and up back in the days of high inflation, it’s almost unthinkable that in 2020 central banks are pondering the opposite challenge: how to prevent inflation from being too low. But it’s the reality most policymakers face, and the one our monetary policy frameworks will need to grapple with long into the future. The Future of Inflation So, how did we arrive where we are today? Why is low inflation the current challenge, and why will that likely persist? To answer these questions, we need to look at r-star, or the longer-run neutral rate of interest. One estimate of r-star in the United States, from a model developed by Holston, Laubach, and myself, is around half a percent in the United States. That’s actually now lower than at any time before the Great Recession. 3 We’ve seen similar declines in r-star in other advanced economies, including in Japan and the euro area. In fact, the GDP-weighted average of estimates of r-star for Canada, the euro area, the United Kingdom, and the United States is now also half a percent, nearly 2 percentage points below where it stood at the turn of this century. 4 These very low neutral rates are largely a result of global, longer-term structural factors. They’re driven by demographic changes, slow productivity growth, and demand for safe assets—all of which are unlikely to reverse any time soon. 5 One key takeaway from these global trends is that interest rates and inflation are going to stay lower than we’ve come to expect in the past. 6 This means that monetary policy will likely be more frequently constrained by the lower bound, or LB for short, creating a set of challenges for policymakers. In particular, life near the LB means central banks have much less room to maneuver using adjustments in short-term interest rates when faced with a downturn. The Fundamentals of Inflation Targeting Given that inflation targeting was designed in a world where inflation was undesirably high, does it still work for a world with the opposite problem? As I peer into the future, the question is not so much what is wrong with inflation targeting, but rather what we need to preserve and, in fact, strengthen it. Any evolution of the current framework should involve doubling down on fundamental principles that have proven to be successful. What do I mean by that? There are three fundamental elements of inflation targeting that will be crucial as central banks work to prevent inflation from drifting too low: well-anchored inflation expectations, accountability, and transparency. Inflation Expectations, Accountability, and Transparency The most critical element is anchoring inflation expectations at the right level. For those of you who lived through the 1970s and 1980s, the specter of high inflation probably still looms large. But millennials and Generation Z have never faced the prospect of paying 15 percent on a mortgage. It’s often claimed that we don’t really understand what drives inflation expectations. But, in fact, researchers have made significant progress on this topic. Research using a number of approaches has found that the history of inflation plays a big role in inflation expectations. Now, this does not mean that expectations are a mechanical average of past inflation, like in traditional versions of adaptive expectations. Instead, the key finding of this research is that inflation expectations depend on the historical behavior of inflation as shaped by the conduct of monetary policy. For example, recent work using the New York Fed’s Survey of Consumer Expectations shows a decline in longer-run inflation expectations by nearly half a percentage point over the last six years, to about 2-1/4 percent. 7 This decline reflects both the low CPI inflation of recent years and demographic shifts, where members of older cohorts with high expectations (I’m afraid to say) die off. If inflation continues to underrun target levels similar to the past six years, the downward trend in inflation expectations will likely continue. But there is still time to avert this fate—in this case, it’s fortunate that the young are impressionable. If inflation is sustained at target levels consistently, a further downward trend in expectations can be forestalled. But expectations depend on deeds, not just words, which brings me to the issue of accountability. One reason inflation targeting has been so successful at keeping inflation low and stable is that policymakers held themselves accountable for consistently delivering low inflation near the target. Finally, as well as holding ourselves accountable, policymakers need to be transparent and communicate their actions and the rationale behind them. Much has been made about whether central banks can credibly commit to future actions and outcomes, but the experience with inflation targeting gives me encouragement. Inflation-targeting central banks have proved beyond a doubt that they could bring inflation down and keep it low and stable. This was not a foregone conclusion, and initially there were doubts about whether inflation targeting would succeed. In addition, forward guidance delivered in the years following the financial crisis had a clear and direct effect on driving policy expectations and financial conditions. Keeping inflation expectations anchored at the right point will depend not just on policymakers holding themselves accountable for inflation, but on their ability to clearly execute and communicate their policies. Conclusion I’ll finish with this. It’s risky to make predictions about the future. But in many ways the future is already here. Low r-star and declining inflation expectations are clear indicators of what’s to come. There’s been a great deal of discussion about how central banks around the world, and the Federal Reserve in particular, are going to deal with the challenges that lie ahead. As the FOMC engages on its ongoing framework review, it is important to state again that any changes to our monetary policy framework must and will be carefully and thoughtfully considered. As long as we double down on the fundamentals of inflation targeting by anchoring inflation expectations at the target level, holding ourselves accountable to delivering on our objectives, and being transparent about our actions, we will be well positioned to handle whatever the future might bring. Thank you. 1 Archer, David J. Inflation Targeting in New Zealand , Seminar presentation, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C., March 20-21, 2000. 2 John C. Williams, Inflation Targeting and the Global Financial Crisis: Successes and Challenges , Essay presentation to the South African Reserve Bank Conference on Fourteen Years of Inflation Targeting in South Africa and the Challenge of a Changing Mandate, Pretoria, South Africa, October 31, 2014. 3 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest . 4 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest . 5 John C. Williams, Living Life Near the ZLB , Remarks at 2019 Annual Meeting of the Central Bank Research Association (CEBRA), New York, July 18, 2019. 6 John C. Williams, Monetary Policy in a Low R-Star World , Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, FRBSF Economic Letter, August 15, 2016. 7 This statement is based on ongoing research with New York Fed Research staff using Survey of Consumer Expectations data and a version of the Malmendier-Nagel (2016) model of expectations formation (Ulrike Malmendier and Stefan Nagel [2016]. “ Learning from Inflation Experiences ,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics , Vol. 121, No. 1, 53 – 87 [gated version].). As such, it differs from the median measures of 1-year and 3-year inflation expectations released monthly by the New York Fed. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

January 14, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Working Together; An Interdisciplinary Approach to Organisational Culture, London School of Economics and Political Science, London, U.K. As prepared for delivery Thank you for the warm introduction. It’s an absolute pleasure to be back at the London School of Economics, where I completed my Master’s degree in the late 1980s. Studying at the LSE, with remarkable professors like Richard Layard, Chris Pissarides, George Evans, and the late Tony Atkinson, inspired me to pursue a career in economics and public policy. I owe a great debt of gratitude to this institution and am in awe of how it has evolved and grown in the past 30 years. I will say that there are a few things I have not missed since my days in London: the food (yes, that has changed!), the high cost of living (some things never change), and the endless studying for and worrying about final exams. But I have missed the dear friends I made, the book shops, and the library. It’s ironic that I find myself back at the London School of Economics and NOT talking about economics. The views I bring to today’s discussion come from professional and personal, rather than academic experience. I’ve now led two major organizations, and culture is both the hardest and the most important thing to get right. Culture is at the heart of behavior and norms, and the single most important factor driving the decision-making of employees. It’s not an exaggeration to say that culture is critical—both when things go right, and when they go wrong. Before I get any deeper into ideas about culture, I should give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. Culture Shapes Our Working Lives When we talk about company culture in the context of financial services, the first thing that comes to mind is the risky, unethical, and sometimes criminal behavior in the banking industry, particularly during the financial crisis. And 10 years on from the crisis, this behavior persists. Instances of fraud, money laundering, and scandals related to foreign exchange and LIBOR continue to make the headlines. 1 This behavior puts a spotlight on the essential role of robust regulation and strict enforcement. But illicit and unethical behavior is rarely the result of an isolated “bad apple.” It’s more often the symptom of a rotten culture. And rotten cultures don’t appear overnight—nor for that matter do positive, inclusive ones, where people feel empowered and accountable to upholding the values of the organization. Culture is created—intentionally or otherwise—by the structures, incentives, and behavioral norms that shape our working lives. Today I want to move our attention away from the extreme behavior that makes the headlines, and think more deeply about organizational cultures. What does a good culture look like? How can leaders in the industry establish a positive culture within their firms? And perhaps hardest of all, how do you ensure that a firm’s culture adapts to the changing world, but still stays true to its values and purpose? An Ethical Dilemma Consider this: 2 A junior banker on a successful real estate investment team is asked to run projections for future rental income for a mall in Hong Kong. As part of her research she notices a number in a spreadsheet that inflates future cash flows by 4 percent. She asks a senior analyst if the number should be flagged as an optimistic assumption, so it’s clear it’s not based on evidence. The senior analyst responds by saying the number is a more conservative estimate than many. He says it’s a “judgment call” and that they can discuss it once the project has concluded. But the project comes and goes, everyone is busy, and the senior analyst doesn’t bring it up again. This scenario raises numerous questions: Should the junior team member raise the issue again or should she let it go? What was driving the behavior of the senior analyst? And why did no one else on the team view the situation as an ethical dilemma? These are the kinds of issues that people often face in a work environment. And this example demonstrates many of the ways culture influences behavior. Employees may enter an organization with a strong sense of right and wrong. What they may not realize is that group norms can exert a powerful magnetic pull on their moral compass. The junior banker knew the way the number was being presented was unethical, and yet she complied with her boss. The response from the senior analyst, describing the situation as a “judgment call,” is a common phenomenon. Using a euphemism to describe the inflated statistic camouflages the wrongdoing and makes it sound more acceptable to others. We see it in our daily lives—terms like “troublemaker” and “not being a team player” are often used to shift the onus from the person whose behavior is being challenged to the challenger. Ann Tenbrunsel’s work has been very important for revealing how we use language to disguise or excuse behavior we know to be unacceptable. 3 One of the other issues this example illustrates is how organizational norms affect our own sense of what’s right and wrong and whether to speak up. Many of you here today will be familiar with the Asch experiment, where students participated in a vision test. There was a control line and three other lines labelled A, B, and C. Participants had to state aloud which line was the same length as the control. But they had to do so after a group of actors had given an incorrect answer. 4 About one third of participants went along with the majority, even though it was readily apparent their answers were incorrect. 5 When asked why they went along with the group they said it was because they wanted to fit in, or because they believed the group was better informed than they were. Does the junior banker drop the issue in an effort to fit in? Does she raise the issue in private, or does she call a company hotline? The answer depends on the complex relationship between the individual and the culture in which they work. I’m particularly looking forward to hearing from Celia Moore. She spoke at the New York Fed last year and discussed how organizations set goals and motivate people to achieve them. Praise, penalties, and rewards all influence an individual’s behavior. Signals from the organization’s leadership also have a major role to play: do the higher echelons of management value divergent views? Do they foster a culture where people feel empowered to speak up? 6 All of these things shape how an individual will respond to an ethical dilemma, whether they will acknowledge it as such, and how they will lead others as they move up in an organization. As financial services professionals with great technical expertise, we often fall into the trap of thinking we can solve all of our problems on our own. But we have so much to learn from experts in other fields. Strengths as Blind Spots One of the most important lessons I’ve learned as a CEO is that there’s no fixed endpoint when it comes to shaping an organization’s culture. You can never take a step back and say, “We’ve finished the culture project. Well done! Now it’s time to focus our efforts elsewhere.” Culture is constantly evolving, and therefore needs to be constantly nurtured. One of the most challenging elements is that there’s no clear benchmark for success. And sometimes your greatest strengths can become your blind spots. As an organization with a public mission and regulatory responsibilities, the Fed needs to have a particular focus on compliance. But cultures with a heavy focus on compliance can breed a sense that individuals aren’t responsible for their actions. As a CEO, I’ve tackled these issues by focusing on principles and values rather than writing extensive policies that try to cover every potential decision. This puts a premium on individual accountability to do what’s right and creating an environment where everyone has the ability and responsibility to speak up. Somewhat paradoxically, focusing on principled decision making and accountability, rather than relying exclusively on rules and policies, can be the most effective safeguard against wrongdoing and unethical behavior. What’s the Way Forward? Creating a positive work culture is challenging and ongoing work. And there’s no silver bullet that can solve cultural problems overnight. In terms of how to move forward I’d like to make three brief points before I close: First, the fact that we’re all sitting here in this room is a very positive sign. That so many leaders from major firms are here today, engaged in these issues, is a symbol of how organizational culture is moving up the agenda. The second is that the Banking Standards Board survey is a terrific tool for getting a snapshot of what your organization’s culture looks like and how it’s changing over time. It goes far beyond typical engagement questionnaires and provides powerful insights into the values of employees and the characteristics of an organization. 7 It’s impossible to make progress if you don’t have an accurate picture of your starting point. The third is that when it comes to culture, I encourage everyone to look beyond their own lens of expertise. The Fed couldn’t do its work without the deep knowledge of economists, lawyers, and statisticians. But the solutions to challenges related to a firm’s culture are unlikely to be found if we keep our focus narrowly trained on our own specialties. We have so much to learn from experts in psychology, ethics, and management. That’s one reason I’ve been so looking forward to today’s panel discussion. It brings together experts from many of these fields, whose combined insights are the key to moving us all toward the business culture we want to see. Learn more about the New York Fed’s work on governance and culture reform . 1 See, for example, Peter Eavis and Keith Collins, “ The Banks Changed. Except for All the Ways They’re the Same ,” New York Times , September 12, 2018; Yalman Onaran, “ Stung by Big Fines, Big Banks Beef Up Money-Laundering Controls ,” Bloomberg , April 4, 2019; “ Citi Hit Hardest as EU Fines Banks $1.2 Billion over Foreign Exchange ,” American Banker , May 16, 2019. 2 This scenario is adapted from work by the Education and Industry Forum on Financial Services Culture , a private-sector voluntary membership group sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 3 Max H. Bazerman and Ann E. Tenbrunsel, Blind Spots: Why We Fail to Do What’s Right and What to Do about It (Princeton University Press, 2011). 4 Asch, S. E. “ Effects of Group Pressure upon the Modification and Distortion of Judgments ,” in Groups, Leadership and Men; Research in Human Relations, ed. H. Guetzkow (Pittsburgh: Carnegie Press, 1951). 5 Saul McLeod, Solomon Asch-Conformity Experiment , SimplyPsychology.org, December 28, 2018. 6 Building Cultural Capital in the Financial Services Industry: Emerging Practices, Risks and Opportunities , Conference Summary, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June 4, 2019. 7 Banking Standards Board, Assessment Results 2018 , (United Kingdom). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

. We will use our tools and act as appropriate to support the economy. As part of our response, my colleagues and I in the Federal Reserve System are coordinating with our counterparts around the world. Tuesday’s phone call between G7 finance ministers and central bank governors, the subsequent statement, and policy actions by central banks are clear indications of the close alignment at the international level. Financial Markets Turning to the specific responsibilities of the New York Fed, we are tasked with the implementation of monetary policy. Our goals are to keep the federal funds rate within the target range and foster stable conditions in short-term funding markets. We will ensure that the supply of reserves in the banking system remains ample, consistent with the FOMC’s direction. 2 Treasury bill purchases continue to add to the underlying level of reserves, and repo operations are keeping reserve levels ample. We are monitoring conditions in money markets closely. We remain flexible and ready to make adjustments to our operations as needed to ensure that monetary policy is effectively implemented and transmitted to financial markets and the broader economy. Conclusion I’ll conclude with this: The coronavirus poses evolving risks to the U.S. economy. Our policy action this week positions us well to support the economic expansion. We are carefully monitoring the effects of the coronavirus on the U.S. economic outlook and will respond as appropriate. Our focus remains trained on serving the American people by pursuing our dual goals of maximum employment and price stability. Once again, thank you for this evening’s award. 1 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 3, 2020. 2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation , October 11, 2019; Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Treasury Bill Purchases and Repurchase Operations , October 11, 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

March 06, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Shadow Open Market Committee Spring Meeting, New York City As prepared for delivery Good afternoon. I would like to start by thanking Athanasios for inviting me to participate in this event. It is a real honor to highlight the influence of our esteemed colleague Marvin Goodfriend, an outstanding and original researcher, policy advisor, and friend. Marvin epitomized the role of policy advisor. His research dug deep into the issues, introduced new ideas into the discussion, and developed options for policymakers to consider for the most challenging issues. The fact that we have so many researchers and policymakers here is testament to the importance of his research in shaping the conversations that we are having to this day. Before I reflect more on Marvin’s contributions to monetary policy, I should give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. In preparation for what I know will be a stimulating discussion, I’d like to highlight a few of the ways that Marvin changed the conversation in the U.S. about what was then commonly referred to as the zero lower bound on interest rates, or ZLB for short. These show how Marvin’s insights shaped some of the most prominent discussions in monetary policy. Before I do so, it’s helpful to look back about 20 years. As the clock ticked down on the 20th century, many people’s attention was not on the ZLB. Most were more concerned about the millennium bug that had the world on high alert. Truth be told, the ZLB wasn’t perceived to be a looming problem in the United States back in 1999. The economy was doing very well and the target federal funds rate was 5-1/2 percent at the end of the year. Up until then, the only historical reference points for the ZLB were from the Great Depression of the 1930s and, more recently, Japan in the 1990s. It was simply not part of the experience of postwar Europe or the Americas. However, a small group of economists, with Marvin at the forefront, was asking whether the ZLB could pose a challenge here in the U.S. and, if so, what would be the consequences and potential remedies. Researchers and policymakers began to turn the dial up on the discussion around the ZLB. The Fed held a conference in Woodstock, Vermont in October 1999 on the ZLB. 1 At that conference, Marvin presented his paper “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy,” which was subsequently published in the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (JMCB) . 2 In January 2002, Marvin briefed the FOMC on aspects of the research that he had presented at the Woodstock conference, as part of a session on the ZLB in which David Reifschneider and I presented our research as well. 3 By that point, the federal funds rate had fallen to 1.75 percent, so the ZLB was starting to get on policymakers’ radar screens. On those occasions, Marvin emphasized the importance of the ZLB as a constraint on policy and urged us to think differently about how central banks could still carry out their missions, even under that constraint. He developed and analyzed what were then considered “outside the box” options for overcoming the ZLB. These helped lay the groundwork for how economists and policymakers think about these issues in both conceptual and practical terms. For example, Marvin was one of the first people to think seriously about how the constraint caused by the ZLB could be relaxed by implementing negative interest rates. Now, I know that the topic of negative interest rates is controversial. But, whatever conclusions you may draw about the relative merits of negative rates, Marvin’s research early on helped identify and explore a broad dimension of issues and potential choices for policymakers. Marvin’s intellectual pursuit of all aspects of the ZLB logically drove him to explore the possibility for currency to have a digital component. Although many think of central bank digital currencies as a new-fangled idea, Marvin was thinking deeply about the prospect long ago. This has become one of the hot topics in the world of central banks today. The conversation that Marvin began in Woodstock in 1999 became the basis for discussions that were had later on at the FOMC meeting in January 2002. At that FOMC meeting, Marvin expanded upon the idea of asset purchases as a policy tool that he had proposed in his paper at the conference in Woodstock. He emphasized that the Fed asset purchases can affect financial conditions and thereby the economy. He was expanding the conversation away from thinking about conventional monetary policy to unconventional options, like the balance sheet. Importantly, he distinguished between central bank purchases of short-term government securities, as the Bank of Japan was doing at that time, versus purchases of longer-term securities. Marvin viewed purchases of short-term securities as ineffective under the ZLB, while he saw purchases of longer-duration securities as potentially powerful owing to a “preferred habitat” motive on the part of investors. Of course, large-scale asset purchases later became a tool of critical importance for easing financial conditions in the United States and abroad. Although the consequences of the predicted Y2K glitch were minimal, the ZLB became a central issue when the financial crisis hit. Thankfully, Marvin, along with others, helped lay the intellectual groundwork and created the vocabulary for us to work through some of the most significant issues facing central banks. His work is a true emblem of how researchers play a vital role in informing and shaping the policy discussion. I look forward to the upcoming conversation. Thank you. 1 Jeffrey C. Fuhrer and Mark S. Sniderman, Conference Summary , Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , Volume 32, Number 4, Part 2, pp. 845-69, November 2000. 2 Marvin Goodfriend, Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy , Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , Volume 32, Number 4, Part 2, pp. 1007-35, November 2000. 3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting and presentation materials , January 29-30, 2002. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

April 16, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Economic Club of New York (delivered via videoconference) As prepared for delivery Introduction Thank you for the kind introduction. Hello, from my apartment in Manhattan. It’s a pleasure to be able to join you today, even under these extraordinary circumstances. I hope that wherever you are watching, you and your loved ones are safe and well. The outbreak of the coronavirus and the global pandemic have created an unprecedented situation. Today, I want to talk about what that means for the economy and financial markets, and how the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and the Federal Reserve System as a whole, are responding to the challenges before us. My colleagues and I are dedicated to doing everything within our power to support the functioning of financial markets and help put the economy on a strong footing once this crisis is behind us. Before I continue, let me give the Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The coronavirus pandemic has created circumstances we have never experienced before in our lifetimes. There’s hardly a community in the world that remains unaffected. I want to emphasize that this is first and foremost a public health crisis, and a human tragedy. It’s our doctors, nurses, and healthcare professionals who are on the front lines, fighting this disease and caring for those who are suffering. We owe them a great debt of gratitude. My sincere thanks is also with the grocery store workers, those in law enforcement and transportation, and everyone who continues to carry out essential work each day. The Scale of the Challenge The necessary actions taken to slow and contain the spread of the coronavirus are not only changing how we live our lives, but are also having a profound effect on the economy and financial markets, both here and abroad. Although many people have drawn comparisons with the financial crisis of 2008, the current turmoil is fundamentally different from recessions of the past. The challenges before us do not stem from vulnerabilities at banks or the bursting of a bubble—I can only liken them to a natural disaster of global proportions. If we look back to February, the American economy was strong, with unemployment at historical lows. But, now, social distancing and other restrictions imposed in response to the pandemic are causing severe, rapid declines in jobs and income. Unprecedented numbers have filed for unemployment insurance in the past several weeks alone, and we know that more economic pain is still to come. The reality is that the full scale of the economic consequences is still unknown. The economic distress and the extraordinary uncertainty about the future course of the pandemic have set off a tidal wave of flows of money away from riskier investments to the safety of cash. This sudden shift led to an evaporation of liquidity and breakdowns in the functioning of key financial markets. This includes the market for U.S. Treasury securities, the cornerstone of the global financial system. These developments, if left unchecked, threaten to starve our economy of the credit that it badly needs during this difficult time. The Response Last month, as the risks posed by the coronavirus became increasingly apparent, the Federal Reserve took swift and decisive action to support the economy and stabilize financial markets. In two unscheduled meetings in the first half of March, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) quickly brought the target range for the federal funds rate to near zero. 1 The FOMC also signaled that it expects to keep interest rates at this level until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve the Fed’s maximum employment and price stability goals. 2 These monetary policy actions serve two purposes. First, low interest rates make it easier for households and businesses to meet their borrowing needs during this time of economic stress. Second, they foster broader financial conditions that will help promote the rebound in spending and investment needed to return the economy to full strength. The New York Fed The New York Fed has important and unique responsibilities in supporting liquid and well-functioning financial markets. Working alongside our colleagues in the Federal Reserve and other agencies, we are taking rapid and significant actions to supply liquidity and to stabilize critical parts of our financial system. We are conducting large-scale repo operations to assure ample liquidity in money markets. 3 In addition, at the direction of the FOMC, we are purchasing sizable quantities of U.S. Treasury securities and agency residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities to improve functioning in these critical markets. 4 To put the current situation in context, we are running more open market operations, for greater sums, than at any time in our history. 5 The Federal Reserve is also making liquidity available to key intermediaries to support market functioning and to keep credit flowing. These actions include offering term loans to depository institutions through the traditional discount window, and the establishment of the Primary Dealer Credit Facility and the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility. 6 These strong and timely actions averted a potential shutdown in the flow of credit and are providing funding and stability at a time of extraordinary volatility in markets. Although stresses in financial markets will not entirely abate until the pandemic is behind us, we have seen material improvements in measures of liquidity and market functioning in key parts of the U.S. financial system. Our work is not done. The Federal Reserve is also standing up programs to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments, so that they can weather this storm and continue to do their work, both now and when normal life resumes. 7 Last week, we announced more details on these programs, which altogether provide additional funding of up to $2.3 trillion. 8 These programs are executed with the full support of the Treasury. We are also deeply committed to providing transparency around matters such as usage, eligibility, governance, vendor selection, and fees for these programs. The actions by the Federal Reserve, while sharing some similarities with those undertaken during the financial crisis, are specifically designed to deal with the unique economic challenges posed by the coronavirus. Our efforts supporting the provision of credit include a number of programs aimed at different parts of the economy and work through different channels. One set of programs supports the availability of credit to businesses—importantly, including small and medium-sized businesses—through loans, commercial paper, and corporate bonds. The second set of programs targets the availability of credit to states and municipalities. But we cannot act alone: fiscal policy is also playing a critically important role. In particular, it can do what monetary policy cannot: provide for the public health response and transfer income to those most affected by the outbreak. Fiscal policy is also a vital partner in the delivery of our own programs, supplying the financial support necessary for the extraordinary scale of the credit facilities we’re operating. An International Response The Federal Reserve is not unique in taking bold actions. Central banks around the world are working to support their economies and stabilize their financial systems. There has been close alignment at the international level about the monetary policy and other actions needed to tackle this period of extraordinary economic pain. Given the central role of the dollar in the global economy, the FOMC has instituted new and enhanced programs to facilitate the ability of other central banks to provide U.S. dollar funding in their countries. 9 Bold Action The economy is under distress in ways we’ve not experienced in our lifetimes. At the New York Fed we are working tirelessly—leveraging our experience, expertise, and ingenuity—to address the economic and financial challenges posed by the pandemic. This crisis requires innovative thinking and bold action. My colleagues and I are dedicated to doing our utmost to lessen the impact of the crisis on families and businesses in our communities, and to restore our nation’s economic prosperity as quickly as possible. Related Content New York Fed Actions Related to COVID-19 Federal Reserve Board of Governors: Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) 1 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 3, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 15, 2020. 2 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 15, 2020. 3 See Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Repurchase Operations , March 17, 2020. 4 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support the Economy , March 23, 2020. 5 According to the Open Market Desk at the New York Fed, between March 16 and April 14, the Desk has purchased over $1.2 trillion of Treasury securities, over $470 billion in agency MBS, and $6.4 billion in agency CMBS. For comparison, over the course of the 2012 – 14 asset purchase program, the Desk added about $800 billion of Treasury securities and $800 billion of agency MBS to the System Open Market Account portfolio. 6 For the discount window, see Federal Reserve Actions to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses , March 15, 2020. For the Primary Dealer Credit Facility and the Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Announces Establishment of a Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) to Support the Credit Needs of Households and Businesses , March 17, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Broadens Program of Support for the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses by Establishing a Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF) , March 18, 2020. 7 For announcements of the various programs, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Announces Establishment of a Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses , March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Announces Establishment of a Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) to Support the Credit Needs of Households and Businesses , March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Broadens Program of Support for the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses by Establishing a Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF) , March 18, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support the Economy , March 23, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Will Establish a Facility to Facilitate Lending to Small Businesses via the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) By Providing Term Financing Backed by PPP Loans , April 6, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Takes Additional Actions to Provide Up to $2.3 Trillion in Loans to Support the Economy , April 9, 2020. 8 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Takes Additional Actions to Provide Up to $2.3 Trillion in Loans to Support the Economy , April 9, 2020. 9 For announcements of the various programs, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Coordinated Central Bank Action to Enhance the Provision of U.S. Dollar Liquidity , March 15, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces the Establishment of Temporary U.S. Dollar Liquidity Arrangements with Other Central Banks , March 19, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Coordinated Central Bank Action to Further Enhance the Provision of U.S. Dollar Liquidity , March 20, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Establishment of a Temporary FIMA Repo Facility to Help Support the Smooth Functioning of Financial Markets , March 31, 2020. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 21, 2020 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Buffalo Niagara Partnership, the Greater Rochester Chamber of Commerce, and CenterState CEO (delivered via videoconference) As prepared for delivery Introduction It’s a pleasure to be able to join you all from my apartment in Manhattan. I sincerely look forward to the day when we can again meet in person. In a short period, our lives have changed in unimaginable ways: things that we took for granted—like eating at a restaurant, or going to a movie—are no longer possible in many places. For the first time in our lifetimes, governments around the world have had to take the extraordinary action of shutting their economies down. Those workers who continue to deliver essential services face very real risks, and my deep gratitude is with all those working in hospitals, law enforcement, transportation, and grocery stores. All essential workers have the thanks of everyone at the New York Fed. What started as a healthcare crisis has had profound consequences for the U.S. and global economies. We all know the incredible strain that New York City has been under, with numerous patients still being diagnosed with COVID-19 on a daily basis. But Upstate New York has also been deeply affected—not just by the spread of the virus, but also by the profound economic fallout. The cause of this recession—a global pandemic—means that our economic future will be determined in large part by the path of the virus. It’s impossible to know exactly how and when workers and businesses will be fully back to work and when consumers will return to the businesses that are open. Despite the uncertainty, I’m going to spend some time today discussing what the scale of the challenge looks like for New York State, and for the U.S. economy as a whole. I’m also going to outline the Federal Reserve System’s response. The Fed is well-known for setting interest rates. But we play a number of other roles, and have a key responsibility for ensuring that the financial system is working to support the economy, which has been crucial during this crisis. Before I continue, let me give the Fed disclaimer that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. A Diverse State One of the particular strengths of New York State is its diversity—and this is especially true from an economic perspective. In Western and Central New York there are top-tier universities, manufacturing businesses, a thriving professional services industry, as well as popular tourist destinations. Since the 2008 financial crisis, the declining population trend in Upstate New York of earlier decades had largely stabilized. In recent years, new businesses had sprung up and unemployment had fallen to historic lows. All of this was against the backdrop of a strong national economy. At the start of the year, most forecasts anticipated continued moderate growth throughout 2020 and into 2021. According to the data for April, the unemployment rate now stands at a staggering 14.7 percent—a figure I hoped that I would never see in my lifetime, and one that is sure to get worse before it gets better. If I think back to the economic picture of February, nobody could foresee this would be our reality within a few short months. It’s likely that the latest numbers do not reveal the full extent of the financial devastation faced by millions of American families. The data don’t capture those who had to leave their jobs, either for their own health or to take care of loved ones. Many more people have had their hours reduced or have been forced to take a pay cut. It’s going to be some time before we have a detailed understanding of the full economic effects of the public health measures necessary to combat the coronavirus. What we do know is that the pandemic has put a large question mark over the positive trends experienced in our state, as well as the nation as a whole. As social distancing measures are relaxed, we will get a better understanding of how different industries are affected. We know that travel, hospitality, and retail have all been hard hit. What we don’t know is what the shape or timescale of the recovery will be. It’s going to be some time before we have a clearer view of the effects on other industries, including autos, higher education, manufacturing, and professional services. Our Response Despite this extraordinary uncertainty, at the Federal Reserve we worked quickly to put measures in place to support the economy and set the foundation for a strong recovery. During the first half of March, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) brought the target range for the federal funds rate to near zero. 1 The FOMC has indicated that it expects to keep interest rates at this level until it is confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve its maximum employment and price stability goals. 2 Bringing interest rates down to near zero serves two purposes. First, low interest rates make it easier for households and businesses to meet their borrowing needs. Second, they foster broader financial conditions that will help promote the rebound in spending and investment needed to return the economy to full strength. The New York Fed The New York Fed has important and unique responsibilities in supporting liquid and well-functioning financial markets. Working alongside our colleagues in the Federal Reserve and other agencies, we are taking rapid and significant actions to supply liquidity and to stabilize critical parts of our financial system. By conducting large-scale repo operations and purchasing sizable quantities of U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities, we are providing funding and stability at a time of extraordinary volatility in markets. 3 These actions averted a potential shutdown in the availability of credit, which would have made the current economic crisis even more severe. In addition to stabilizing financial markets, the Federal Reserve is standing up programs to support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments. These actions will enable them to continue to do their work, both now and when normal life resumes. 4 Our efforts supporting the provision of credit include a number of programs aimed at different parts of the economy and work through different channels. One set of programs supports the availability of credit to households and businesses—importantly, including small and medium-sized businesses. A second set of programs targets the availability of credit to states and municipalities. Fiscal policy is also playing a critically important role. In particular, it can do what monetary policy cannot: provide for the public health response and transfer income to those most affected by the outbreak. Fiscal policy is also a vital partner in the delivery of our own programs, supplying the financial support necessary for the extraordinary scale of the credit facilities we’re operating. Conclusion I’ll conclude with this: These are extraordinary times, and the Fed is taking extraordinary actions to ease the economic pain. This is anything but a typical recession, and it has called for a new set of measures to address the economic consequences of the virus. Amid all the change we’re experiencing, you can be assured of one thing: our unwavering commitment to limit the economic damage from the pandemic and foster conditions for a strong and sustained recovery. 1 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 3, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , March 15, 2020. 2 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement , April 29, 2020. 3 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support the Economy , March 23, 2020. 4 For announcements of the various programs, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Announces Establishment of a Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF) to Support the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses , March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Announces Establishment of a Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF) to Support the Credit Needs of Households and Businesses , March 17, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Board Broadens Program of Support for the Flow of Credit to Households and Businesses by Establishing a Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility (MMLF) , March 18, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Announces Extensive New Measures to Support the Economy , March 23, 2020; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Will Establish a Facility to Facilitate Lending to Small Businesses via the Small Business Administration's Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) By Providing Term Financing Backed by PPP Loans , April 6, 2020; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Takes Additional Actions to Provide Up to $2.3 Trillion in Loans to Support the Economy , April 9, 2020. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
