Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Review, Reflect and Deflect Richard W. Fisher's remarks before the Independent Bankers Association of Texas Annual Convention September 23, 2013 San Antonio Speech in PDF Thank you, Chris [Williston]. I am honored and delighted to speak to you all today. I understand that Danny King's daughter, Amy, arranged quite a songwriters' show for you last night. I heard it was so good that Ann Worthy, my head regulator at the Dallas Fed, stayed up past midnight … for the first time in 40 years. I am going to start today by reviewing current banking trends for the nation and for the Eleventh Federal Reserve District. Then, as there has been a great deal of reflection in the press and blogosphere on the occasion of the fifth anniversary of Lehman Brothers’ bankruptcy and the ensuing global financial crisis, I want to briefly provide you an overview of what the crisis cost us as a nation and the work remaining to prevent a reoccurrence of a crisis, a subject I will be addressing in a more fulsome manner in a speech and a public debate in New York in mid-October. Last, I will comment briefly on last week’s FOMC meeting and what some have referred to as “the taper caper,” doing my utmost to deflect your criticism. Texas’ Superior Bank Performance First, let’s discuss how banks in the Eleventh Federal Reserve District are performing in the context of national trends. Recall that the district includes some 27 million people sprawled across approximately 360,000 square miles in southern New Mexico, Texas and the wooded north of Louisiana. Over 96 percent of the economic output and the district’s banking assets are in Texas, so you might reasonably say I am speaking of the performance of Texas banks versus banks in the U.S. as a whole. Profitability is fairly strong across the nation, helped in part by a continued decline in provision expense. Asset quality continues to improve, and lending activity continues to grow nationally. These national trends are consistent with what we have seen over the last several quarters. You should take pride in knowing that Eleventh District and Texas banks are outperforming the rest of the nation’s banks. Let’s look at comparative return on assets (ROA): Profitability trends over the last several years as measured by ROA show that district banks continue to outperform banks nationwide, with an ROA of 1.15 percent versus 1.12 percent for all U.S. banks. While moving in the right direction, banks still have a little more work to do before their profitability reaches precrisis levels. Provision expense is worth noting: Falling provision expense has contributed to improved earnings trends for both U.S. and district banks. Declines in the amount banks set aside to cover bad loans have importantly contributed to improved profitability over the last several years. This, however, is not likely to be the case moving forward. Banks nationwide and in the district are now reporting provisions below precrisis levels. In the case of our district banks, provision expense as a percentage of average assets is almost half of what was reported in 2006. It doesn’t look like profitability is going to be bolstered much by net interest margin (NIM), either. The NIM for banks across the U.S. has continued to trend lower over the past two decades; in the district, the trend has been observed over the past decade. It is noteworthy that the most recent decline in NIM is certainly affected by the zero lower bound on short-term interest rates. [1] As you can see in this chart, district banks continue to report a slightly higher margin at 3.33 percent versus 3.25 percent for banks nationwide. Now let’s look at how profitability differs nationally by bank asset size: ROA has considerably improved in all size classes—banks with asset sizes of less than $10 billion and between $10 billion and $250 billion, and the largest banks, those with assets greater than $250 billion. The upward trend in ROA tapers off by 2013 for community and midsize banks, while profitability for the dozen or so big banks—the cohort that includes banks considered “too big to fail” (TBTF)—shoots up rather dramatically. The Big Guys earned a ROA of 1.26 percent versus 1.04 percent for the community banks. This chart shows the major profitability components for the asset size classes we just discussed: Starting from the bottom up, you can see that the ROA for the biggest banks is 22 basis points above that for community banks. Recall that Eleventh District banks earned 1.15 percent ROA; thus, the Big Guys outpace even the relatively stronger performance of our healthy banks in and around Texas. This gap is being driven by a couple of things: The largest banks have lower noninterest expense; some would say this is due to economies of scale. These Big Guys also recorded much higher noninterest income—a full 100 basis points higher. These two items were more than enough to offset the lower net interest income reported by the biggest banks. Having noted that big gap, let’s focus on the noninterest-income component for a minute and look at how it has impacted earnings trends for the Big Guys. This chart shows noninterest income and its components for each of the three size classes of banks for 2012 and 2013. [2] As you can see, noninterest income was virtually unchanged for the community and midsize banks, while noninterest income has increased for the largest banks, from 1.89 percent of average assets in 2012 to 2.09 percent in 2013. Looking at the components of noninterest income, you can see that the growth has been driven by an increase in trading revenue. Trading revenue is a noncore/nontraditional income source that is typically not available to community and the smaller midsize banks. It is thus more difficult for these smaller institutions to return to their historical norms or even compete in traditional lending with the Big Guys, whose lending activities, in a sense, are subsidized by their trading activities. We are receiving numerous reports from community and regional banks in the Eleventh District that the lending terms and standards of big banks are becoming increasingly lax. As you know, a common measure of asset quality is the noncurrent loan ratio, the percentage of a bank’s loans 90 or more days past due or on nonaccrual status. Here’s a comparison of noncurrent loans for U.S. versus district banks: We’ve seen fairly dramatic improvement in asset quality over the last several years, with the noncurrent ratio declining to 3.07 percent for banks nationwide and 1.55 percent for those in the district. You can see from this chart that banks in Texas and the district continue to outperform banks nationwide. Most of you remember the legendary Bob Hankins, who retired last year after 20 years as head of Banking Supervision at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. Bob received an award last year at this very luncheon. He had a saying that Texas banks were “twice as good and half as bad” as banks nationwide. That remains the case, though banks around the U.S. are slowly catching up with Texas, and you can also see from the chart that banks here and in the U.S. still have some work to do to get noncurrent loans down to precrisis levels. How about the so-called Texas ratio—a measure of noncurrent loans plus other real estate owned expressed as a percentage of equity plus loan loss reserves? [3] This became a scarlet letter in the late 1980s when 20 percent of Texas banks had a Texas ratio exceeding 100 percent. However, in 2013 only 0.7 percent of Texas banks had a Texas ratio greater than 100 percent, compared with 2.5 percent nationwide—and that nationwide number is down from a 5.7 percent peak in fourth quarter 2010. Note what is labeled on the center right side of the chart as the “Wells Fargo-South Central effect.” Wells Fargo relocated a charter to Houston in 2009 and moved a large volume of mortgage loans into the district, triggering the increase in nonperforming residential real estate. (If the Wells Fargo-South Central effect is excluded from the 2009 data, the noncurrent loan ratio falls by 71 basis points for the district.) Now here is something I consider particularly noteworthy about our district: our loan growth and its composition. Loan growth on a year-over-year basis remains good, but it decelerated a bit for the nation in the second quarter to 3.74 percent. In contrast, loan growth for district banks ticked up slightly to 5.72 percent, almost 200 basis points above the nationwide average. Of interest, you can see from this multiyear chart that loan growth for banks nationwide hooks downward in the first half of 2013, while in the district, it turns upward. Here’s a closer look at loan growth between June of 2012 and 2013: You can see in this chart how business loans contributed to total loan growth nationwide and in the district. Business loans grew 6.8 percent for banks nationwide and 4.8 percent for those in the district. We do, however, continue to see pockets of weakness. Small-business lending was down 36 basis points year over year for banks in the U.S., while it increased only 1.6 percent districtwide. [4] So let me summarize all of this: Profitability continues to trend upward, although when we will make it back to precrisis levels remains to be seen. Asset quality is improving, but there is more work to be done. Lending continues to rebound: We’ve seen seven consecutive quarters of growth nationwide. However, areas of weakness remain, particularly small-business lending. The issue of small-business lending and the difference between the drivers of income for the largest banks and those with less than $250 billion in assets is a reminder of a lingering problem: The coddling, whether intentionally or otherwise, of the biggest of the big banks—those considered too big to fail. Five Years After Lehman, We Still Have a Big Problem Working with Harvey Rosenblum and my colleagues at the Dallas Fed, I have been a constant burr under the saddle of the too big to fails. In a nutshell, I believe that the megabanks are inherently handicapped by their size and scale in practicing the basic principle of banking: Know your customer . Extreme size and complexity have proven to be the enemy of prudence and the source of costly mistakes. Mathematically based risk-management models, while theoretically comforting, have their deficiencies. We learned during the recent crisis just how perilous those deficiencies can be. We at the Dallas Fed believe, based on the experience of the last five years, that the largest financial institutions are a dagger pointed at the heart of our economy. We are not alone. Even the local paper in the denizen of the megabanks, the New York Times , recently editorialized regarding the controversies surrounding JPMorgan Chase: “The underlying problem is not only this or that violation, but the fact that the sheer size and scope and complexity of the banking behemoths defy controls, encouraging speculation and bad behavior.” [5] We at the Dallas Fed would add that they undermine free-market capitalism and jeopardize our economic welfare. But we would note that it is unfair to single out JPMorgan Chase as a culprit. It is only one of a set of megabanks that remain a threat to financial stability. Indeed, Bob Diamond, the former head of the megabank Barclays, recently warned in a Financial Times op-ed that additional steps are needed “if we are to avoid the kind of capital regulatory arbitrage that weakened the financial system.” [6] And on Friday, the Wall Street Journal’s lead editorial said: “The policy of too big to fail has been codified and expanded. Dodd–Frank lets Washington’s wise men define ‘systemically important’ institutions subject to stricter regulation … [But] Dodd–Frank’s … great conceit is that in a crisis these firms will be wound down without a rescue. They even have to provide ‘living wills’ that are supposed to plan the funeral. But the law also gives regulators the freedom to protect creditors as they see fit, which they will surely do in a panic. The difference next time will be that more firms will be deemed too big to fail.” The Journal’s editorial highlighted this in bold print: “The financial system is more regulated than ever, but also no safer.” [7] It would appear that the editors of these three great newspapers have been reading my speeches and Congressional testimony! They seem to agree with me and Harvey that TBTFs or “systemically important financial institutions” (SIFIs) might easily again play the nefarious role they did five years ago in bringing down our economic and financial system. (The acronym SIFI sounds like some kind of communicable disease transmitted through reckless behavior. In the event of another crisis brought on by the behavior that SIFIs still appear to have leeway to engage in, my guess is the acronym would come to stand for “Save If Failure Impending”). Am I exaggerating when I say that the TBTFs are a dagger pointed at the heart of the economy? To be sure, there were many causes and tripwires for the financial debacle from which we are still struggling to recover—a debacle that we at the Dallas Fed estimate cost more than an entire year’s worth of U.S. economic output, or more than $120,000 per American household. [8] Among those causes and tripwires were the unbridled advent of toxic forms of structured finance, complicity by the ratings agencies, and even the Fed’s own role: keeping interest rates too low for too long, rebuffing Fed Governor [Edward] Gramlich’s attempts to regulate subprime lending, and blessing the increased consolidation of banking. As my Dallas Fed colleague, John Duca, gently reminds me, there was more than a little “we have met the enemy and he is us” that contributed to the perfect storm of forces that led our economy into that frightful and costly tailspin. [9] But still, the TBTF behemoths were indisputably what the Bank of England’s Andy Haldane called “super-spreaders” of the virus that brought our financial system and economy to its knees. [10] They retain that potential today. For in the aftermath of the crisis and the passage of Dodd–Frank, the giants have gotten bigger, and the profitability of the community and regional banks that might pose meaningful, healthy competition has been undermined by the legislation’s complexity. Dodd–Frank claims to end TBTF. Instead, as the Wall Street Journal editorialized, it entrenches the TBTF pathology. The megabanks remain a potential lethal force. As mentioned, I will be speaking at length on this subject in New York in October. A Deliberate Deflection As I said at the beginning of my remarks, I am going to try to avoid answering questions you might have about last week’s FOMC meeting and what some in the press have now labeled “the taper caper.” Nearly every Federal Reserve Bank president and his or her sister will be speaking to this topic this week, so you will be getting an earful of cacophonous comments on this subject. Today, I will simply say that I disagreed with the decision of the committee and argued against it. Here is a direct quote from the summation of my intervention at the table during the policy “go round” when Chairman [Ben] Bernanke called on me to speak on whether or not to taper: “Doing nothing at this meeting would increase uncertainty about the future conduct of policy and call the credibility of our communications into question.” I believe that is exactly what has occurred, though I take no pleasure in saying so. Enough said. Thank you for what you do for the business and citizens of Texas. And thank you for listening. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. Since banks borrow short-term funds from depositors and lend for longer terms, the gap between interest earned on loans and interest paid to depositors typically benefits from a steep yield curve, or the difference between the yields on the 10-year Treasury bond and the three-month Treasury bill. “Trading revenue” represents the net gains/losses from trading cash instruments and derivative contracts. The “Texas ratio” is defined as the ratio of loans past-due 90 days or more, nonaccrual loans, and other real estate owned relative to equity capital, plus loan loss reserves, less intangibles. “Small-business loans” are commercial and industrial loans and loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential property, with original amounts of $1 million or less. “Chasing JPMorgan Chase,” New York Times , Sept. 2, 2013, p. A16. “Bob Diamond Calls for Bank Rules Shake-up,” by Tom Braithwaite and Patrick Jenkins, Financial Times , Sept. 16, 2013, p. 1. “The Government Won on Financial Reform,” Wall Street Journal , Sept. 20, 2013, p. A14. “Assessing the Costs and Consequences of the 2007–09 Financial Crisis and Its Aftermath,” by David Luttrell, Tyler Atkinson and Harvey Rosenblum, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Letter , vol. 8, no. 7, 2013, www.dallasfed.org/research/eclett/2013/el1307.cfm . Cartoonist Walt Kelly’s satire cartoon Pogo coined this phrase as a parody of a message sent from U.S. Navy Commodore Oliver Hazard Perry to Army General William Henry Harrison after the 1813 Battle of Lake Erie: “We have met the enemy, and they are ours.” See “The Birds and the Bees, and the Big Banks,” by Andrew Haldane and Robert May, Financial Times , op-ed, Feb. 20, 2011. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Uncertainty Matters Richard Fisher's remarks before the Causes & Macroeconomic Consequences of Uncertainty Conference October 3, 2013 Dallas Speech in PDF Thank you, Evan [Koenig].[ 1 ] It is a pleasure to share this platform with John Taylor. I first met John at a Carnegie Foundation seminar when he was Undersecretary of the Treasury; I have been among the legions of his admirers ever since. He is thoughtful, no-nonsense and, importantly, dedicated to making monetary policy work with maximum efficacy. We at the Dallas Fed are grateful that he chairs the advisory board of our Globalization and Monetary Policy Institute. And we all, as Americans, are grateful for his service and dedication to our country. Thank you, John, for being the good patriot and man that you are. Uncertainty Matters Uncertainty matters. A lot. This won’t be a surprise to many of you. The first thing you are taught in any MBA program, be it at Stanford, where I earned my degree, or anywhere else, is that “business” is the process of managing under conditions of uncertainty. All business executives worth their salt organize their teams and resources to minimize uncertainty of factors under their control; and they develop contingencies and operating tactics and strategies for factors over which they have no direct control. Obviously, the less-clear external influences are, the greater the degree of angst about budgeting and planning for the future. Even the saltiest of helmsmen cannot confidently navigate a ship in a dense fog. Going back to the earliest days of the current recovery, my business contacts have regularly complained of the fog of uncertainty emanating from Washington: They have consistently cited fiscal and regulatory uncertainty as major impediments to capital investment and expanding payrolls. Given uncertainty about the implications for overhead of the Affordable Care Act and other government mandates, they’ve complained of not knowing what their all-in labor and other costs will be and of how that lack of knowledge has made long-term employment planning nearly impossible. I’m sure that many of you have heard similar complaints—or have voiced them yourselves. What you may not realize is that until quite recently, economists who study business cycles and monetary policy paid scant attention to the effects of uncertainty on aggregate job and output growth. The profession’s standard models assume that the economy is populated with households and firms that are identical to one another, or that people and businesses can insure away individual risk and so are effectively, theoretically, identical. It’s become standard practice, too, to assume that decision-makers are hyper-rational in how they form their expectations of future policy and future events; they are assumed to fully understand how the economy works. To be sure, the economy is subject to shocks, so that its course is unpredictable. But that uncertainty, according to this school of theory, is of no real consequence for households’ decisions about how much to save and consume, or businesses’ decisions about how much to hire and invest. The technical term is “certainty equivalence”: In standard models, choices depend on what you expect will happen and not on the degree to which you are confident in your predictions. Such thinking is far removed from reality and, thankfully, there’s increasing recognition of that fact. A variety of uncertainty indexes have been developed and their importance in theory and in practice examined.[ 2 ] Pretty uniformly, these studies suggest that changes in uncertainty have significant economic effects and that uncertainty has been elevated in recent years. In theoretical analyses, the impact of uncertainty is especially great when realistic financial and informational frictions prevent risk from being spread optimally. Because of such frictions, for example, debt contracts often require that borrowers post collateral. When uncertainty increases, so do collateral requirements, tightening credit and increasing the value of “safe” assets relative to other assets.[ 3 ] There’s more than one type of uncertainty. There’s uncertainty about future average tax rates on investment income, for example, or the future pace of average labor productivity gains. This is aggregate uncertainty. There is also uncertainty that widens the distribution of asset returns across firms or the distribution of income prospects across households, while leaving aggregate average asset returns and aggregate average productivity prospects unchanged. This is cross-sectional uncertainty. Finally, there’s the uncertainty that you feel when you think that you understand how the world works and then discover that you don’t because something happens that you thought unlikely to happen.[ 4 ] In the extreme, these are “black swan” events: the “oh spit” moments we experience when we realize that we have fundamentally and disastrously miscalculated. Black swans induce paradigm shifts: The world—or, at least, our thinking about the world—is never the same again. The Great Depression was one such event. The housing-market collapse that began in 2006 and then spilled over to financial markets is another. If the U.S. government defaults on its debt later this month, we’ll have a third example. The unthinkable will have become real, and the “full faith and credit” of the United States will be a mirage rather than accepted fact. There are myriad other events that, on a much smaller scale, lead people to question their understanding of the rules. For example, the recent decision of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to maintain the pace of its large-scale asset purchases in the face of a generally improving labor market outlook and a widespread perception within financial markets, right or wrong, that the Fed had telegraphed a dialing back of the rate of purchases may have increased uncertainty about the future path of monetary policy. That was one argument raised against the decision not to taper. I know, because I made the argument, and I was not alone. Most real-world fiscal and regulatory uncertainty is a mix of aggregate and cross-sectional uncertainty. Given the aging of the U.S. population, we know that the revenues required to finance entitlement programs will certainly have to increase in coming decades. “Entitlement reform” may ameliorate the problem but won’t eliminate it. Government purchases will have to be cut, relative to baseline projections, and tax revenues will certainly have to be increased. But exactly which programs will be cut and which taxes increased, and when, is unclear and has been further muddled by the behavior of fiscal policy makers these past few days. The financial crisis and subsequent recession exacerbated these problems by increasing the outstanding stock of debt. U.S. federal government debt held by the public has increased from 34 percent of potential GDP at the business-cycle peak in first quarter 2001 (shortly before the 9/11 attacks) to 36 percent in fourth quarter 2007 (just prior to the Great Recession) to 70 percent of potential GDP today. This increased debt has been manageable as a result of a substantial fall in interest rates. Indeed, interest on the public debt has trended downward from 4.7 percent of potential GDP in 1990 to 3.2 percent in 2007 to just 2.1 percent in 2012 as the average interest rate on Treasury securities has dropped from 9 percent to 5 percent, then to its recent level of 2½ percent. Rates obviously cannot continue to fall, though, so the cost of servicing debt is sure to increase, even if the size of the debt relative to the economy stabilizes. The Canary in the Mine: Capital Investment Capital investment is the economy’s canary in the mine because it’s often the first thing to succumb to uncertainty. Also, once undertaken, capital investment is costly to reverse. Investment has certainly been unusually sluggish in the wake of the recent recession. Going back to when our data begin, in 1947, net investment as a percent of GDP has fluctuated around a constant mean of 5.6 percent.[ 5 ] It boomed in the late 1990s, reaching 8.1 percent of GDP, its highest level in over 50 years. The only higher quarter on record was the second quarter of 1950 (shortly after John Taylor and I came into this world, although I am not implying causality). Its peak during the 2001–07 expansion was an unremarkable 6.9 percent, but the subsequent plunge was unprecedented in the post-World War II data: The U.S. capital stock actually shrank during the second half of 2009. Relative to its 5.6 percent long-run average, net investment as a percent of GDP fell by twice as far as it had in any prior postwar recession. More to the point, the recovery in investment has been exceptionally anemic. Today, four full years after the trough of the recession in second quarter 2009, net investment as a percent of GDP is still only 3.2 percent—a level typical of past recession lows. Net investment as a percent of GDP was last at or above its 5.6 percent long-run mean 6½ years ago. Small wonder then that nonfarm payroll employment has been slow to recover too. Through August we had restored less than 80 percent of the 8.7 million jobs lost during the Great Recession. Less well known is the fact that real GDP per capita only recovered its prerecession peak this past summer.[ 6 ] That’s 5½ years to make up the ground lost during the recession. Previous post-WWII recoveries never required more than nine quarters maximum. A Dallas Fed analysis suggests that the recent financial crisis and its aftermath put the U.S. back by more than an entire year’s worth of output, an equivalent of more than $120,000 per American household.[ 7 ] Baker-Bloom-Davis and Better Comprehending Uncertainty And what of uncertainty? I mentioned earlier that we now have several uncertainty indexes. One of these, focused on measuring policy uncertainty, was developed by our moderator, Nick Bloom, together with Scott Baker at Stanford and Steven Davis of the University of Chicago. The index is based on three different types of information: (1) a count of articles referencing uncertainty, the economy and policy that have appeared in prominent U.S. newspapers (including the nation’s premier paper, the Dallas Morning News ); (2) a weighted count of tax-code provisions that are scheduled to expire; and (3) the extent to which professional forecasters disagree with one another about future levels of inflation and government purchases. The Baker-Bloom-Davis index begins in January 1985 and runs through the present. High values of the index signal an elevated level of economic policy uncertainty. From 1985 through 2007—prior to the 2008–09 recession—the index has a mean of 94, and it exceeds 150 only 2 percent of the time (one month in 50; just six times in over 23 years). The index rose to above-average levels in the fall of 2007 and stayed at or above 94—but below 150—through the summer of 2008. Then, between August and September 2008, the index nearly doubled, rising from 96 to 188. Since September 2008, the index has at no time dropped below 100, and it has exceeded 150 on 31 occasions—more than half the time. It has soared above 200 twice: for two months in 2011, coincident with that year’s debt-ceiling debate, and in December 2012, when a compromise implementation of sequestration was being hammered out. It’ll be interesting to see what happens with the index in the wake of the past week’s developments (or lack thereof) in Washington. The point is that starting with the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, economic policy uncertainty has been consistently high, and half the time it has been extraordinarily high. It’s difficult to prove “beyond a reasonable doubt” that this elevated uncertainty is causally related to the weak recovery we’ve experienced. But the hypothesis is surely sensible, the timing is certainly auspicious, and enough careful confirming analysis has been done to say that the preponderance of evidence favors the proposition that not just recent policy decisions, but also the manner in which those decisions were arrived at, have been a significant hindrance to economic expansion. The Kinky Stuff: Monetary Policy As to monetary policy, I would submit there are several links between monetary policy and economic uncertainty. First, though, some background. Ordinarily, monetary policy works by influencing the current and expected near-term levels of short-term interest rates. Once short-term interest rates hit zero, however, the Fed turned to unconventional policies. By using massive purchases of longer-term Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities, these policies helped hold down term premia and support the housing recovery. Simultaneously, the Fed tried—and I emphasize tried because the message seems to have been garbled in the minds of some intended recipients—to influence expectations of its own behavior once asset purchases have run their course. These “asset-purchase” and “forward-guidance” policies are relatively unfamiliar, and their impact is uncertain. One implication is that aggregate fiscal shocks—and, hence, also aggregate fiscal uncertainties—are likely to have outsize effects in current circumstances. Contractionary fiscal policy that would ordinarily drive down interest rates, providing offsetting stimulus to private expenditure, will have a larger-than-typical economic impact because this “crowding in” is absent once interest rates are confined to the zero lower bound. Expansionary fiscal policy, similarly, will fail to “crowd out” private expenditure if interest rates hold steady. Second, because the zero bound complicates the conduct of monetary policy and short-circuits fiscal crowding out, it introduces a “kink,” or discontinuity, in the economy’s behavior. The existence of a kink means that uncertainty matters even if ordinarily it would not: “Certainty equivalence” no longer applies. When real growth and/or inflation prospects are weak—so that the economy is operating near the zero bound—downside risks to growth and inflation loom larger than they ordinarily would. More-aggressive-than-usual policy responses may be appropriate to avoid the negative implications of an encounter with the zero bound. Paradoxically, though, once the lower bound on interest rates is binding, a less-than-usually-aggressive monetary policy response may be appropriate. I have tried to articulate this in FOMC meetings ever since we started down the path of quantitative easing, drawing on anecdotal reports from my CEO contacts and what I thought was common sense. But my arguments fell on deaf ears until my more learned counterpart at the San Francisco Fed, John Williams, produced a formal study that posited that the aggressive use of unfamiliar policy tools like quantitative easing and Operation Twist add to aggregate economic uncertainty and, if applied at all, should be deployed more cautiously than our more familiar tools.[ 8 ] Large Margins of Error In general, the objective of monetary policy is to provide households and firms with an economic environment that makes it attractive to use money as medium of exchange and store of value. Since many private contracts, including labor and debt contracts as well as capital expenditure commitments, extend out several years, a multiyear policy perspective is needed. A multiyear perspective is especially important when the economy may encounter the zero bound. The explanation is that by interfering with the normal conduct of monetary policy, the zero bound increases the likelihood that policy will miss its objectives year after year in the same direction, so that the errors accumulate over time. Over the past five years, for example, PCE inflation has averaged 1.2 percent per year. The FOMC’s announced long-term inflation objective is 2.0 percent. Over a single year, the difference between 1.2 percent and 2.0 percent inflation is inconsequential. Over five years, though, that small difference cumulates to a 4.26 percentage point difference in the price level, which is not insignificant, perhaps, if back in 2008 you took out a mortgage with a five-year balloon. Alternatively, nominal GDP growth over the past five years has averaged 2.4 percent per year, when ordinarily one might have expected 4.5 percent average annual growth (2.5 percent real growth plus 2.0 percent inflation). Again, the difference is inconsequential in any given year. Accumulated over five years, though, the level of nominal income today is fully 12 percent below what might reasonably have been expected when mortgage and auto loan agreements were made back in 2008. Kindly note that I am not advocating any change to the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation target. My point is simply to highlight the longer-term consequences of what might appear to be smallish, shorter-term deviations from the norm. Business operators plan capital expenditure and payrolls not in one- or two- or even three-year increments; they plan and budget over longer-term horizons. The nominal stability that people need if they are going to negotiate multiyear contracts is a multiyear nominal stability. A policy that “lets bygones be bygones” from year to year may not achieve this kind of stability, especially when policy options can become constrained, in the short term, by the zero bound. A policy that takes a longer-term perspective and is properly communicated and executed—so as to instill confidence that monetary policy will hew to a 2 percent inflation target rather than fixate on the run-rate of the past four quarters or the outlook for the next four—may better supply the longer-term comfort that households and businesses need to plan and budget. Such a policy would reduce the uncertainty that monetary policy as it is currently conducted spawns and would be more effective in doing its part to assist in economic expansion.[ 9 ] A Dime Between Two Nickels I hope this is enough to get a conversation started. I will now turn the microphone over to John Taylor. In doing so, I am reminded of Ross Perot’s quip when he was placed between Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush for a predebate photograph in the 1992 presidential election. Noting that Mr. Perot was substantially shorter than the other two men, a reporter asked him how he felt. His reply: “I feel like a dime between two nickels.” In contrast, compared to John Taylor, I feel like an intellectual dwarf—a mere penny sitting on the dais next to John’s $100 bill brain. And I’m talking about the new, difficult to replicate $100 bill that will be released next Tuesday. Please join me in welcoming John Taylor to the podium. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. The speaker is indebted to Dallas Fed Senior Vice President and Principal Policy Advisor Evan Koenig for his input in developing the themes articulated in this speech. Uncertainty indexes are described and analyzed in the following recent papers: “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty,” by Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom and Steven J. Davis, unpublished manuscript, 2013; “Surprise and Uncertainty Indexes: Real-Time Aggregation of Real-Activity Macro Surprises,” by Chiara Scotti, unpublished manuscript, 2013; “Fiscal Volatility Shocks and Economic Activity,” by Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Keith Kuester and Juan Rubio-Ramírez, unpublished manuscript, 2012; “Risk Shocks,” by Lawrence Christiano, Roberto Motto and Massimo Rostagno, National Bureau of Economic Research, NBER Working Paper no. 18682, January 2013; and “Uncertainty Shocks Are Aggregate Demand Shocks,” by Sylvain Leduc and Zheng Liu, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper no. 2012-10, January 2013. See “The Leverage Cycle,” by John Geanakoplos, in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2009 , vol. 24, Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff and Michael Woodford, eds., Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010, pp. 1–65. See, also, “Reviewing the Leverage Cycle,” by Ana Fostel and John Geanakoplos, Yale University, Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper no. 1918, September 2013. This type of uncertainty is analyzed in “Understanding Uncertainty Shocks and the Role of Black Swans,” by Anna Orlik and Laura Veldkamp, unpublished manuscript, 2013. Net investment includes additions to fixed capital net of depreciation. Real GDP per capita was $49,655 in 2009 dollars in second quarter 2013 versus $49,610 in fourth quarter 2007. See “Assessing the Costs and Consequences of the 2007–09 Financial Crisis and Its Aftermath,” by David Luttrell, Tyler Atkinson and Harvey Rosenblum, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Economic Letter , vol. 8, no. 7, 2013, www.dallasfed.org/research/eclett/2013/el1307.cfm . See “A Defense of Moderation in Monetary Policy,” by John C. Williams, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper no. 2013-15, July 2013. For more information about tightening control of inflation expectations by putting a five-year inflation rate, in place of the usual four-quarter inflation rate, in the Taylor rule, see “All in the Family: The Close Connection Between Nominal-GDP Targeting and the Taylor Rule,” by Evan Koenig, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas Staff Papers , No. 17, March 2012. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Remarks for $100 Bill Launch Richard Fisher's remarks for $100 Bill Launch at Houston Branch October 8, 2013 Houston Thank you for coming. This is a significant day in the life of U.S. currency. We are here today to announce that we are putting into general circulation the newly redesigned $100 bill — which is the most sophisticated piece of currency the United States has ever produced. The $100 note is the most widely circulated and most often counterfeited U.S. bill around the world, and this new note incorporates advanced technology to combat counterfeiting. We estimate that nearly two-thirds of $100 bills circulate outside the U.S. That is why it’s important for our nation to stay ahead of counterfeiting and maintain the integrity of our currency. Starting today — any commercial bank, savings and loan, or credit union that orders $100 notes from the Federal Reserve will receive this new design. Consumers can expect to find it in their hands in a matter of days, depending upon where they bank. As you know, U.S. currency is printed by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, an arm of the Treasury Department. The BEP then ships the bills to the Federal Reserve Banks, which put them into circulation through financial institutions. We at the Federal Reserve like to point out that all U.S. bills are technically Federal Reserve Notes. All U.S. currency is printed at the BEP’s plants in Washington, D.C., and Fort Worth, Texas. Those are the only two places in the world where U.S. money is printed — legally printed. We are particularly proud of the new $100 note because the vast majority of them have been printed in Fort Worth. When you receive one, you may notice a small “FW” printed on the front. This, of course, designates the work of the Fort Worth facility. So in this great state — with its strong economy — not only do we make money in Texas, but we make money in Texas. So what’s so special about this bill, besides its Texas roots? There are a good number of anti-counterfeiting measures designed into this new issuance, but consumers will quickly notice two new features. First, on the front of the note, you’ll find a blue 3-D security ribbon. This ribbon is woven into the paper, not printed on it. The ribbon features images of the Liberty Bell and the numeral 100. If you tilt the note back and forth, the bells change to100s as they move side to side. If you tilt the note side to side, the bells and 100s move up and down. Also, on the front, there is a bell in an inkwell. This is a color-shifting bell inside a copper inkwell. The inkwell and bell are both copper. When you tilt the note back and forth, the bell changes from copper to green. The bill retains the watermark portrait of Benjamin Franklin, visible when you hold the bill up to light. These anti-counterfeiting measures are incorporated not only to deter bad guys from replicating our money, but also to help protect consumers and business operators from losses. It only takes a few seconds to check the new $100 bill to make sure it’s real. Simply put — these bills are hard to replicate but easy to authenticate. Remember, if you receive a counterfeit bill — of any denomination — you cannot turn it in for a genuine note. So it’s important to know what real money looks like. All of this may lead people to believe there is a large-scale counterfeiting problem in the U.S., and that’s not the case. Few U.S. notes are reported counterfeit. This new $100 note is our latest proactive step to ensure America stays ahead of counterfeiting technology around the world. It’s important for consumers to know that it is not necessary to trade in their old $100 bills for new ones. All designs of U.S. currency remain legal tender, regardless of when they were issued. The United States has never recalled, de-monetized or de-valued its currency as updated bills were issued. As the older designs make their way through the banking system, they will eventually get returned to the Federal Reserve, where they will be recycled. We think of it as sending the old bills to money heaven. This process ensures that the money consumers receive from banks is safe, fit and secure. Thank you all for coming. This concludes our formal remarks, but we have several officials here from the Federal Reserve — including myself — who will be happy to answer your questions. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) Annus Horribilis or Annus Mirabilis ? Remarks before the Economic Club of New York on Oct. 17, 2013. October 17, 2013 New York City Speech in PDF Thank you Bill [Dudley]. It is a pleasure to be introduced by my colleague from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Bill is a friend as well as a colleague. Though it is our custom at the Federal Reserve to only speak for ourselves and never for any other member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), I think I can safely say that all 11 of Bill’s fellow Federal Reserve Bank presidents and, indeed, all the governors at the Federal Reserve Board, are grateful for Bill’s skillful leadership and total devotion to our collective mission. He is a hopeless golfer but a great human being. I want to take this opportunity to formally thank him for his service to the Fed and to our country. Robert Roosa and Wild Dreams It is a very special honor for me to speak at the Economic Club of New York. My very first job after graduating from Stanford Business School was at Brown Brothers Harriman and Co. as the policy assistant to Robert Roosa. Bob Roosa was the proud chairman of the Economic Club from 1970 to 1971. He used to regale me with its history, of how anybody who was of consequence had spoken here, from Presidents Wilson and Eisenhower and Kennedy to Winston Churchill and Indira Gandhi and Zhu Rongji (and many others since). I mentioned this to my wife Nancy before flying up here. Without much humility, I asked her, “In your wildest dreams did you ever think that your husband would follow in the footsteps of the world’s great leaders and speak to the Economic Club of New York?” You know what her answer was? “Richard, we have been married for 40 years. You don’t appear in my wildest dreams.” The Nightmare of Fiscal Policy I came to speak to you this morning not of pleasant dreams but of the nightmare of fiscal indecision and political chicanery that emanates from Washington, the risk it poses to the reputation of our nation, and the limits it imposes on monetary policy. I did not come to speak of whether or not we should or might “taper” our asset purchases at the next meeting of the FOMC. Or of how Janet Yellen will lead the committee when she succeeds Ben Bernanke. Or how I might vote when I rotate into a voter’s slot on the FOMC next year. I would be happy to avoid answering those and any other questions you might have during the Q&A session. Errol Flynn and Felix Rohatyn The iconic actor Errol Flynn (who, to the best of my knowledge, was not a member of the Economic Club) is reported to have quipped that his legendary financial problems lay “in reconciling my gross habits with my net income.” This is the most concise description I can marshal to explain the problem plaguing our nation’s fiscal authorities. And it has not changed with the 11th-hour temporary agreement reached last night by the leaders of Congress and the president. Kicking the can down the road for a few months will not solve the pathology of fiscal misfeasance that undermines our economy and threatens our future. I have no doubt that we will go on indefinitely increasing the debt ceiling, be it in a regular or a herky-jerky, just-in-the-nick-of-time pattern. For no president or congressional leader dares risk being recorded in the history books as having consciously presided over default and the destruction of “the full faith and credit of the United States.” Republican or Democrat, all know full well that your fellow New Yorker, Felix Rohatyn, was spot-on some 37 years ago during New York’s great fiscal crisis when he likened default to “someone stepping into a tepid bath and slashing his wrists—you might not feel yourself dying, but that’s what would happen.” [1] But there is, I believe, a limit of tolerance for our government’s fiscally counterproductive, Errol Flynn-like ways. I believe that razor in hand, we are stepping toward Rohatyn’s tepid bath and that the full faith and credit of the United States government is, in fact, at risk. Haircuts … We saw an expression of this last Thursday when Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Ltd. announced it would apply an increased “haircut” to its valuation of U.S. Treasury securities held as collateral against futures trades, with Treasuries maturing in less than one year receiving a risk discount of 3 percent. This was printed on Friday in a highlighted box above the fold on the front page of the Financial Times . Opposite was a picture of Chinese Premier Li Keqiang, who the paper reported had “signaled Beijing’s increasing concern at an Asian summit” and then provided a kindly no-wonder reminder that “China has about 60 percent of its $3.5 trillion foreign currency reserves invested in U.S. assets.” [2] The FT could easily have substituted Premier Li’s picture with one of the German chancellor or the Japanese or British prime minister or the Mexican president, or any other world leader or business operator or simple observer of events, and ascribed to any of them a more explicit but surely pervasively held concern: “What the hell is happening to America?” Has the American ship of state, as Maureen Dowd wrote yesterday, turned into a “ship of fools”? [3] … and Tipping Points My heart bleeds for my country, for no amount of monetary accommodation, no conceivable amount of “large-scale asset purchases,” no clever new monetary innovation by the Federal Reserve can offset the rot that is destroying our fiscal house and the blight it spreads over our economy. To be clear, the Federal Reserve will take all appropriate measures to preserve money market functioning and stability in periods of acute distress. I view this as an integral part of our formal dual mandate. Chaotic money markets threaten both price stability and business activity and employment. However, it is not our job to fix the budget impasse. Any initiatives we might have to undertake in the course of our duty as a central bank to prevent serious disruptions of U.S. dollar funding markets should not be executed in a way that they might be construed to substitute for fiscal redress. Fundamental, structural imbalances in our economy might be temporarily obscured but cannot be permanently resolved by monetary sleight of hand. Indeed, I argue that the current monetary accommodation policy of purchasing $85 billion a month in Treasuries and MBS (mortgage-backed securities) risks exacerbating the situation: There is a tipping point where monetary accommodation comes to be viewed not as a pleasant stimulus that levitates bond and stock and housing markets leading to a felicitous “wealth effect,” but instead as an agent of financial recklessness. None of us really know where that tipping point is. But with each dollar of Treasury and MBS purchases the FOMC instructs the New York desk to make, we inch closer to it. For the remainder of Ben Bernanke’s leadership and from the very first moment of his successor’s, the FOMC will have to astutely maneuver so as to avoid crossing a line that no Nobel laureate or econometric modeler or quant-jock or dealer or market operator can identify ex-ante. I admit to a preoccupation with this concern. This much I know: As long as inflationary expectations are held at bay, we can fully open the monetary throttle in an effort to deliver on the mandate Congress gave us to help achieve full employment. But it is for naught as long as the fiscal authorities are slamming on the brakes and leaving everyone in the dark as to how they will cure the fiscal mess they have wrought. No rational businesswoman or man will or should make a long-term commitment to expanding their workforce or commit their precious capital to significant job-creating projects if they have no idea what their taxes will be or how government spending will impact them or their customers or suppliers. And no manager can plan or budget forward while simultaneously working under the yoke of ever-expanding regulations that render incalculable their cost structure, including the full-in cost of the most important variable in that cost structure—the workforce—as long as the Affordable Care Act remains more of a mystery than a clear, understandable program. The creative capacity of American business for dealing with uncertainty is unparalleled. But doubts caused by fiscal malfunctioning so extreme that the “risk-free rate” of the world’s largest economy and reserve currency is called into question are of a different kind and character than the everyday uncertainties that even the most gifted manager is trained to handle. How does one discount the value of payables and receivables for next year when the world wonders if the U.S. government will validate the full value of Treasury bills? The Fed to the Rescue? It is true that unlike the Congress, the FOMC actually makes decisions and does so in a civil manner—both lost traits in Washington. But it is a myth that we have the power on our own to propel our economy forward. We can provide the fuel, but we can’t engage the gears of the engine of employment. Only businesses can do that. And businesses cannot do it when they haven’t an inkling of how the fiscal mess that is Washington will be resolved. The simple observation is that U.S. businesses and households need confidence that fiscal policy will be conducted responsibly—that revenues and expenditures will come into line, over time. Until that fog is lifted, do not expect the economy to steam forward at anything but a most cautious pace. Annus Horribilis or … In contemplating the fix we are in, I thought of a phrase used by Queen Elizabeth in her 1992 speech, marking the 40th anniversary of her accession to the throne. You may recall that was a year when a series of tragedies, including the burning of Windsor Castle, beset her family. With classic British understatement, she told her subjects: “1992 is not a year on which I shall look back with undiluted pleasure. … it has turned out to be an ‘Annus Horribilis’”—a “horrible year.” [4] We have suffered much on the financial and economic front these past many years. And, in fact, since 1976 we have on 17 occasions under six of the last seven U.S. presidents experienced a federal government disruption, including shutdowns. Since 2010, we have had eight budget conventions, to no avail. And we’ve seen several face-offs on the debt ceiling. But the cumulative effect of our government’s fiscal ineptitude and propensity to put off taking action on hard decisions, and the frustration I feel about the inability of even the most radical monetary policy to work in the absence of long-term fiscal probity, has tempted me to record 2013 as an annus horribilis . It is certainly not shaping up to be a year on which I shall look back with undiluted pleasure. Sound but Disagreeable It need not be so horrible, however. In fact, it may be a year of good fortune if our president and congressional leaders summon the courage to put partisan gamesmanship aside and finally craft tax and spending and regulatory policy that encourages businesses to take the cheap and abundant money the Fed has made possible—the cheapest in the 237-year history of the Republic!—and put it to use creating jobs and expanding the wealth of the entire nation, not just that of rich and quick financiers and those with the means to speculate and profit from volatility. Getting these incentives right is not an easy task. But it is crucial. One of the most exalted of the Economic Club’s long history of speakers, Winston Churchill, said, “In finance, everything that is agreeable is unsound and everything that is sound is disagreeable.” Continuing down the path of hypermonetary accommodation is certainly agreeable, especially if you are invested in stocks or bonds or have been able to refinance your mortgage and participate in the new housing boom. But carried on for too long, it is surely an unsound way to put our nation back on the path to respectability or eliminate the markets’ placing haircuts on the value of U.S. Treasuries. The only way for us to achieve sound footing is for our fiscal leaders to make politically disagreeable decisions. There is no other way for us to regain and maintain our standing as the most prosperous and powerful economy in the history of the world. Annus Mirabilis? I mentioned Queen Elizabeth’s annus horribilis . So as to not leave you despondent, I wish to remind you that the queen’s expression was a play on words in a poem written in 1667 by John Dryden, titled Annus Mirabilis —or Year of Miracles . Dryden was writing about the year that spanned 1665 and 1666. It began with the Great Plague of London—a pandemic akin to the bubonic plague—and ended with the Great Fire that burned London for five days. So why the title Year of Miracles ? Because from the wreckage, London rebuilt itself and arose from the ashes, with wide streets and buildings commissioned by Charles II and designed by Christopher Wren that were so solidly constructed they last to this day. Our collective task is to turn the current annus horribilis into an opportunity to emerge from the current fiscal wreckage stronger and more resilient than ever. If England could do it in the 17th century, we Americans, who have never, ever flinched from staring down and overcoming adversity, can certainly do it now. I am tempted to remind you of how Texas arose from the ashes of the 1980s oil bust and savings-and-loan crisis to lead the nation in job creation for several decades and become one of our most prosperous states. But I am not going to do so. I was going to tell you how in the Texas renaissance, as the U.S. has seen job destruction in the two middle-income quartiles for the past decade, Texas has seen job creation in those same middle-income groups and has outperformed the nation in creating jobs in the highest-income quartile, too. But I won’t. I am tempted to tell you that Texas came off the bottom to become the top exporting state in the United States. But I shan’t. Or that state laws and regulations crafted with the 1980s banking crisis in mind spared Texas the worst of the recent housing crisis. All these factors, of which I won’t breathe a word, have resulted in a workforce of some 12.8 million and, in 2006, catapulted the state to its ranking as the top destination for people who move across states. Americans and immigrants alike come to Texas to seek jobs and opportunity in what continues to be the nation’s most dynamic economy. I could tell you about that, but I will refrain from Texas brag. New York, New York Instead, let me point to New York as an example of what is possible. Some of you may remember the predicament in which New York found itself in 1975, the year I came to work at Brown Brothers. It was de facto bankrupt. Garbage piled up on the streets. Crime was rampant. Upper East Side apartments could be had simply for the assumption of maintenance costs. Nothing worked. Everything was dysfunctional. The outlook was so horrific that Mick Jagger wrote “Shattered” after a cab ride around the city. Remember the lyrics? “What a mess, this town’s in tatters/I’ve been shattered, my brain’s been battered/Splattered all over Manhattan …” Then, when the markets showed the city the back of its hand, leaders such as Felix Rohatyn and Gov. [Hugh] Carey and others stepped up to the plate. They and the people of New York turned something truly horribilis into a thing mirabilis . Disagreeable but sound decisions were made. Those decisions took a tattered, shattered city and put it on the path to becoming the bright, shiny, miraculous Big Apple that it is today. A Plea The Federal Reserve is limited in its power to make what took place in New York happen for our nation, and unless the fiscal authorities get their act together, looking to the Fed to solve the nation’s economic ills through ever-expansive monetary policy might well make the situation worse. So I end with a plea for our president and our Congress. The markets are restless. Your peers around the world are afraid. There is little remaining tolerance for agreeable but unsound decisions. The bond market is beginning to show us the back of its hand. It is time for leadership. Turning something horrible into something miraculous is the American thing to do. Please get on with it. Thank you. Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. As quoted in “Infamous ‘Drop Dead’ Was Never Said by Ford,” by Sam Roberts, New York Times , Dec. 28, 2006. “Asia Moves to Protect Itself, Just in Case,” by Jeremy Grant and Paul J. Davies, and “White House Edges Closer to Short-Term Debt Ceiling Deal,” by Richard McGregor, James Politi and Michael MacKenzie, Financial Times , Oct. 11, 2013. See “Pope Trumps President,” by Maureen Dowd, New York Times , p. A25. Speech by Queen Elizabeth II , marking the 40th anniversary of her accession, London, Nov. 24, 1992. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.

Speech by Richard W. Fisher, President and CEO (2005–2015) A U.S. Economic Update and Perspective on Monetary Policy Remarks before the Australian Business Economists on Nov. 4, 2013. November 4, 2013 Sydney, Australia Speech in PDF Thank you, Stephen [Halmarick]. I am thrilled to be back in Sydney. Earlier this morning, I visited Reserve Bank Governor Stevens and his staff and provided a read on the U.S. economy and monetary policy as of last week’s meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). I thought I would do the same for you this afternoon. I would then be happy, in the best tradition of central banking, to avoid answering any questions you have. To Begin, a Biographical Note As was mentioned by Stephen, I am indeed half Aussie. My father, Leslie Fisher, was a Queenslander. In 1910, at the age of five years and two months, he was arrested for begging on the streets in Maryborough and sentenced in the court there to seven years in the Westbrook Reformatory. [1] According to an article earlier this year in Toowoomba’s daily, The Chronicle, Westbrook was “the most feared reformatory in Australia.” The guards there meted out “vicious beatings.” [2] Thankfully, my father’s sentence was commuted after one month; “the little boy … is of tender years and not a fit subject,” wrote the Police Magistrate. My father was released to an orphanage, then shuttled among a series of harsh foster homes before making his way back to the streets and a remarkable career that took him from Toowoomba to Brisbane to South Africa, Mexico, China and the United States and, ultimately, to … the great republic of Texas! My dad lived to the ripe old age of 90. He was a tough old bird. And Aussie to the bone. For most of his life, he smoked three packs of cigarettes a day and drank a great deal of Scotch. He admitted to this one evening and a friend said, “Hold on. My father was a smoker and also drank a lot of Scotch. But he died at 60. What gives?” To which my father replied, “Well, he just didn’t do it long enough.” [3] The Westbrook prison is no more; indeed, the property on which it stood was sold in May of this year. But the courthouse in Maryborough where my father was sentenced still stands. On Wednesday, I will visit it to remind myself of where I come from. And to thank my lucky stars that I am the son of a gutsy Australian who managed in one generation to secure his family’s rise from homeless to Harvard, from begging for food to riches, from being a ward of the state to becoming a principal in the policymaking of the most important central bank in the world. So Stephen, when I say “I am thrilled” to be here, I mean it. I thank you for having me, the son of the humblest of Queenslanders, address such a distinguished audience here in Sydney. The Fed in Context Australia was in the grips of a great economic contraction when my father roamed the streets of Maryborough. The economic depression here reverberated from a lengthy economic downturn in the United States that crystalized in the Panic of 1907—the so-called “Rich Man’s Panic” beginning in May of that year. It saw the failure of the Knickerbocker Trust Co., the third-largest bank in New York, and many other banks of deposit in the U.S. as well as then-notable financial institutions in places as far away as Egypt, Japan, Hamburg, Chile and here, Down Under. [4] Early in 1907, Jacob Schiff of Kuhn Loeb & Co. gave a speech to the New York Chamber of Commerce. He warned that “unless we have a central bank with adequate control of credit resources, [the United States] will undergo the most severe and far-reaching money panic in history.” [5] His words were prescient. At the time, we did not have a central bank in the United States; we had not had one for over seven decades. The United States had two central banks before 1907: the First Bank of the United States lasted 20 years before its charter expired in 1811 and was not renewed by Congress; the Second Bank of the United States also lasted 20 years before being closed by President Andrew Jackson in 1836. In 1907, the American financial system was, for all practical purposes, under the control of a handful of financiers. Foremost among them was J.P. Morgan. Mr. Morgan was capable of maneuvering through the ups and downs of an economy and financial system without a central bank and become ever richer. The majority of American businesses and bankers could not and were waylaid by recession and financial panic. For all practical purposes, J.P. Morgan was the closest thing to a lender of last resort but was a profiteer, and thus a very poor substitute for a central bank that Jacob Schiff so rightly said we needed. The Panic of 1907 led to the creation by Congress of the National Monetary Commission and, to make a long story short, that commission, led by Sen. Nelson Aldrich of Rhode Island, laid the groundwork for President Woodrow Wilson and the Congress to create the Federal Reserve System in 1913 and establish the system’s 12 Federal Reserve Banks in 1914. The Fed is uniquely American in structure. It is disaggregated, with the working business of the central bank distributed across the land through 12 Federal Reserve districts. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas and its branches in Houston, San Antonio and El Paso conduct the Fed’s business and represent the perspectives of 27 million people and almost $1.5 trillion in annual output from Texas, northern Louisiana and southern New Mexico—roughly the equivalent of the population and output of Australia. The president of the United States appoints and the U.S. Senate confirms the chairman and the six other governors of the Fed who reside in Washington. The presidents who operate the business of our central bank through the dozen Federal Reserve Banks spread across the nation are not federal employees. They work under the supervision of the Federal Reserve Board, but serve at the pleasure of and answer to their own boards of directors that consist of nine private citizens from their individual Reserve Bank districts. The 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents represent the heartland of the country, “Main Street” as we say in the States. Unlike the Federal Reserve governors, we do not suffer in having to live in the politically charged atmosphere of Washington, D.C.; we operate banker’s banks rather than maneuvering around the lobbyists and rent seekers that leech off the political center of our nation. To make monetary policy, all 19 of these principals—the seven governors and the 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents—convene every six weeks as the FOMC under the leadership of the primus inter pares , the Federal Reserve Chairman. The mandate of the FOMC is to preserve price and financial stability while conducting monetary policy so as to engender full employment. Think of the Federal Reserve this way: President Wilson and the Congress of the United States formed a central bank to mitigate the risks of Americans suffering through the economically desperate conditions my father experienced as a child. Like my dad, the Fed has made mistakes and has far from a spotless record. Its role in the Great Depression of the 1930s, the Great Inflation of the 1970s and the run-up to the financial panic and ensuing deep recession of 2007–09 come to mind. But over the course of its hundred-year lifetime, the Fed has successfully anchored America’s prosperity. Current Policy What about now? Are we doing the job we are supposed to do? As you might imagine, given my roots as a half-Aussie and my being a full-blown Texan, and given that, as mentioned, the 12 Federal Reserve Bank presidents are not beholden to the president or Senate of the United States and fear no personal political retribution, I pull no punches when I discuss the U.S. economy and our monetary policy. The views I express today are my own and mine only. I say that the economy of the United States is hog-tied by a government that is sadly ineffective and, in fact, counterproductive. We have a government that hasn’t been able to agree on a budget in five years; that has historically, under both Republican and Democrat presidents and Congresses, spent money and committed itself to fund long-term programs without devising revenue streams to cover current costs or fund future liabilities. It is a government that is more effective at forming commissions to discuss what they might do—the president and Congress just recently have agreed to their ninth such commission in three years—than in getting anything done to provide businesses, employers, workers and the citizenry the certainty they need to confidently plan their futures. Under these circumstances, it is no small wonder American businesses are not expanding and growing jobs at the pace we at the Fed would like to see. It is no small wonder that our economy is growing at a substandard pace compared to previous recoveries. It is no small wonder that the most expansive monetary policy the FOMC has ever engineered has been hampered from accomplishing what it set out to do. In short, while the Fed has been moving at the speed of a boomer in full run, the federal government of the United States has at best exhibited the adaptive alacrity of a koala (without being anywhere near as cute). [6] This can be demonstrated with some simple math from the most elementary formula for calculating gross domestic product (GDP). Private expenditures on goods and services increased at a 3.2 percent rate over the expansion to date, whereas GDP has increased at 2.2 percent. One could say that GDP would have risen at 3.2 percent had government expenditure increased at the same rate as private expenditure. Or, more modestly, if government spending had just been held constant, instead of contracting, GDP would have grown at an annual rate of 2.6 percent. I am not a proponent of increasing government spending without restraint. And like most Aussies, I am averse to excessive government debt. I know that it is bothersome here that your debt-to-GDP ratio has risen to 30 percent presently from 18 percent before the global financial crisis. Indeed, I have been an outspoken critic of the U.S. government's fiscal promiscuity, which makes your 30 percent debt ratio look practically celibate by comparison. I mention this simply to illustrate a point: Unlike Australia—who could afford to ramp up spending during the financial crisis and even in the first half of 2013 through infrastructure spending to cushion the slowdown in mining—the excessively over-indebted U.S. government has, as mentioned, been hog-tied—prevented from providing stimulus. It has thus played a countercyclical, suppressive role. The inability of our government to get its act together has countered the procyclical role of the Federal Reserve. We have had to carry the ball solo. This is an unhealthy thing for any central bank and comes with not insignificant risks. Let me expand on this and describe, from my personal perspective, the pros and cons and cost/benefit analysis we must now consider as we contemplate future monetary policy. (The remaining remarks will be delivered from the podium). Notes The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. The records of these events are not available on the web and are, in part, handwritten in Queensland’s official records, which are not available publicly. For those interested, relevant documents are attached in the Appendix. See “Hammer Falls on Westbrook Prison’s Dark, Horrific Past,” The Chronicle, May 31, 2013, www.thechronicle.com.au/news/hammer-falls-westbrook-prisons-dark-horrific-past/1889865/ . With thanks to Charles Plosser for jogging my memory. The National Bureau of Economic Research dates the contraction from May 1907 to June 1908. In that one year and one month, the level of trade and industrial activity collapsed by more than 30 percent. See “The Panic of 1907 and Some of Its Lessons,” by Myron T. Herrick, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , March 1908, 31 (2): pp. 8–25. “Boomer” is Australian slang for kangaroo. Share this About the Author Richard W. Fisher served as president and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas from April 2005 until his retirement in March 2015.
