1 Presentation to the Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy and U.S. Embassy Speaker Series Singapore, Singapore By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on March 29, 2016 Trick of the Light? The U.S. Economy, Global Growth, and International Risks in Perspective Good evening. This is my second trip to Singapore, and I’m very pleased to be back—the people, the pace, and especially the food are wonderful. It’s been an amazing journey. As I’m sure you all know, the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate is maximum employment and price stability. In its simplest terms, we want everyone who wants a job to be able to find one and for inflation to average 2 percent per year. I mention it only because when we talk about U.S. monetary policy—particularly when so much recent attention has focused on global turbulence—the discussion can sometimes overlook that these two fundamental goals are central to the decisions we make. It’s important to remember that, as a Fed policymaker, I’m always going to view our decisions through the lens of those objectives. Now is probably a good time to inject the standard disclaimer that the views expressed today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. So having set that baseline, I’d like to talk to you this evening about where we are on each of those goals, where I see the U.S. and global economy headed, and how that informs my views on monetary policy. Importantly, I want to address some of the more prominent concerns that have made headlines lately—the spoiler alert is that it’s not as bad as everyone thinks. Employment 2 Turning first to U.S. employment, things are looking very good. There are a variety of measures to gauge the health of the labor market, but the most widely discussed, and most frequently used, is the unemployment rate. Unemployment will never be zero, because in any well-functioning economy, people leave jobs and new people enter the workforce. Economists use the term “natural rate of unemployment” to describe the optimal rate for an economy at full health. It’s hard to know what the exact number is, but I put the natural rate at about 5 percent. We’ve dipped just below that mark, to 4.9 percent, and I expect the unemployment rate to continue to edge down, reaching the mid-4s by late this year. This is a reflection of steady improvement in a labor market that has fully recovered from the recession and its aftermath, when we saw a peak of 10 percent. Of course, there are other indicators, which have been the focus of much debate and concern—workers who are part-time for economic reasons and the labor force participation rate have received particular attention. There is some worry that these represent a workforce in more trouble than the unemployment rate alone would indicate. But looking more closely at the data, we’ve actually come quite far on both. In fact, while part-time employment for economic reasons looks like it’s still somewhat elevated relative to historical norms, the labor force participation rate now appears to be consistent with its longer-term trend—or what we might more simply call “normal.”1 A further sign of labor market health is that more people are quitting their jobs. People have greater confidence that they’ll find work, and they’re probably right: Job vacancies are hovering around the highest levels since they started collecting the data back in 2000, and we added 2¾ million jobs in 2015. To sum up, we have either reached or are close to maximum employment across a broad range of markers. 1 Valletta, Bengali, and van der List (2015) and Aaronson et al. (2014). 3 U.S. inflation On the inflation side, we’re not quite where I’d like us to be, but recent developments have been very encouraging and add to my confidence that we’re on course to reach our goal. The Fed sets a target of 2 percent average inflation. I want to emphasize the word “average.” We don’t need inflation to be exactly 2 percent all the time, and small movements in either direction shouldn’t lead to alarm. We’re looking—on average, in the medium term—for inflation to be about 2 percent. Worry should only set in if it’s persistently above or below that number. I’d also like to stress the “above or below” part. Many people think that Fed policymakers’ concern lies disproportionately with inflation that’s too high. They think we view inflation lower than 2 percent as sort of “not great,” but see inflation above 2 percent as catastrophic. That’s not the case. In my view, inflation somewhat above 2 percent is just as bad as the same amount below. And here’s the one place I actually am speaking for others in the Federal Reserve System—the January Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) statement explicitly addressed this issue.2 For the past few years, inflation has been persistently too low, but we’re starting to see some upward movement. Over the past year, the Fed’s preferred inflation measure, the personal consumption expenditures price index, stands at 1 percentage point. Measures of underlying inflation like core inflation—which strips out volatile components like food and energy—or the trimmed mean, are running about 1¾ percent over the past year. Fed officials do understand that gas and groceries are important parts of household budgets. It’s just that for making policy, we need to look at the underlying trends that give us a better picture of where inflation is likely headed. 2 Board of Governors (2016). 4 All in all, the recent data reinforce my expectation that inflation is on track to move back to 2 percent over the next two years. The tug-of-war and mixed signals Current U.S. inflation pressures represent a tug-of-war that is playing out in the overall economy. On one side, falling prices for energy and most imported goods have pulled inflation down, reflecting the strong U.S. dollar and other international developments. On the other, rising prices for domestic services are mostly trying to yank us back to the 2 percent line. When you look at the parts of the American economy that are not traded globally, like housing rents, we’re seeing prices increase in a way that reflects a stronger, tightening economy. And in services more generally, inflation is running a touch above 2 percent. When we look at the U.S. domestic market in isolation, it shows strong growth. We’re just contending with outside forces. When the price of oil plummeted by some 70 percent and the value of the dollar increased by over 20 percent, it naturally influenced near-term inflation. But, with oil prices recouping some of their losses and the dollar stabilizing, the effects of these past movements should peter out. That’s another reason I’m confident that we’re on track to reach our inflation goal. Mixed signals can also be seen in the way certain sectors are slowing down while the overall economy keeps chugging ahead. Some sectors have underperformed lately, specifically those that are directly affected by the strong dollar, weak foreign demand, and falling energy and commodity prices. But the hardest-hit ones—manufacturing, drilling and mining, and agriculture—account for a relatively small share of employment and GDP. By contrast, the large domestic services sector—including restaurants, health care, and business services—is doing 5 quite well, and makes up the huge majority of American jobs. In last year’s impressive jobs growth, 93 percent were in services, including government. The forecast Despite recent financial market volatility, my overall outlook for both the U.S. and the global economy remains largely unchanged over the past few months. I’m not claiming that I can see for miles, but since autumn of last year, I’ve expected GDP growth to be a bit above 2 percent this year and the unemployment rate to fall to roughly 4½ percent by the end of the year. Some other economists’ growth forecasts have been revised down, like the Blue Chip consensus.3 But those numbers are actually now largely in line with what I’m predicting for 2016, which is far from grim. One reason my U.S. outlook has held steady is that the outlook for the rest of the world hasn’t changed much either. That may seem surprising, given the attention paid to financial volatility and melancholia about global growth over the past several months. But despite what might be implied by the public discussion, forecasts of world growth haven’t changed that much. For example, the latest forecast for global GDP growth in 2016 from the International Monetary Fund is about 3½ percent, down only one-half percentage point from a year ago and still better than the most recent estimate of 3 percent growth in 2015.4 Risks, concerns, and the global economy So let’s talk about the obvious risks and areas of economic concern that endless column inches have been dedicated to chronicling. I’m certainly not dismissing them, and our most recent FOMC statement was pretty clear that our glasses aren’t tinted by the rosy hue of U.S. domestic growth. 3 Blue Chip Economic Indicators (2016). 4 International Monetary Fund (2015, 2016). 6 In the popular discussion, market volatility and global economic developments have taken center stage. I understand the concern, and I’m carefully monitoring how things unfold. But I want to be clear what that means, and to clarify each in turn. While financial volatility and the accompanying fears have diminished somewhat since the beginning of the year, it’s still helpful to address the discussion, because it’s a recurring theme. It’s often said that the economy isn’t the stock market and the stock market isn’t the economy, which is very true. Short-term fluctuations or even daily dives aren’t accurate reflections of the state of the vast, multilayered U.S. economy. Watching a stock ticker isn’t the way to gauge America’s economic health. As Paul Samuelson famously said, the stock market has predicted nine out of the last five recessions. My concern isn’t as simple as whether markets are up or down; what’s important is how it impacts our monetary policy objectives. The same holds true for international developments. We live in a global economy and what happens in China or Europe or Brazil isn’t contained by national borders; the rest of us necessarily feel the effects. But others’ economic fates do not spell our own. The U.S. is affected by what happens around the world, but it is also powered by domestic demand and we make our own monetary policy, which has supported growth and strengthened our economy. The same holds true for other countries. Part of the reason the global economic forecast hasn’t changed that dramatically is that countries and central banks have taken policy steps to shore up growth, from Europe to Japan to China. There are factors slowing global growth, and they’re very real. But to some extent, the attention has distorted their size and scope, and it’s important to separate the facts from the chatter. The data don’t show that the song is over. Europe may be under something of a gray 7 cloud, but the death of European growth, to paraphrase Mark Twain, is greatly exaggerated. I don’t want to evince a stereotypical American overoptimism—and as a native Californian, I will admit to being an optimist in general—but I don’t see a looming global crisis. Growth expectations may be slightly tempered, but that’s a far cry from the triage bay we were in eight years ago. My view is essentially, let’s just stay on track. Let’s not get sidelined by the noise and distraction commentary can sometimes cause. A case in point is China. Yes, growth has slowed, but this largely reflects a pivot from a manufacturing-based economy to one driven by domestic consumption and services—the exact engines that are currently powering U.S. growth.5 Something that puts my assessment of China in perspective is that, again, my outlook hasn’t really changed. When I look back over my speeches from the past few years, I could easily recycle the passages on China for a talk today. I mention these shifts in forecast—or lack thereof—because they’re significant. Economists are driven by data and we are perfectly happy to revise our estimates as new information comes in or events unfold. We don’t even see it as saying we were wrong, we see it as having amended our view based on the data. This is marvelously helpful in everyday life, by the way: Try telling friends or family that you weren’t wrong, you’ve just amended your view based on data. In any event, China’s official decision to lower its growth goal to 6.5–7 percent has been treated by many as a harbinger of economic doom, foreshadowing an unexpected slowdown. But if you look at statements by the government, it’s completely consistent with the narrative of the past few years. Growth is going to slow somewhat, but it’s not a surprise, and it’s not a mark of an impending economic hard landing. 5 Williams (2015). 8 Of course, the effects of China’s economy do reverberate globally, and each country and region is affected differently by its neighbors and trading partners. I don’t want to sound like I’m preaching from my chair and the comfortable vantage of the U.S. For Asia-Pacific, China’s shift will clearly have an effect. Commodity-exporting nations, for example, are going to feel the change. Countries in the region can be, to some extent, a helpless dancer following China’s lead; as China pivots, the region is swept along by its steps. The path for monetary policy The interconnectedness of economics means other countries are considering how they’ll be affected by the U.S. as it continues its policy normalization. I made a point at the beginning of my remarks to highlight that I am a U.S. policymaker, and that my focus is on what’s correct for our domestic economy. But I’m not oblivious to the international effects of the decisions we make. I’m familiar with the adage that when the U.S. sneezes, the world catches a cold. The general concern is that normalization in the U.S. will cause market turbulence internationally. People often point to the “taper tantrum” of a few years ago as evidence of the far-reaching effects of Fed decisions. There are two main issues: first, raising interest rates; second, the balance sheet, which currently stands at some $4 trillion. The Fed has indicated that we expect to raise rates gradually, and we have made that abundantly clear in our communications. We took the first small step with a modest rate hike in December, and the future pace will be, as we’ve said repeatedly, gradual and thoughtful. As for the balance sheet, there’s a ways to go before we start to unwind it, and it won’t happen until normalization of the funds rate is well under way. After that, our plan is to shrink the balance sheet “organically,” through the maturation of the assets. It’s going to take at least six years to 9 get the balance sheet back to normal, which is in keeping with the overall approach to removing accommodation gradually.6 One of the lessons from the taper tantrum is that it’s not the policy that causes disruption, it’s the uncertainty. The actual tapering did not cause a negative market reaction. Our plans for both rate hikes and the balance sheet are steady and consistently communicated. It’s frankly the most telegraphed monetary policy of our lifetimes. What’s important about this, and what’s very good news, is that this is essentially the move back to normal. The conversation in the U.S. isn’t about another quantitative easing program, or about the need for new forms of policy accommodation. And a well-communicated gradual pace is the essence of boring; it’s not a surprise and shouldn’t roil markets. The turmoil we’re seeing right now is a response to events—concerns about China are about China and concerns about Europe are about Europe. They’re not about marginally higher interest rates in the U.S. I have every faith that those concerns will abate as world growth remains on track, and that policy in the U.S. will not only fail to roil markets, but will be a net positive for everyone— after all, a strong U.S. economy is good for the global economy. Conclusion All in all, my outlook is positive. I see continued growth in the U.S., and I don’t see the global situation as dire. The ability of governments and central banks to respond to their own needs while navigating global conditions may not be a miracle cure, but it offers stability. 6 Carpenter et al. (2015). 10 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. 2014. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197–255. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/projects/bpea/fall-2014/fall2014bpea_aaronson_et_al.pdf Blue Chip Economic Indicators. 2016. Vol. 41, No. 3, March 10. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016. “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” Amended January 26. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_20160126.pdf Carpenter, Seth, Jane Ihrig, Elizabeth Klee, Daniel Quinn, and Alexander Boote. 2015. “The Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections.” International Journal of Central Banking, March, pp. 237–283. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb15q2a7.htm International Monetary Fund. 2015. World Economic Outlook Update. January. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2015/update/01/ International Monetary Fund. 2016. World Economic Outlook Update. January. https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2016/update/01/ Valletta, Robert G., Leila Bengali, and Catherine van der List. 2015. “Cyclical and Market Determinants of Involuntary Part-Time Employment.” FRBSF Working Paper 2015-19, December. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/wp2015-19.pdf Williams, John C. 2015. “China, Rates, and the Outlook: May the (Economic) Force Be with You.” Presentation to the Symposium on Building the Financial System of the 21st Century: An Agenda for China and the United States, September 19, Armonk, NY. http://www.frbsf.org/our-district/press/presidents-speeches/williams-speeches/2015/september/china- rates-outlook-building-the-financial-system/

1 Presentation to the LendIt USA 2016 conference, San Francisco, California By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on April 12, 2016 Fintech: The Power of the Possible and Potential Pitfalls Good afternoon, it’s a pleasure to be here. This is an exciting time for all things fintech, and as you’re aware, it’s getting increasing attention from regulatory agencies like the Federal Reserve, the OCC, state regulators, and others.1 It’s critically important to have an open and active dialogue among everyone involved, in order to better understand one another’s goals and concerns. In an attempt to do just that, I’ll keep my remarks brief and leave plenty of time for Q&A. My talk today perfectly encompasses the sometimes dueling aspects of my profession. On the one hand, I’m president of the Fed District that is not just home to the technological hub of the United States, but is arguably the center of the tech universe. On the other hand, they don’t call economics “the dismal science” for nothing, and I’m compelled to consider what potholes may be dotting the road ahead. I’ll begin by outlining what the financial system should provide for our economy and society, and by acknowledging where it has tended to come up short in the past. In a nutshell, the core purposes of the financial system are to facilitate payments between buyers and sellers, and to direct households’ and businesses’ savings to their most productive uses, such as building 1 See, for example, the recent report issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2016). http://www.occ.gov/publications/publications-by-type/other-publications-reports/pub-responsible-innovation- banking-system-occ-perspective.pdf 2 homes, expanding businesses, getting an education, or developing infrastructure. That’s a tall order, and certain aspects have proven particularly difficult to achieve, including ensuring that the financial system is efficient and resilient, and that it benefits everyone in society. Fintech holds great promise for tackling these long-standing challenges. This is why I’m excited by the innovation I’m seeing in financial technology—much of it from people here today. But it’s also why I’m going to raise some potential risks. Let me be clear: People from regulatory agencies don’t highlight potential downsides because we’re dour, unfun pessimists— or at least not only because we’re dour, unfun pessimists. We do it because we have to look not just at what’s possible in the sense of wonder and limitless options, but at what’s possible in the sense of the economist’s greatest concern: the unintended consequence. Before I go any further, I should make two disclaimers. First is the standard one, that the views expressed here today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Second is that, as president of the San Francisco Fed, I am not directly involved with writing rules or regulations. So I will not be talking about specific regulations and their application to fintech. Instead, my aim is to lay out issues and questions that should be part of the ongoing conversation about how fintech can make our financial system—and ultimately our economy—more successful at achieving its fundamental goals. So, back to the duality. The laws of innovation often mirror the laws of physics: For every great stride, there is an equal and opposite risk. So it’s not that regulators are here to call 3 the cops on the party; we’re here to make sure no one jumps off the roof. And while we see the potential in innovation, we’re also looking at the other side of the coin. As I said, technology offers creative opportunities to improve the performance of the financial sector, and to remedy some of its shortcomings. Fintech’s opus spans products that address all parts of the so-called consumer wallet: planning, spending, saving, and borrowing. The products are generally less complex, making them more understandable and easier for customers to use. They’re delivered via platforms that widen the overall customer base, allowing more people access to credit and the first rung of the financial ladder. One of the most obvious and potentially most game-changing benefits is the ability to reach historically underserved and economically disadvantaged communities. This is the case in mature economies, like the United States, where inequality and access to financial services are perennial issues. It’s also true for emerging economies, where large portions of the world’s population are making the transition from subsistence-level living to a more sustainable economic existence. That is incredibly powerful. Fintech can lower costs and improve services, particularly for lower-income families and small businesses. Meaning fintech can help more people get access to credit at reasonable terms, better manage their finances, and keep more money in their pockets. Or, in the case of the many workers in the U.S. who send funds to families in other countries, put more money in the pockets of their children, parents, or communities. Fintech can help revitalize impoverished 4 neighborhoods by allowing small businesses that have been shut out of the formal financial sector to take root and grow. Globally, we’re seeing the emergence of payment systems via mobile phones in places where the vast majority of people are unbanked or underbanked, but have cell phones. Instead of paying huge fees for bank-like services, it’s all done through text or the touch of a few buttons. This has made its mark in some areas, is starting to gain a foothold in others, and even has potential here. So what could go wrong? The flip side concern is that those exact people could wind up becoming even more marginalized. I think back to exclusionary practices in lending like redlining, where portions of the population were denied services based on where they lived. Even when outright discrimination was banned, lending metrics translated into disenfranchisement of racial and ethnic groups. It would be a travesty if, despite the best intentions in the world, new technologies designed to improve the availability of credit instead ended up reintroducing that kind of exclusion, by, say, basing decisions on zip codes or other demographic metrics. A similar juxtaposition of potential and risk arises with the proliferation of options for saving and borrowing that fintech promises. These novel approaches to intermediating savings and investments could lower costs and broaden access to people who are currently unbanked or underserved. At the same time—as we know all too well from historical precedent—the unscrupulous will prey on the vulnerable, be it through predatory lending, irresponsible payday 5 loans, outright fraud, and more; sadly, the list goes on and on. I don’t want to see fintech’s positive potential hijacked to become a source of new, more powerful platforms to prey on consumers on a massive scale. Another area for the great and the possible is leveraging big data and data analytics to improve operational efficiency, risk management, and decision making. For example, sophisticated algorithms can help overcome many of the hurdles to defeating money laundering and the funding of terrorist and criminal organizations. “Know your customer” laws across the world require banks and financial institutions to verify that their customers are the people they claim to be, which is a costly and heretofore imperfect undertaking. Advanced data analytics could provide powerful tools to increase both the efficiency and efficacy of these efforts. The other side of that coin, of course, is that, left unbridled, the ease and anonymity of some types of fintech, such as digital currencies, have the potential to make criminal and terrorist activity even easier. And while fintech could have significant benefits for the ability to assess and manage risk, any time we’re talking about big data, we need to be at least cognizant, and at most vigilant, about the protection and privacy of those consumers whose data are being used. While fintech can also improve not just the accessibility but the quality of service— something that consumers are demanding—we also need to look out for the resilience of the financial system as a whole. As the fintech industry continues to grow, both as nonbank institutions and via partnerships with banks, potential risks to the financial system and economy 6 expand in proportion. Moreover, for our financial system to be efficient, it’s important that we have a level playing field, regardless of how institutions prefer to describe themselves or what kind of charter they hold. As a matter of principle, if it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it should be regulated like a duck. In raising these concerns, I’m not suggesting that the spirit of innovation is in any way nefarious, nor do I claim that people haven’t considered risk of their own volition. But as I said earlier, this is about unintended consequences. In summary, there’s no question that fintech is going to change the face of financial services on a global scale. I am excited for the changes to come, and I see the potency of the possible. But for fintech’s potential to be met, we need to make sure we don’t reinvent or exacerbate shortcomings that have plagued our financial system thus far. In that regard, well-designed regulation that protects consumers, fosters inclusionary rather than exclusionary practices, and enhances the fairness and resilience of the financial system should help rather than hinder fintech’s contribution to creating a better financial system and economy. Thank you.

1 Presentation to the Sacramento Economic Forum, Sacramento, California By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on May 13, 2016 Now That Winter Is Over, Springtime Is on My Mind It’s a special pleasure to be back home in Sacramento. I grew up here and my family has deep Sacramento roots. It’s also great to be here this time of year when the weather is just right; I won’t lie, I don’t miss the hottest days of July and August. Today I’ll give an overview of the economy, about where we are and where we’re headed, and address some of the issues that have been getting a lot of attention lately, namely the weak reading of GDP growth in the first quarter and very low productivity growth. Before I go any further, I should pause to note, as always, that the views I express here today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. Employment With that out of the way, I’ll turn first to our employment mandate. And here, a lot of people do share my view that the labor market is looking very good. There are a multitude of indicators I look at, and pretty much all of them say we’re at or very near full strength. Unemployment has reached what I see as its natural rate—that’s the optimal rate we should expect in a healthy economy—at 5 percent. I see it dipping even further below that benchmark as the year unfolds. Job openings is another data point, as is the rate at which people are quitting. That may seem odd as an indicator, but the willingness of workers to leave their jobs is actually a good way to gauge people’s perceptions of the job market. Another is the difficulty companies are facing in hiring—with a strong labor market, there are more jobs available, and businesses have to compete for talent. Even one area that has caused some concern, the declining labor force 2 participation rate, is now close to its longer-term trend.1 Inflation Turning to the other side of our mandate, inflation has been persistently below the Fed’s 2 percent target over the past several years. Recently, that’s been due to transitory forces, for instance, the strengthening dollar and falling energy prices. But those effects have been dissipating. To cut through some of the noise, it’s useful to look at measures of inflation that strip out volatile prices and provide a clearer view of the underlying trend. One such measure is core PCE inflation, which excludes food and energy prices. It rose 1.6 percent over the past 12 months. Another such measure is the trimmed mean, which rose 1.8 percent over the past year. Either way you look at it, inflation has been moving back up to our goal. With the economy continuing to improve and special factors holding inflation down diminishing, I see inflation rising to meet our 2 percent goal in the next two years. GDP and seasonality As for gross domestic product, or GDP, I expect growth to be 2 percent this year. This is the time of year when we look back at first-quarter growth and get worried about how low it was. It’s also the time of year that economists start talking about “residual seasonality”—that is, they point out the recurring pattern of slow GDP growth in the first quarter over the past several years and reassess the reasons for this anomaly. The takeaway from this analysis is that first-quarter GDP data tend to paint an overly negative picture and aren’t the best way to assess the economy’s underlying momentum.2 Although the published data should account for usual seasonal patterns, for myriad wonky reasons that would take too much time—and too much of your patience—to explain, they 1 Aaronson et al. (2014). 2 Rudebusch, Wilson, and Mahedy (2015) and Rudebusch, Wilson, and Pyle (2015). 3 don’t. To correct for this problem, my staff has added a second round of adjustment to get a more accurate number. Adjusted in this way, real GDP actually grew over 2 percent in the first quarter. This makes more sense when we look at the rest of the economy—such as the labor market—and is in line with what I’m hearing from the business community, that they didn’t see significant drop-offs at the beginning of the year. Productivity Turning to an issue that’s been getting a lot of attention: Productivity growth has been exceptionally weak over the past five years, which has caused some concern and some confusion. We’re seeing an otherwise healthy economic expansion that makes the U.S. virtually unique among advanced economies, and we’re running a labor market that’s flashing green on just about every measure. So why is productivity growth so low? Productivity is a notoriously tricky thing to measure, so one oft-repeated question is whether all areas of the economy are being accurately assessed—for instance, the tech world. Are we using outdated models to try to assess the next-generation engine of growth? The short answer is “no.” A recent study shows that mismeasurement of innovation does not account for the slowdown in productivity growth in any meaningful way.3 In that case, what is going on? Productivity is the simple measure of output per unit of input. That is, how much work did it take to produce a unit of a particular good or service? In the past, great spurts of productivity have resulted from game-changing innovation like the steam engine, electricity, or the advent of the modern production line. The last instance was the first tech boom, which ushered in a decade of strong productivity growth starting in the mid-1990s.4 I know the recent productivity slowdown seems confusing when we’re sitting near the “Tech 3 Byrne, Fernald, and Reinsdorf (2016). 4 See Gordon (2016) for historical discussion of U.S. productivity growth. 4 Coast”; in Silicon Valley, it feels like the possibilities are endless and the world is changing at an ever-faster rate. So why aren’t we seeing another productivity boom? The difference between now and the last tech boom is that, in the mid-1990s, businesses throughout the economy used those new technologies to change how and what they produced. They became much more efficient and spread their reach. In the more recent tech boom, a lot of the innovation and new products are directed at our leisure time, which may enrich our lives, but doesn’t have the same groundbreaking effect on how businesses operate. Of course, there may be a revolutionary invention or technology just around the corner. History has shown that we fail spectacularly to predict when we’ll next turn it up to 11. But in the meantime, it’s more likely than not that slow growth is both real and here to stay. And while the days of 2½ to 3 percent growth are behind us, at least for the foreseeable future, it isn’t the end of the world. We can still run a strong economy. GDP grew at 2 percent last year, we added 2¾ million jobs, and I forecast a 2016 that looks a lot like 2015, with continued employment gains, steady GDP growth, and progress on our inflation goal. Monetary policy So what does all this mean for monetary policy? The Fed’s monetary policy committee, the FOMC, has indicated that we expect to raise rates gradually, and we have made that abundantly clear in our communications. We took the first small step with a modest rate hike in December, and the future pace will be, as we’ve said repeatedly, gradual and data dependent. We don’t want to be the guests who stayed too long, but we don’t want to jump off a cliff either. 5 One other issue that has been getting some attention is what we’re planning on doing with our sizable balance sheet, which swelled to some $4 trillion after three rounds of quantitative easing. We have a ways to go before we start to unwind it, and it won’t happen until normalization of the funds rate is well under way. After that, our plan is to shrink the balance sheet “organically,” if you will, through the maturation of the assets. It’s going to take at least six years to get the balance sheet back to normal, which is in keeping with the overall approach of removing accommodation gradually.5 What’s important about this, and what’s music to the ears, is that this is essentially the move back to normal. Monetary policy is going back to the boring basics. Sources of growth That brings me to a central point, which is to recognize what monetary policy can and can’t do. Our job is to keep the economy on track, and meet our employment and inflation goals. And we have a limited tool kit to do that. People shouldn’t confuse monetary with fiscal or other policy. There are ways to spark growth and innovation. But it will require investments in education, training, safer neighborhoods, infrastructure—the things we need to build human capital. We can’t do this using monetary policy. They are issues that must be met at the local, state, and federal level, and are fundamentally in the legislative realm. While all the labor market indicators look good on a macro level, I know it’s not the same for everyone. The euphoria in San Francisco generally exits the freeway before it makes it out to Highway 99 in the Central Valley. Some places continue to struggle, because there are structural or long-term problems that can’t be fixed by interest rates. They were there before the recession 5 Carpenter et al. (2015). 6 and they’re still there today. Likewise, if productivity is waiting for the next great invention, we need to invest in the education of the next generation of innovators. If we want a population that continues to see its prospects and paychecks rise, we need to be sure they have access to high quality schooling. I can’t speak for legislators, and I harbor a fantasy that if I don’t tell elected officials how to do their jobs they won’t weigh in on mine. But I do know the data, and they say that investing in early childhood and going to college have very high returns. Research shows a direct correlation between the quality of a child’s neighborhood and income later in life.6 And if you remember just one number, make it this: 300,000. That’s how much more a kid who’s moved from public housing into a lower-poverty area can expect to make in a lifetime.7 As for the benefits of getting a college degree, we know that there’s an average annual income gap of about $58,000 between households with two college-educated earners and those with two high school educated earners.8 A college education has returns more than twice that of stocks and about five times more than bonds.9 And while it is a long-term investment, the average breakeven period is around 10 years.10 College has a direct link to economic mobility. If you’re in the lower 80 percent of the earnings distribution, a college degree gives you about a 30 to 40 percent chance of reaching the top 20 percent. But without one…. The bottom quintile on the earnings scale has less than a 5 percent chance of winding up in the top quintile without a college degree.11 6 Chetty and Hendren (2015). 7 Chetty, Hendren, and Katz (2016). 8 Autor (2014). 9 Abel and Deitz (2014). 10 Daly and Cao (2015). 11 Daly and Cao (2015). 7 Like I said, I’m not an elected official, just a guy who likes data. But the data are convincing. Conclusion In any event, from the perspective of a monetary policymaker, we’ve been on a long road back from the recession. There are always uncertainties and numerous challenges before us, but overall, things are definitely looking good. Thank you. 8 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. 2014. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197– 255. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/projects/bpea/fall-2014/fall2014bpea_aaronson_et_al.pdf Abel, Jaison, and Richard Deitz. 2014. “Do the Benefits of College Still Outweigh the Costs?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Current Issues in Economics and Finance 20(3). https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/current_issues/ci20-3.html Autor, David H. 2014. “Skills, Education, and the Rise of Earnings Inequality among the ‘Other 99 Percent.’” Science 344(6186, May 23), pp. 843–851. Byrne, David M., John G. Fernald, and Marshall B. Reinsdorf. 2016. “Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem?” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, conference draft (March). http://www.brookings.edu/about/projects/bpea/papers/2016/byrne-et-al- productivity-measurement Carpenter, Seth, Jane Ihrig, Elizabeth Klee, Daniel Quinn, and Alexander Boote. 2015. “The Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections.” International Journal of Central Banking 11(2, March), pp. 237–283. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb15q2a7.htm Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren. 2015. “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility: Childhood Exposure Effects and County-Level Estimates.” Working paper, Harvard University (May). http://scholar.harvard.edu/hendren/publications/impacts-Neighborhoods- Intergenerational-Mobility-Childhood-Exposure-Effects-And Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2016. “The Effects of Exposure to Better Neighborhoods on Children: New Evidence from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment.” American Economic Review 106(4, April), pp. 855–902. Daly, Mary C., and Yifan Cao. 2015. “Does College Pay?” In Does College Matter? Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 2014 Annual Report. http://sffed-education.org/annualreport2014/#college- essays/does-college-pay Gordon, Robert J. 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Rudebusch, Glenn D., Daniel J. Wilson, and Tim Mahedy. 2015. “The Puzzle of Weak First-Quarter GDP Growth.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-16, May 18. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2015/may/weak-first-quarter-gdp-residual-seasonality- adjustment/ Rudebusch, Glenn D., Daniel J. Wilson, and Benjamin Pyle. 2015. “Residual Seasonality and Monetary Policy.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-27, August 24. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2015/august/residual-seasonality-and-monetary-policy/
