Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Banque de France Conference: Financial Regulation--Stability versus Uniformity; A Focus on Non-bank Actors, Paris, France Share Strengthening the quantity and quality of capital held by banks has been a central element of post-financial crisis regulatory reform. Yet, as the topic of this conference reminds us, the crisis also exposed weaknesses in other financial intermediaries that carried systemic implications. In the United States, when Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers failed, they were so-called freestanding investment banks, not subject even to the inadequate pre-crisis regulatory regime for bank holding companies. The stress at American International Group (AIG), an insurance company, and the vulnerability of money market funds to destabilizing runs contributed to a profound deepening of the crisis. Hence the theme for this session of the conference: In light of this recent history and, more generally, of the steady growth of nonbank financial intermediaries, to what degree should they be subject to the capital regulations developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and applied to bank holding companies in the United States and to all commercial and investment banks in Europe? At first glance, the answer to this question might seem intuitively obvious. After all, the risk of loss associated with a particular corporate loan or mortgage-backed security or, indeed, any other asset does not vary just because its legal owner is an insurance company or mutual fund, rather than a bank. Yet we all know that regulatory capital requirements sometimes do vary with the nature of the firm. And I suspect that most people in this room believe there are good reasons why they should vary under at least some circumstances. In my remarks this morning, I will explain how the identification of those circumstances should proceed--by looking not at the asset side of a financial intermediary's balance sheet, but at the liability side. The scope and nature of a firm's liabilities provide the justifications for capital requirements regulation. Differences in liabilities can, accordingly, sometimes warrant different capital requirements for portfolios of similar assets across firms. At the risk of packing too much into these introductory points, let me also note that an emphasis on a firm's liabilities is related to, but not synonymous with, an emphasis on its activities. Thus, for example, simply deciding that an intermediary provides mostly commercial banking services or insurance products does not fully answer the question of what its capital requirements should be. My purpose today is not to offer specific proposals, or even a comprehensive conceptual framework, but instead to propose an approach for thinking about the purposes of capital regulation across types of financial intermediaries that will suggest appropriate starting points for shaping--or reshaping--applicable capital regulation. This seems to me a particularly important effort at a time when the financial system is undergoing significant change. Liability Structure and Capital Regulation To begin, we should remind ourselves that capital regulation of private corporations is unusual. Generally, market actors with actual or contemplated claims on a nonfinancial corporation are left to their own devices in protecting their interests, though various features of contract, securities, and insolvency law are designed to help them make these judgments more efficiently. In many kinds of financial intermediaries, on the other hand, capital levels are regulated, usually because of market failures attributable to some combination of information problems, moral hazard, collective action problems, and systemic risk. Scrutiny of the liability side of the balance sheet reveals whether and how these various justifications are present for different financial intermediaries. Let me start with a couple of straightforward examples, well-established in regulatory practice. The first example arises from the fact that, by the very nature of their business, many intermediaries have substantially more customer-facing liabilities 1 on their balance sheets than nonfinancial firms. This characteristic often means that leverage is higher. It almost always means that a large portion of the liability side of the balance sheet is accounted for by such customers, who are not well-positioned to evaluate the soundness of these intermediaries' often-opaque balance sheets. Consider the case of a very traditional life insurance company, which collects premiums from customers over a protracted period of time, while promising a payout to beneficiaries if the insured dies within the coverage period. The duration of the exposure, difficulties in evaluating the company's ability to pay, and the potentially high costs of changing coverage to another firm even if that evaluation can be done together provide a rationale for insurance company capital requirements. Here the motivation for capital regulation is likely oriented toward the capacity of the company to meet these long-term claims as they come due, presumably over a fairly extended span. Investors and counterparties from the financial sector might well be left to fend for themselves. Thus this rationale for capital regulation focuses only on assuring sufficient assets over time to satisfy the policyholders' claims should the company fail, with less attention to maintaining the company as a going concern. A second example of how the liability side of an intermediary's balance sheet suggests the appropriate form of capital regulation is presented by the familiar problem of deposit runs on banks. Like a policyholder, a depositor has difficulty gauging the health of the financial intermediary. But unlike a life insurance policyholder, a depositor can withdraw all or most of her funds if she has any fear--even an ill-founded fear--that the bank may be in trouble. Indeed, depositors have a rational incentive to act quickly, since the first to withdraw will have the best chance of getting all their money back. Experience with bank runs, and with the more-damaging cases of bank panics (in which problems at one bank are imputed to others on the basis of incomplete and possibly incorrect information), led to government-provided deposit insurance. While countering runs and panics and protecting depositors from loss, government deposit insurance creates different justifications for capital regulation--protecting the government insurance fund, which is now guaranteeing a significant portion of the bank's liabilities, and countering moral hazard, which may arise because insured depositors need no longer care whether the bank is adequately capitalized. The moral hazard issue leads us to a third example of how the liability side of the balance sheet of a financial intermediary reveals the need for capital regulation--the too-big-to-fail (TBTF) problem. As the size of an intermediary increases, its exposures to other market actors--including many other intermediaries--may become so extensive that its failure would threaten the financial system as a whole. Believing that the government will, for this reason, prevent such an intermediary from becoming insolvent, market actors may extend credit as if a guarantee similar to deposit insurance were in place. Thus the nature and extent of the firm's liabilities, taken as a whole, may warrant capital regulation to offset an implicit TBTF subsidy. Even if the distinct problem of TBTF could be countered through other means, such as a credible bankruptcy or resolution option, the failure of a financial intermediary with systemically significant liabilities raises the prospect of imposing very large negative externalities on the financial system. This prospect creates an additional argument for capital requirements--or, more precisely, an argument for progressively higher capital requirements that would reduce the probability of the failure of the systemically important intermediary. Note that this last discussion has moved us toward consideration of macroprudential reasons for capital requirements--specifically, for higher requirements aimed at reducing the probability of insolvency below that which would be warranted if the sole regulatory aim were to protect customers, depositors, or even a government deposit insurance fund. As has been much discussed in recent years, pre-crisis financial regulatory regimes had substantially undervalued systemwide considerations. Indeed, in the first instance the crisis spread not only because of the direct effects engendered by the insolvency of individual firms, but also because of the dramatic contraction of funding available throughout markets for widely held assets such as mortgage-backed securities. The pre-crisis explosion of short-term wholesale funding, both inside and outside traditional banks, left the entire financial system vulnerable to the disappearance of this market funding as real estate prices declined sharply and uncertainty spread about the value of the assets being funded. Concerns about solvency accelerated the run of wholesale funding from Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers, raising the prospect of classic fire sales of their assets, with consequent depressing effects on the balance sheets of all firms holding these assets. Experience during the financial crisis vindicated the view of those who had argued that liquidity, as well as capital, in large intermediaries needed to be regulated. 2 It also buttressed the view that capital and liquidity regulation are closely related and need to be developed in tandem, if not as part of the same regulatory framework. Much academic research prompted by the crisis has focused on the interrelationship between funding and solvency problems. 3 Here, then, is another way in which the characteristics of the liability side of an intermediary's balance sheet should determine the form and stringency of capital regulation. Shorter duration and, if you will, increased "runnability" of its liabilities create greater threats to both its stability and that of the financial system as a whole. Where a firm is significantly dependent on this kind of funding, it may need more common equity to convince counterparties and investors of its solvency during periods in which assets are very volatile and to maintain its solvency should it need to sell assets at fire sale prices. This microprudential basis for higher capital requirements is complemented by the macroprudential rationale that intermediaries whose deleveraging could have a broad impact on market liquidity through fire sale or related effects should be required to hold still more capital. Let me make three additional points on this rationale for higher capital standards. First, a run that cuts off funding to widely held assets is a greater risk to the system than a conventional bank run in the absence of deposit insurance. A bank's whole loans would not usually be sold in great number even under stressed circumstances and, even to the degree they were, other banks' portfolios of loans are generally not marked down because of the stressed bank's sales. Second, the possible availability of central bank liquidity support does not obviate the need for higher capital for intermediaries reliant on short-term wholesale funding. The same factors that make market actors uncertain about the value of the intermediary's assets in times of stress will be relevant to the central bank's ability to assure itself that the recipient of temporary liquidity is in fact solvent. Third, because these risks to the firm and the financial system arise from of the composition of the liability side of the balance sheet, the concerns expressed here apply--though perhaps in somewhat different degrees--regardless of the particular form of intermediation in which the firm is engaged. Tailoring Capital Regulation With only modest simplification of the always complex world of financial regulation, one can say that while capital requirements traditionally have differed significantly for different types of financial intermediaries, they have been relatively uniform for all firms classified as a particular type of intermediary. As I mentioned at the outset, the variations in capital requirements might run contrary to the intuition that the risk of loss of a given portfolio of assets is the same no matter who owns them. Of course, the direct explanation for the variations lies in part in institutional history, with different regulatory bodies having been given authority over different types of financial intermediaries. Still, as we have seen, differences in the liability side of the balance sheet can in fact provide a good policy justification for having varying capital requirements among different types of financial intermediaries. Yet, as I will suggest in a moment, even if conventional differences are at least broadly justifiable (which, of course, is not to say that certain differences in any particular jurisdiction have been well-formulated in all their specifics), the fact that so many intermediaries have moved well beyond their traditional practices, products, and scope may warrant some qualification of conventional practice. Conversely, the conventional regulatory principle of imposing more or less uniform capital requirements on a given form of intermediary might have seemed intuitively correct. But one lesson regulators around the world have drawn from the crisis is that macroprudential considerations can sometimes argue for varying capital requirements among the same kind of intermediaries. Let me address, then, some implications of the liability-side perspective on capital requirements for different forms of financial intermediaries. Despite the focus of this session of the conference on nonbanks, I want to begin by noting how post-crisis changes in the Basel regime reflected the characteristics of an intermediary's liabilities. Prior to the crisis, the Basel regime--though nominally applicable only to internationally active banks--in fact applied to most banks in many member jurisdictions, including the United States and the European Union (EU). There were no quantitative liquidity requirements, and capital requirements did not vary based on the liability side of the balance sheet. Indeed, the major departure from uniform application of capital rules was the opportunity afforded by Basel II for large banks to use their own internal models in determining their regulatory capital requirements, an opportunity that Basel II's proponents expected to result in slightly lower requirements than under a standardized approach. In the wake of the crisis, Basel III strengthened capital quality and levels across the board. In addition, capital surcharges were imposed on about thirty banks of global systemic importance (G-SIBs), based on criteria that roughly reflect TBTF concerns--that is, the size and interconnectedness of the firms' balance sheets. Neither the generally applicable Basel III changes nor the G-SIB surcharges were specifically tied to the stability of a bank's debt structure. However, minimum quantitative liquidity requirements have been developed in the form of the shorter-horizon Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the longer-horizon Net Stable Funding Ratio, which together are intended to place some limits on excessive reliance on runnable liabilities. 4 Important as these changes have been, the risks to the financial system posed by large amounts of short-term wholesale funding argue for closer regulatory linkage between capital and liquidity concerns. Conceptually, the cleanest approach might be to integrate capital and liquidity requirements in a single regulatory framework, which would establish minimum levels of capital and liquidity and then increase the capital requirement for intermediaries with more vulnerable funding structures. Higher capital levels would be especially warranted for intermediaries using large enough amounts of short-term debt that their response when funding liquidity is constrained--either selling assets or withholding funding from their own customers--could adversely affect the financial system as a whole. Realistically, though, the goal of full integration of capital and liquidity regulation seems unattainable for the foreseeable future. For one thing, it is hard to imagine all the relevant banking, market, and insurance regulators converging on such a novel approach anytime soon. In addition, though, without a more complete understanding of the precise relationship between liquidity and capital needs, placing so much weight on one form of regulation would be ill-advised. For the present, then, the Basel regime will maintain separate capital and liquidity regulations, which may differ among types of financial intermediaries. 5 But we can at least strive to establish each set of regulations with reference to the other and to attain at least a rough consistency across regulatory regimes applicable to various intermediaries. In the United States, we have already taken one step in this direction. As you may know, in implementing the Basel G-SIB capital surcharge, we decided that surcharges somewhat higher than those finally agreed in Basel were appropriate. As we refashioned the Basel approach, we added a metric on short-term wholesale funding dependence to the formula for determining a firm's systemic significance, a factor that unfortunately had not been included in Basel. I hope that when it comes time for a review of the Basel methodology for identifying and grouping G-SIBs, funding practices and vulnerabilities will receive more attention. And there may be further steps that could increase that sensitivity. Exploring ideas along these lines seems to me far preferable to raising minimum liquidity requirements for all banks, even those with capital levels well above the regulatory minimum. For example, while stress testing has traditionally focused on risks to capital, some observers have suggested adding liquidity risks to the stress test. Turning now to some implications for other intermediaries, I will begin with broker-dealers, which pose perhaps the clearest case of the capital/funding relationship. Broker-dealers tend to hold large amounts of assets that are of longer duration, but that also are relatively liquid in normal times (in contrast, say, to whole loans by a bank). However, as seen most graphically in the case of mortgage-backed securities during the crisis, many of these assets can rapidly become quite illiquid in periods of stress. Since broker-dealers generally fund substantial portions of these assets with short-term liabilities, such as repurchase agreements (repos) rather than insured deposits, there is the potential, again seen in the crisis, for runs reminiscent of the bank runs of the era before the advent of deposit insurance. To a considerable extent, of course, the Basel framework covers these firms. In the EU, any broker-dealer is covered, whether as a stand-alone entity or as part of a universal bank. In the pre-crisis period in the United States, matters were less clear, since only broker-dealers affiliated with bank holding companies were covered by the full panoply of Basel requirements. There was partial coverage of the five largest freestanding broker-dealers that needed such oversight in order to operate within the EU. Because, during the crisis, those five firms either became bank holding companies or failed and had their continuing operations absorbed by bank holding companies, all sizeable domestically owned broker-dealers are now covered by Basel requirements. However, as I mentioned just a moment ago, the Basel framework itself has not gone as far as is desirable in making capital requirements at the largest institutions sensitive to macroprudential funding concerns, a circumstance underscored by the balance sheets typical of broker-dealers. Consideration of changes such as refinement of the formula for assigning surcharges to G-SIBs would be useful when Basel standards are revisited over time. In the interim, there are more near-term opportunities for supervisory measures that take account of the relationship between capital levels and funding vulnerabilities. Perhaps the most interesting application of a liability-side focus on capital regulation is the case of insurance companies. Given the ongoing discussions of capital standards in the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, the issue is also a timely one. Several relevant points can be derived from attention to the liability side of insurance company balance sheets. First, as shown in my earlier example of how liability structure affects capital needs, the largest segment of a traditional insurance company's liabilities is composed of contingent claims based on the occurrence of specified events, such as the death of an insured person or destruction of insured property. These claims cannot be accelerated at the discretion of the holders of the contracts so, unlike deposits in a bank, these liabilities cannot run in any meaningful sense. Unless customers decide to sever their relationship with the company, in which case the contingent liability will be reduced or eliminated, they will continue to provide funding to the firm. Life insurance, in particular, has an unusually predictable liability pattern, well-refined by actuaries over the years. Thus there is a relative absence of liquidity risk as compared with other kinds of intermediaries. Property and casualty insurance is somewhat more volatile but that volatility is not correlated with the broader economy. So, while higher capital levels may be needed for microprudential purposes, the traditional property-casualty insurance model does not appear to raise significant funding, fire sale, or other macroprudential concerns. These traditional insurance liabilities argue for lower capital requirements than might be required for a hypothetical bank holding a similar portfolio of assets. And, as noted earlier, in some respects they also argue for a gone-concern approach to capital regulation. However, a second observation is that the liability side of the balance sheets of many large insurance companies look quite different from this traditional picture. Many life insurers, for example, now offer wealth and retirement products with account values that can be withdrawn at the discretion of the policyholder, sometimes with little or no surrender penalty. Although these products are generally considered medium to long-term liabilities, the option to surrender or withdraw funds creates the potential for increased claims that could strain the liquidity of the firm. Recent history suggests that the surrender rates of fixed annuities are directly related to the path of interest rate rises. In the middle part of the last decade, as interest rates rose in the United States, the surrender rate for these products increased by about 75 percent in just a few years, before dropping precipitously after the rapid decline in rates following the onset of the financial crisis. Similarly, the move of some insurance firms into securities lending, repo, over-the-counter derivatives, and other capital market activities can work significant changes in the balance sheets of those firms, creating tighter connections to the rest of the financial system. As with other financial intermediaries, insurers then become subject to demands for posting additional collateral or closing out positions as unfavorable market conditions take hold. In addition, if the books of the insurance company are large enough, it then becomes a potential vehicle for transmitting distress at the company to other parts of the financial system. Thus the liability side of the balance sheets of firms that are all "insurance companies" can vary substantially, just as with firms that are called "banks" or "bank holding companies." Yet capital regulation currently applicable to insurance companies seems not to make some of the relevant distinctions. Traditional capital regulation, with an implicit aim of protecting only conventional policyholders over time, potentially through an orderly insolvency, does not reflect the balance sheet risks I have just described. Yet more recent measures, such as Solvency II, with its heavy emphasis on current market valuation, may not take account of the fact that liability and liquidity risks for genuinely traditional life insurance products are relatively limited compared to those of many other intermediaries. In some respects, Solvency II ignores the strength of conventional insurance funding--that assets can be held for the truly long-term, through multiple business cycles--even as it focuses directly on the fluctuations in asset values that are indeed relevant to many less conventional activities. This brief review illustrates the challenges in fashioning capital requirements for large insurance companies with a mix of traditional, nontraditional, and noninsurance activities that are sometimes quite intertwined in particular business lines or subsidiaries. And, even where these activities are reasonably segregated from one another, some of the policy devices suggested for differential capital treatment may be misplaced. For example, deciding on higher capital requirements based solely on whether an activity is "nontraditional" for an insurance company can be inappropriate. A "nontraditional" activity for an insurance company could embrace everything from the massive derivatives business maintained by the pre-crisis AIG to very sedate businesses outside the financial sphere entirely. In confronting these and similar challenges, I would suggest that a focus on the actual nature of liabilities associated with a firm's activities provides a good starting point for sound analysis. Finally, let me mention asset managers briefly. As they have garnered increasing shares of financial system assets, a trend that accelerated following the financial crisis, the question has arisen whether they too should hold capital buffers. Of course in most cases the asset manager itself does not have much of a balance sheet at all. The funds themselves are often not leveraged, in which case nearly all the liabilities are shares of the fund held by investors, the price of which varies to reflect the value of the assets purchased by the manager of the fund. 6 While some commentators have suggested that liquidity challenges and consequent fire sale type behavior might develop if the structure of the fund places a premium on exiting first, these kinds of risks would support an argument less for capital buffers than for some form of prudential market regulation, such as rules on liquidity or redemptions. I would note in this regard that last week the SEC issued a proposed rulemaking that would require open-ended funds to have liquidity risk management controls in place for shareholder redemptions, including during times of stress. 7 Likewise, to the degree that certain idiosyncratic risks might exist with respect to the decisions and operations of certain asset managers, their liability structure again suggests that some form of prudential market regulation would be better suited to address these risks. Conclusion In conclusion, let me recapitulate one set of points and add another. To recapitulate--focusing on the characteristics of the liability side of a financial intermediary's balance sheet suggests that there are reasons to vary capital regulation across different forms of financial intermediation, but that significant shifts in the nature and scope of an intermediary's liabilities may in turn provide reasons for varying applicable capital regulation among firms that are primarily identified as a particular type of intermediary. Conceptual, institutional, and practical impediments to developing a single framework for capital regulation are doubtlessly insuperable for the foreseeable future. But regulators with mandates covering different kinds of intermediaries, including the Federal Reserve, must keep both sides of this perspective in mind. And, hopefully, regulators with a more focused responsibility will be sensitive to the ways in which their regulated entities have departed from their original liability structure. The additional point follows from the first. When concerns are raised about regulatory arbitrage or a level playing field, they are usually in the context of a similar asset being held, or a business activity conducted, by financial firms with different regulatory structures. My discussion today would suggest that attention must be paid to the liability structure of the different firms before deciding whether the asymmetric regulatory treatment is prudent or an invitation to the propagation of new financial risks. These two points underscore the fact that the question for regulators is not really whether capital rules developed for banks should be extended to nonbank actors. The Basel standards have already evolved to take account of different forms of intermediation in the financial firms subject to those rules. The Basel framework might itself be enhanced by further differentiation of capital and liquidity requirements based on the liability structures of firms. Similarly, capital rules for intermediaries not subject to Basel rules should be shaped by similar considerations. 1. By "customer facing liabilities," I mean liabilities to households, retail investors, and businesses. In financial intermediaries, these liabilities are not only greater than in similarly sized balance sheets of non-financial firms. They also disproportionately arise from financial transactions--such as accepting deposits or investments--rather than for performance of services or delivery of goods. Return to text 2. For a highly insightful survey of the implications of illiquidity issues for market performance and regulation, see Jean Tirole (2011), "Illiquidity and All Its Friends," Journal of Economic Literature vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 287-325. Return to text 3. See, e.g., Markus Brunnermeier and Lasse Heje Pedersen (2009), "Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity," Review of Financial Studies , vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 2201-2238; Viral Acharya and S. Viswanathan (2011), "Leverage, Moral Hazard, and Liquidity," Journal of Finance , vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 99-138; Zhiguo He and Wei Xiong (2012), "Rollover Risk and Credit Risk," Journal of Finance , vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 391-429; Stephen Morris and Hun Song Shin (2008), "Financial Regulation in a System Context," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Fall), pp. 229-61. Return to text 4. In the United States, we have also applied a somewhat less stringent version of the LCR to banks that are large but that do not cross the threshold of being internationally active. This tiered approach is consistent with the principle stated earlier that prudential requirements should vary based on the potential impact of a firm's failure on the financial system as a whole. The liquidity rules clearly seem to have influenced the way banks manage their balance sheets. In the United States, bank holding companies subject to the LCR significantly increased their holdings of high-quality liquid assets from the beginning of 2013 until the beginning of this year, to the point that many internationally active banks reported their LCR ratios already above fully phased-in requirements, even though the transition rules set an 80 percent minimum ratio for January 1, 2015. Return to text 5. It is worth noting that the net capital rule for broker-dealers maintained by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission is a form of hybrid capital and liquidity regulation. However, it seems basically oriented to protecting customers, a bit like traditional regulation of life insurance companies, and was not developed with going concern or systemic implications in mind. It does not, for instance, place higher requirements on firms with heavy reliance on short-term wholesale funding, though it does penalize firms that hold large amounts of illiquid assets. In many respects the rule seems well-suited to smaller broker-dealers but, for reasons explained earlier, it does not seem optimal for the large broker-dealers in large bank holding companies. Return to text 6. Through the use of certain kinds of derivatives, some funds acquire synthetic leverage. There are arguments for additional regulation in those cases, though again, capital requirements do not seem at first glance the optimal tool. Return to text 7. Under the proposed rules, mutual funds and exchange-traded funds would be required to implement liquidity risk management programs to address investor redemptions, including swing pricing during times of rapid redemption and calculation requirements to measure the amount of assets that could be liquidated without impacting market prices. Securities and Exchange Commission Press Release 2015-201, SEC Proposes Liquidity Management Rules for Mutual Funds and ETFs , September 22. SEC Chairman Mary Jo White previously provided a roadmap to the development of a regulatory approach for the asset management industry: " Enhancing Risk Monitoring and Regulatory Safeguards for the Asset Management Industry ," speech delivered at the New York Times DealBook Opportunities for Tomorrow Conference, New York, December 11. Return to text Last Update: September 28, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At "The Future of Large and Internationally Active Banks" 18th Annual International Banking Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the World Bank, Chicago, Illinois Share The regulation of financial institutions is necessarily a dynamic exercise. Growth or innovations in banking may create new risks that prompt regulatory change. The new requirements, in turn, incentivize or disincentivize certain actions by financial institutions, including shifts in activity that may start anew the process of regulatory response. The regulation of international banking reflects this general pattern, but because internationally active banks can quickly transmit financial problems across national boundaries, it also features the question of who should be doing the regulating in a dynamic financial environment. Following the financial crisis, during which some internationally active banks posed special problems for both home and host countries, this issue has commanded attention reminiscent of the aftermaths of the Herstatt failure of the 1970s and the Bank of Commerce and Credit International (BCCI) failure of the early 1990s. Unlike those earlier instances, though, this renewed prominence of the "who does the regulating" question has accompanied a major reconsideration of what regulation is appropriate. Today I would like to address both the "who" and the "what" issues in the regulation of international banking. My theme is hardly an original one--namely, that in the absence of either a global regulator or completely insular national banking systems, we must continue to work toward a system of shared responsibilities to assure both home and host regulators that internationally active banks are subject to adequate oversight and controls. I will begin by reviewing briefly the benefits and risks associated with international banking and then identifying the different models for allocating responsibility for the oversight of international banks. After noting the shortcomings of the system for regulating internationally active banks that prevailed before the financial crisis and developments in the intervening years, I will turn to a consideration of the challenges that remain, with a few suggestions on how we might make more progress. Benefits and Risks of International Banking It is worth at least briefly reminding ourselves of some of the more salient advantages and risks associated with cross-border banking as they help inform development of regulatory options. 1 Among the potential advantages are facilitating productive capital flows, diversifying risks associated with growth in host countries, diversifying the earnings and thus the stability of the global bank, offering counter-cyclical lending through support from the parent when host country economic conditions constrain domestic banking operations, enhancing efficiency in financial intermediation in host countries, providing specialized financial services, 2 and providing price or product competition for banking services in host countries. The magnitude of these benefits obviously differs from country to country, depending on a variety of factors. Some of these benefits can be greater if foreign banks have the freedom to deploy capital and liquidity to whatever markets offer the most attractive opportunities, whereas others are achievable simply through the bank's expertise, existing business relationships, and range of services. On the other side of the ledger are the risks associated with foreign banking that are distinct from risks associated with banking more generally. These risks tend to be related to the parent bank's capacity to support the larger organization. Reversals in the home market or other significant foreign operations may reduce the ability of the parent to support its foreign affiliates with needed capital and liquidity. Even if the foreign affiliate is not itself under great stress, the weakened overall condition of the parent because of problems in other parts of the world may prompt it to retrench--often rather abruptly--by reducing activity in foreign markets in which it is active. This response may be driven either by bank management itself or at the instance of home country officials who want the bank to continue to lend in its home market. Especially in countries where foreign banks account for a significant part of financial intermediation and where the underlying problems are not idiosyncratic to a specific bank, the result may be a significant diminution in intermediation beyond what would have taken place because of macroeconomic developments. Even more serious is the risk that the foreign bank will fail, and that the home country will lack the resources or the will to ensure either that it is recapitalized and continues to function or that it fails in an orderly fashion. If the foreign operation has been thinly capitalized and is lacking in liquidity, host country officials may face an unpleasant choice between supporting a foreign bank (including operations for which they have not had consolidated supervisory responsibility) or allowing it to fail in a disorderly fashion, with potentially serious knock-on effects in the host country's financial system. Thus, what might have been economic advantages for host countries from foreign banks in reasonably good times can turn into substantial disadvantages in periods of idiosyncratic or generalized stress. As with the benefits of foreign banking, the risks vary considerably among host countries. Obviously, countries without well-developed domestic banking systems will both benefit more and be at greater risk. Yet even the most sophisticated domestic financial systems can be affected significantly. For example, the risks can be exacerbated by funding patterns and currency mismatches, as happened in the United States during the financial crisis. Foreign banks that had been using their U.S. branches to raise dollars in short-term markets for lending around the world were suddenly left without access to this funding and, as a result, made substantial and--relative to their assets--disproportionate use of the Federal Reserve's discount window. Approaches to the Regulation of Internationally Active Banks As I mentioned at the outset, international banking raises the question of who should do the regulating, as well as the question of what regulation is appropriate. The two questions are related, of course. As I will explain shortly, the nature of regulations in part depends upon the perspective and aims of the regulator. There are essentially four models, each of which has benefits and shortcomings. First, the home jurisdiction can have dominant or exclusive regulatory responsibility for all of its banks' global operations through application of consolidated regulation and supervision. Second, host jurisdictions can have dominant regulatory responsibility for all foreign banking operations within their borders. This approach requires foreign banks to charter locally and to meet the same regulatory and supervisory standards applicable to domestic banks. Third, there can be shared authority between home and host jurisdictions, whereby host countries do some regulating and supervising of foreign banks within their borders but do not require all foreign banking activities to be locally chartered and subject to regulation identical to that of home banks. Finally, there could be one global regulator to oversee all the operations of internationally active banks around the world. There is an almost unlimited number of variations on the shared approach and, in fact, one or another variants on that approach have been adopted by most jurisdictions during the modern banking era (though there have been instances of countries severely limiting or prohibiting foreign banking altogether). Before turning to a discussion of how the shared approach has evolved and may be further modified, I think it useful to identify both the appeal and the problems with the other three, conceptually purer, approaches. Both the attraction and limitations of the host country model are fairly apparent. On the one hand, the host country is most likely to be attentive to the risks posed to its financial system by foreign banks. More generally, the host jurisdiction is at least presumptively best positioned to craft a regulatory and supervisory framework to protect its financial system from the particular risks engendered by economic and financial conditions. Having all foreign banking operations meet local capital and other standards helps achieve that end. The risks of abrupt shifts of capital and liquidity out of the country can be minimized, and depositors can be better protected. On the other hand, a fully local regulatory system would make the costs of entry very high. For example, if no foreign branches were allowed, or were required to operate as if they were separately chartered and capitalized, the commitment of resources needed to enter a foreign market would be considerably higher than those typically associated with opening a branch. In addition, even complete local subsidiarization might not protect a foreign banking operation from suffering some contagion if its parent is under stress. Thus, the quality of home country regulation may have some bearing even under the host country model. Not surprisingly, the home country model presents essentially the obverse set of advantages and limitations. Having a consolidated set of capital requirements and a single supervisor allows for the quickest deployment of capital and liquidity where it is most in demand, or most needed to relieve stress, and minimizes compliance costs. However, as has often been pointed out, the home country regulator will be most responsive to the impact of both regulation and distress of its banks on its own market. In its regulatory and resolution activities, it is likely to undervalue the potential risks and costs for host countries. In periods of stress, the home country regulator, accountable primarily to home country legislators or government officials, may concentrate on stabilizing its own financial markets and be more inclined to allow, or even demand, a sharp reduction in activity abroad. The result would, at a minimum, be an abrupt decrease in intermediation at particularly sensitive times. At worst, foreign operations could default on obligations and exacerbate financial stress. 3 At first glance, it might seem that the home country and global regulatory approaches would yield similar substantive results, since in each case, there would be consolidated regulation and supervision. A global regulator, however, would at least in theory take the interests of all jurisdictions into account in regulating, supervising, and resolving a global bank. Of course, how to balance those interests--particularly in the face of unanticipated circumstances--would be a difficult, and almost invariably political, judgment. This reality raises the thorny issue of the accountability of a global regulator. The political factor is one of many reasons why jurisdictions are likely to remain unwilling to cede much authority to global, as opposed to international, financial institutions. Indeed, quite apart from political considerations, there may be good reasons not to do so. For one, a single global regulator of internationally active banks would presumably be something close to a regulatory monopolist, whose policies and practices could be inappropriately uniform across quite different national markets and slow to adapt to changing conditions. Also, as with dominant or exclusive reliance on home country consolidated supervision, it seems unlikely that a global regulator--no matter how well-staffed--would be fully informed on the varieties of financial risks posed to regulated institutions across national markets. A limited exception to the general disinclination to cede financial sovereignty, as in various other areas, lies within the European Union or, more precisely, the euro zone. With the creation of a Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) in the European Central Bank and a freestanding Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM), there have been important transfers of authority, though national regulators continue to play a supporting role. Interesting and important as this regional initiative is, however, the unique European arrangement of shared sovereignty makes it less a model for the world as a whole than an extension of the single currency project, responding to some of the difficulties encountered during the financial crisis. The Shared Model and Lessons of the Crisis The shortcomings of each conceptually "pure" model explains why some version of a shared home/host model has prevailed over time. Given the range of variations in this model, however, it is useful to bear in mind the relative advantages and disadvantages of the cleaner models in choosing the elements of a specific shared approach. In considering recent developments, as well as what remains to be done, it is also useful to begin by recalling the situation that prevailed at the onset of the financial crisis. In its early years, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's work focused on elaborating the responsibilities of home and host regulators of internationally active banks. The principle of consolidated supervision was developed in the early 1980s, and reinforced following the failure of the BCCI in the early 1990s, in an effort to ensure that some regulatory authority had an overview of a global bank's consolidated assets and liabilities. At the same time, though, the Basel Committee set out expectations for host country prudential oversight of foreign banks that would be similar to that for domestic banks. 4 The financial crisis painfully demonstrated the inadequacy of both home and host country regulation. Home country regulators of some large, internationally active banks clearly did not appreciate the risks those firms were assuming overseas. Host country regulators, including those in the United States, had not exercised prudential oversight of some foreign bank activities and had not sufficiently appreciated the risks associated with the funding models and other activities of some foreign banks that were subject to consolidated prudential regulation. And there were indeed instances of international bank failures in which the home country authorities seemed to focus on domestic interests to the possible detriment of the interests of host countries. 5 Of course, regulatory failures were far more pervasive than inattention to the specifically cross-border activities of banks. The substantive rules governing capital and other requirements for all banks were woefully inadequate, although the fact that most very large banks around the world have significant cross-border operations exacerbated the shortcomings. While banks were growing in size, integrating traditional lending and capital markets in ever more complicated ways and relying increasingly on vulnerable short-term wholesale funding models, many regulators around the world were at best failing to keep up with these changes. At worst, they removed older prudential limitations without substituting new measures designed to address the new realities of banking. The Basel Committee spent most of the decade before the crisis dominantly focused on the Basel II framework, which was intended to reduce somewhat effective regulatory capital levels for large banks in return for their transition to an internal-models-based approach to capital requirements. This was a choice made by national regulators, led by those in the United States, and not a byproduct of the structure of the Basel Committee itself. Adding the lessons of the 2007-09 financial crisis to those of earlier episodes of financial stress, I think we can infer some guidelines on host and home responsibilities to help shape expectations for practice. For host countries, the overarching guideline is that each jurisdiction should take responsibility for protecting the financial stability of its own markets as its contribution to achieving global financial stability. The extent of this responsibility obviously increases with the size and significance of the jurisdiction's financial markets. Thus the United States and the United Kingdom--which currently have the greatest concentrations of capital markets activities--have a particular obligation to oversee the local activities of both domestic and foreign banks that could pose particular risks to financial stability and are likely to be especially difficult to observe for a home country supervisor less familiar with those markets. A corollary of this general guideline is that the scope of host country regulation might sensibly vary with the size and systemic importance of foreign banks. This notion is consistent with the principle embodied in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act that prudential regulation should be progressively more stringent as banks pose greater risks to financial stability. As I will discuss in a moment, this principle also lies behind some of the post-crisis frameworks developed by the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) . For home countries, the relatively longstanding principle that regulators should exercise effective consolidated supervision remains critical, though I would emphasize that the regulation imposed by home jurisdictions is of equal--if not greater--importance. It is important to emphasize that this obligation is not a substitute for host country regulation and supervision of foreign banking organizations. The home jurisdiction regulatory structure must ensure that the banks are fundamentally safe and sound, and that the parent will generally be able to support its operations around the world. Here, of course, a major shortcoming of the pre-crisis regime becomes apparent, in that capital and other regulatory requirements for internationally active banks were simply not strong enough. Consolidated supervision must contain the risks to the financial system created by banking activity that is not fully captured by regulations. It must also ensure that banks do not hide problems by shifting assets or liabilities around their global operations and, more generally, that the banks are fundamentally safe and sound so as to forestall possible contagion risk to foreign operations. Within these admittedly broad guidelines, there is obviously room for host countries to balance the benefits and risks presented by foreign banking organizations in a number of different ways. Their choices will be affected by policy preferences, the characteristics of their domestic financial systems, and the relative importance of foreign banks in those systems. The host country choices will also inevitably be affected by how home countries are carrying out their regulatory and supervisory roles. This consideration includes, of course, not just regulations that are nominally applicable, but the manner in which those regulations are enforced. Branching presents a particularly instructive example of the tension between assuring financial stability and permitting foreign banking operations that may carry economic benefits. Because branches are not separately chartered and capitalized, a bank can relatively easily enter a foreign market by opening a branch, through which it can make loans--often initially to companies from its home country--using funds from the home bank. Particularly where (as in the United States) foreign branches are forbidden by local law from accepting retail deposits, it might seem that there are minimal risks to the host country if the parent bank (and thus the local branch) fails. However, U.S. experience with foreign branches in the decade prior to the crisis shows the very real risks that can arise when a branch is used to raise funds in the host country (in the United States, in dollars) through short-term wholesale borrowing, and then directs those funds out of the host country for loans or asset purchases by other parts of the bank. As noted earlier, when short-term funding dried up, many foreign branches were left seriously short of liquidity and had to turn to the discount window. A shared feature of the U.S. and European Union regulatory systems for foreign banks is that branching is permitted without requiring separate capitalization. Many other jurisdictions have similar policies. Thus opportunities for foreign bank entry and market access are provided. In the United States, larger branches do have to meet some liquidity requirements, though they are less restrictive than the standards applicable to domestic banks and intermediate holding companies. This requirement is an important example of a prudential measure that balances financial stability and the benefits of international banking. The degree to which we or, I presume, other jurisdictions will remain comfortable with this balance will depend on two factors. The first factor is the degree to which local branches are used by foreign banks as significant sources of unstable funding or for other risky purposes. While this has been a significant issue in the United States, it is less clear that other jurisdictions face similar risks. The second is the confidence host jurisdiction regulators have that the parent banks are subject to effective regulatory and supervisory oversight. Developments since the Crisis The profound shift in political and policy environments as a result of the financial crisis has led to considerable strengthening of minimum international standards for internationally active banks, at both national and international levels. Basel III enhanced the quantity and quality of capital requirements and introduced, for the first time, quantitative liquidity standards. Following completion of Basel III, the Basel Committee developed a structure of slightly misleadingly named capital "surcharges," which requires global systemically important banks (GSIBs) to maintain higher capital levels. 6 The Federal Reserve supported all these measures but was a particularly strong advocate of the capital surcharges, which established the new principle that some international prudential standards should be progressively more stringent as the systemic importance of a bank increases. In meeting its responsibility to promote domestic financial stability, the Federal Reserve last year followed the lead set by the European Union some years previously and adopted a regulation requiring subsidiaries of GSIBs engaged in traditional banking as well as those engaged in capital markets activities be covered by local capital requirements consistent with Basel III. But neither in the United States nor the European Union do the GSIB capital surcharges imposed at the consolidated level apply to foreign banking operations in their jurisdictions. 7 So even if the global bank has local capital requirements for most or all of its foreign operations, the parent still has some flexibility as to where the additional capital buffer can be maintained. More generally, our requirements for other prudential regulations applicable to foreign banking organizations (FBOs) are calibrated to the relative importance of the FBOs in the U.S. financial system. Thus the structure of surcharges also help to create a good mechanism for balancing host country interests in assuring financial stability and in realizing the benefits that can come from global banking. Even with good standards, regulators in host jurisdictions will want assurance that these standards are being rigorously implemented and enforced. The relative opaqueness of bank balance sheets makes capital, liquidity, and other common banking regulations difficult to monitor effectively. This argues for complementing fairly complex regulation that seeks to track the often-complex activities of large banks with simpler regulations, such as the leverage ratio and a standardized risk-weighted capital floor. But it also argues for existing international fora such as the Basel Committee and the FSB to provide effective monitoring mechanisms. Even with higher standards in place, supervisors in home and host jurisdictions will still face challenges in assessing cross-jurisdiction vulnerabilities. More regular sharing of information and assessments among home and key host jurisdictions both formally and informally should be high on our shared agenda. At present, both those groups have useful processes for overseeing the implementation of agreed upon international standards. But they tend to be a bit formalistic, concentrating on comparing the language of domestic implementation to that of the international standards, rather than examining whether domestic practice in fact ensures substantive compliance or gaining a shared understanding of the unique risks in each market. It would, I believe, be counterproductive to establish in either the Basel Committee or the FSB the kind of adversarial dispute settlement process associated, for example, with the World Trade Organization. It is in the interest of all members of those bodies to cooperate in the shared task of overseeing internationally active banks. Thus, the better approach to compliance would be one that simultaneously provides regulators with a way to work with one another and to gain deeper insight into how their counterparts in other jurisdictions are applying prudential standards. For example, there has been considerable documentation of the interjurisdictional divergence in risk weights for similar exposures under the internal models-based capital approaches of Basel II. 8 While the Basel Committee has been working on this issue, 9 I suspect that one of the most effective ways of promoting broadly comparable risk weighting would be to have technically competent supervisory staff from other jurisdictions participate with home regulators in the actual bank model validations, oversight, and related supervisory functions. Similarly, as stress testing becomes a more important global financial stability tool, it will be useful to have staff experienced in stress testing at home participating in the stress testing exercises of other jurisdictions. These kinds of interactions, along with the more traditional device of supervisory colleges, can help foster confidence among host jurisdictions in both the regulatory and supervisory activities of home country authorities. Another useful practice for furthering mutual confidence would be a program for regular contact among the very top officials of key regulators. The original Basel Committee brought together these officials for what were usually relatively informal meetings. As one of the early participants in those meetings once told me, the relationships he built with his counterparts through these regular contacts served everyone well when issues concerning international banks arose. But with the concentration of the Basel Committee on sometimes highly technical standards, participation has generally drifted down to the senior staff level. The FSB was created in part to compensate for this change in the Basel Committee. And the FSB usually does garner higher levels of participation. However, other features of the FSB--such as including market regulators and finance ministries in order to provide a broader range of views on financial stability issues--mean that the FSB cannot serve the original Basel Committee purpose either. Moreover, even when the right member agencies are represented, the actual individuals participating may not be the most senior officials in the supervisory function of those agencies. Finally, the near doubling in size of both the Basel Committee and the FSB, while again critical for ensuring a representative group to consider financial stability issues, further complicates the matter. Thus, while a regular, high-level interaction among all key regulators would be optimal, for the foreseeable future, we will probably have to live with something less than optimal. Ad hoc meetings around the fringes of various Basel convocations and bilateral interactions may have to suffice. In this regard, I note the importance of the creation of the SSM within the European Central Bank as the supervisor for all larger banks in the euro zone. The Federal Reserve has already established instructive and productive relationships with the experienced and committed group of supervisors that have been brought in to lead the SSM. The Limits of Shared Responsibility It is important to recognize, though, that even with the best of intentions and actions in home country regulatory and supervisory regimes, there will be limits to how much responsibility can appropriately be shared for international banking activities. These limits are most apparent in the context of the possible insolvency of a major foreign banking organization. 10 The work of the FSB in promoting effective resolution regimes around the world and in seeking an international framework for building the total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) of GSIBs are very good examples of cooperative efforts that promote the aim of ensuring that even the largest banks can fail without either causing financial disorder or requiring injection of public capital. My expectation is that the FSB's framework for TLAC will incorporate the principle of an extra buffer of loss absorbing capacity at the consolidated level beyond what may be required in the aggregate at local levels. 11 But the margin may be a little thinner here, precisely because of the circumstances in which the loss absorption capacity may be needed. With respect to going concern prudential requirements such as capital levels, host countries have a continuing opportunity to observe how home country officials are regulating and supervising their banks. Particularly if effective monitoring mechanisms are developed, host countries may become comfortable with limited oversight of some or all domestic operations of foreign banks. If they see the rigor of home consolidated oversight waning, they will have a chance to intensify their own supervision. But with the prospect of a failed bank, there will be no time for such adjustments or, as a practical matter, the capacity to impose new requirements may become limited by the time the prospect of failure is looming. The imposition of requirements in the midst of a crisis would in any event likely exacerbate stress. Even with the best of intentions, today's home country regulators cannot effectively bind their successors' response to the insolvency of one of their globally important banks when political and economic pressures are likely to be high. The gone-concern loss absorbency requirement for FBO intermediate holding companies proposed by the Federal Reserve Board on October 30 should enhance the prospects for an orderly firmwide global resolution of an FBO by its home country resolution authority through increasing confidence that the U.S. operations of the FBO will obtain their appropriate share of the loss absorbency capacity of the consolidated foreign bank. Past experience suggests that host supervisors are most likely to ringfence assets when there is doubt that the local customers and counterparties of foreign banks will be adequately taken into account. Yet if, for any reason, the home jurisdiction resolution is unsuccessful, the internal long-term debt will be available to U.S. authorities for orderly resolution and recapitalization of the intermediate holding companies. We have calibrated our proposed internal TLAC requirements slightly below our proposed external TLAC requirements for U.S. GSIBs. This slightly lower calibration for internal TLAC recalls the difference between local going-concern capital requirements and the GSIB surcharge, but the gap is somewhat smaller, reflecting the concerns I mentioned a moment ago. The proposal thus balances support for the preferred resolution strategy of the home resolution authority of the foreign GSIB with assurance of U.S. financial stability if that strategy cannot be executed successfully. 12 Conclusion My view of shared responsibility for overseeing international banks emphasizes the importance of financial stability even as it allows for benefits specific to international banking. For the reasons I have explained, in the end host countries need to make the judgments on the tradeoffs between these goals. But I have also explained how a strong set of international prudential standards and good institutional relationships among regulators could help tilt this balance toward greater flexibility for internationally active banks. In response to positions akin to what I have presented today, one often hears complaints that the emphasis on financial stability will result in the balkanization of international banking. I would note first that it is not at all clear that developments since the crisis have on net balkanized banking, so much as shifted some international banking assets from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries whose banks were disproportionately affected by the financial crisis to banks from some emerging market and developing countries. 13 This development probably reflects both needed changes in some of the OECD nation banks and a logical reflection of the increasing economic importance of the non-OECD countries. Second, I wonder how these critics can think that the pre-crisis situation of supposedly consolidated oversight and substantial bank flexibility was a desirable one. At least some of the flexibility enjoyed by banks in shifting capital and liquidity around the globe was deployed in pursuit of unsustainable activity that eventually ran badly aground. Third, as I suggested earlier, even where concerns about "trapped" capital or liquidity are more sensibly based, reasonable ex ante constraints by host country authorities in pursuit of a sound and stable domestic financial system are likely to be far preferable to ex post constraints--for example, ringfencing--that are imposed when the foreign bank is under the greatest pressure. 1. By "cross-border banking," I mean to refer broadly to activities carried on outside of a bank's home country through subsidiaries and branches. I do not include direct lending or other financial transactions across national borders, whether or not facilitated by an agency in the country of the bank's customer or counterparty. While such activities can raise concerns pertaining to investor protection, the volatility of financial flows, or foreign exchange policies, relevant prudential considerations will generally be limited to the country(ies) from which the bank is initiating the transaction and raising any funds needed to fund it. Return to text For references to many individual studies examining one or more the advantages or risks, see Stijn Claessens and Neeltje van Horen (2014), "The Impact of the Global Financial Crisis on Banking Globalization," IMF Working Papers 14/197 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, October). 2. For an example, see Stijn Claessens, Omar Hassib, and Neeltje van Horen (2015), "The Role of Foreign Banks in Trade," mimeo, (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and De Nederlandsche Bank, March). Return to text 3. Mindful of the considerations lying behind the limitations of both models, Dirk Schoenmaker has offered his theory of the "financial trilemma," which states that a jurisdiction can only have two of the three objectives of a stable financial system, international banking, and national regulatory policies. Professor Schoenmaker introduced his theory at a conference in 2008 and subsequently formalized it in Dirk Schoenmaker (2011), "The Financial Trilemma," Economics Letters, vol. 111 (April), pp. 57-59; and Dirk Schoenmaker (2013), Governance of International Banking: The Financial Trilemma (Oxford: Oxford University Press). See also Richard J. Herring (2007), "Conflicts between Home and Host Country Prudential Supervisors," in Douglas D. Evanoff, George G. Kaufman, and John R. LaBrosse, eds., International Financial Stability : Global Banking and National Regulation , (Hackensack, N.J: World Scientific), pp. 201-20. Return to text 4. The current version of this obligation is set forth in Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2012), " Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision " (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, September). I have addressed the issue of host state responsibility at somewhat greater length elsewhere. Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), " Regulating Large Foreign Banking Organizations ," speech delivered at the Harvard Law School Symposium on Building the Financial System of the Twenty-first Century, Armonk, New York, March 27. Return to text 5. For a review of these instances, see Schoenmaker, Governance of International Banking, pp. 72-87. Return to text 6. I say "misleadingly" called capital surcharges because that term implies the banks are faced with a "charge" that has to be paid to someone. In fact, of course, the requirement is that the bank retain higher capital buffers in order to increase its resiliency. Return to text 7. See 79 FR 17240 (March 27, 2014); and Tarullo, "Regulating Large Foreign Banking Organizations." Return to text 8. See generally Vanessa Le Leslé and Sofiya Avramova (2012), "Revisiting Risk-Weighted Assets," IMF Working Paper 12/90 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, March). Return to text 9. See Stefan Ingves (2014), "Finishing the Job: Next Steps for the Basel Committee," keynote address to the Ninth BCBS-FSI High-Level Meeting on "Strengthening financial sector supervision and current regulatory priorities," Cape Town, South Africa, January 30. Return to text 10. Indeed, Dirk Schoenmaker developed his notion of the financial trilemma around the conflicts of interest that arise in the context of the insolvency of a global bank. Return to text 11. The TLAC proposal of the FSB contemplates that host authorities will set internal TLAC requirements at 75 to 90 percent of applicable external TLAC requirements. Return to text 12. Our internal TLAC proposal effects this balance principally by not including parent GSIB surcharges in the calibration for FBO intermediate holding companies but also by lowering the baseline TLAC requirement for U.S. intermediate holding company subsidiaries of single-point-of-entry strategy FBOs from 18 percent of risk-weighted assets to 16 percent of risk-weighted assets. Return to text 13. For a discussion of these points, see Claessens and van Horen, "The Impact of the Global Financial Crisis on Banking Globalization." Return to text Last Update: November 05, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C. Share Watch live The financial crisis highlighted two major vulnerabilities in the U.S. financial system. First was the magnitude of the too-big-to-fail problem. Second was the size and fragility of the so-called shadow banking system and the extent to which shadow banking activities not subject to prudential regulation were integrated with the regulated banking sector. In the intervening years, much has been done to address too-big-to-fail. With regard to shadow banking concerns, the specific forms related to mortgage lending that linked the regulated and unregulated sectors, such as the notorious structured investment vehicles (SIVs), collapsed during the crisis. Changes in capital, accounting, and other regulatory standards make these arrangements very unlikely to reappear. Moreover, the kind of very large nonbank financial firms whose failures deepened the crisis are now subject to consolidated prudential regulation and supervision. So, in a quite direct sense, the answer to the question posed by this conference of whether we are safer than before the crisis is easy to answer in the affirmative. Of course, "safer" does not necessarily mean safe enough. With respect to the largest banks, we continue to pursue the aim of promoting orderly resolution through evaluation of their resolution plans and through a long-term debt requirement, as proposed a few weeks ago. In addition, the banking agencies will be proposing a net stable funding ratio rule, aimed at assuring adequate medium-term liquidity, in the next few months. And the Federal Reserve is currently engaged in a review of its annual stress testing and capital planning exercises, one goal of which is to reflect better the range of risks confronted by these institutions. With respect to shadow banking, the subject of my remarks today, the circumstances are somewhat different. While the specific pre-crisis linkages to the regulated sector have been removed or better regulated, the possibility of other connections remains. More generally, risks to financial stability may arise anew from activities mostly or completely outside the ambit of prudentially regulated firms. Shadow banking is not a single, identifiable "system," but a constantly changing and largely unrelated set of intermediation activities pursued by very different types of financial market actors. Indeed, the very rigor of post-crisis reforms to prudential regulation may create new opportunities for such activities. The aphoristic warning to avoid too much emphasis on fighting the last war, since wholly new risks may have arisen, seems particularly applicable in this area. Yet there is simultaneously the opposite danger that the regulatory response to shadow banking will be too broad and too unidimensional. Indeed, the very term "shadow banking" tilts in that direction. This afternoon, I will try to identify some of the considerations that could help navigate between the perils of underappreciating the risks to financial stability arising from, and the costs from overreacting to, new forms of nonbank financial intermediation. Along the way I will make a few points. One is that, analytically, it is essential to disaggregate the various activities that fall under the loose term shadow banking and to assess the risks and benefits they present on a discrete basis. A second is that, notwithstanding the manifold nature of nonbank intermediation, it remains useful to identify the relationship of specific activities to the prudentially regulated sector. A third is that institutional considerations will be important in defining the potential, and actual, regulatory responses to nonbank intermediation. The Legacy of Shadow Banking As you have probably noticed already, I have some misgivings about the continued use of the term shadow banking as a shorthand for various forms of nonbank financial intermediation that may need a regulatory response. The term conjures up a picture of lending and borrowing that resembles activity associated with, but not conducted by, commercial banks which is both over- and under-inclusive of actual risks to financial stability. Before elaborating on this point, though, let me review how the phrase does capture well the activities that played such a large part in precipitating and exacerbating the financial crisis. 1 Before 2007, large banks provided credit and liquidity support, whether explicit or implicit, for a range of intermediation entities, including finance companies, nonbank mortgage lenders, SIVs, and asset-backed commercial paper conduits. All of these entities engaged in maturity and liquidity transformation, frequently accompanied by significant leverage. Many created, through securitization or otherwise, assets that were viewed as cash equivalents--safe, short-term, and liquid. That is, at least in normal times, they were seen as comparable to demand deposits created by the traditional banking sector. Thus, what we might refer to as the prototypical form of shadow banking presented the kind of risk associated with traditional banking prior to the creation of deposit insurance--that of destabilizing short-term creditor runs that lead to defaults and asset fire sales. Bank sponsorship contributed to the illusion that the shadow banks' short-term liabilities were virtually as good as cash. Large banks also relied on short-term wholesale funding provided by the shadow banking sector as a source of cheap financing. Then, questions arose about the quality of the mortgage loans and other assets underlying the liabilities of SIVs and asset-backed commercial paper conduits and, simultaneously, about the continued willingness and capacity of their sponsors to support them. Suddenly, asset-backed commercial paper was no longer seen as a cash equivalent, and a run ensued. Large investment banks also experienced dramatic runs on their short-term, secured wholesale funding. Another powerful run occurred, this time on money market mutual funds, after Lehman Brothers' shadow banking activities caused it to fail and the Reserve Primary Fund broke the buck. As noted earlier, some key elements of pre-crisis shadow banking such as SIVs have vanished, and some key actors of that earlier period have been brought within the bounds of prudential regulation. Today, the shadow banking sector is smaller and the traditional banking sector is more resilient. Nonetheless, abundant global liquidity continues to seek out safe assets, and some financial market participants will continue to accept maturity and liquidity mismatches in order to earn incrementally higher yields. The risks associated with short-term wholesale funding in particular have more receded than disappeared. Accordingly, the prototype of the precarious shadow banking model can generate new variants that should command regulatory attention. Before returning to this issue, though, I want to speak more directly to why and how we should analyze the risks and benefits associated with specific forms of nonbank financial intermediation, rather than make regulatory decisions based upon the fact that a particular form of intermediation bears some resemblance to the borrowing or lending activities traditionally associated with commercial banks. Analyzing Nonbank Intermediation Switching from a focus on "shadow banking" to a consideration of the varieties of nonbank intermediation reinforces the importance of assessing specific risks rather than merely categorizing activities as either shadow banking or something else. In this way, the potential over-inclusiveness for financial stability purposes of the tag "shadow banking" can be better avoided. Even nonbank intermediaries that engage in lending to consumers or small businesses are not monolithic, insofar as the sources of their funding--and thus attendant run risks--may differ markedly. On the other hand, financial stability risks are not limited to entities or activities that seem to replicate the kind of lending conventionally associated with commercial banks. This is where the potential under-inclusiveness of the shadow banking category arises. Here again, though, it is important not to leap to the conclusion that where some risks do exist, they should be addressed in a uniform manner. For example, some classes of asset managers, such as bond funds that hold relatively illiquid assets while offering their investors the right to withdraw funds on very short notice, may pose redemption risks. But intermediaries such as many conventional mutual funds do not pose bank-like risks, since they generally are not leveraged. So, if further analysis supports the conclusion that redemption risks are real, the optimal regulatory response would surely not be one that treats all asset managers as quasi-banks that need to have capital and similar bank regulatory constraints. 2 An emphasis on actual risks can lead to the conclusion that some nonbank financial entities or activities do not pose material threats to financial stability at all. Pension funds, for example, are surely an important form of intermediation. If, over time, they do not have assets sufficient to meet their promises to plan participants, whether because they have been underfunded in the traditional sense or because they have lost money through ill-considered investments, hardship will undoubtedly follow. If enough pension plans fell short of expectations, there might be macroeconomic consequences. And if they provide short-term funding in order to increase returns on the assets they need to keep liquid, they might contribute to the risks assumed by other kinds of intermediaries. But, in themselves, they are unlikely to pose financial stability risks. Similar reasoning would apply to traditional insurance activities. Even as the risks associated with specific forms of nonbank intermediation are evaluated, it is important also to bear in mind the specific economic benefits of those activities. Nonbank intermediaries can increase the diversity of the economy's capital providers. For example, the creation and eventual proliferation of equity mutual funds offered a variety of savings options to American households for which ownership of a diversified portfolio of equities is either practically burdensome or financially impossible. This development posed a challenge for the liability side of banks' balance sheets, as households reduced the share of their savings in traditional bank deposits. But it is hard to argue that this challenge would have merited limiting the availability of mutual funds. Nonbank intermediaries can also provide credit to borrowers that are underserved or unserved by traditional banks. It could be argued that one example of such nonbank activity is online marketplace lending that uses new sources of data and new technologies to lower the fixed costs of making credit decisions, rendering lending to some individuals and small businesses more cost-effective. Of course, it matters a great deal whether this competition to traditional banks arises because risks are genuinely lower or useful new products have been created, on the one hand, or because well-grounded prudential or consumer regulations have been successfully avoided, on the other. 3 A key implication of the fact that the activities often grouped under the heading shadow banking are not monolithic is that the level of a particular activity is less important than the degree of vulnerability that it creates. Not all of what some might call shadow banking activity represents a market failure that creates excessive risk to financial stability, and so it would be wrong to assume that all shadow banking ought to be regulated to safeguard financial stability. This view is reflected in the Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report for 2015 , which has just been issued by the Financial Stability Board. The report begins by including all activities that could arguably be included in the very broad category of shadow banking, but then classifies these activities by economic function and risks. The result is about a 70 percent decrease in the amount of intermediation otherwise captured by the broader definition. 4 Thus, assessing whether regulation is appropriate for specific forms of nonbank intermediation requires a balancing of the resulting increase in socially beneficial credit, capital, or savings options against any associated increase in risks to the safety and stability of the financial system as a whole. The chief relevant factors to consider include the extent of reliance on maturity or liquidity transformation, the creation of cash equivalent assets, the use of leverage, and the degree of interconnection with the traditional banking sector. When growth in nonbank intermediation reflects a migration of traditional banking activities to less-regulated entities, a number of similar considerations are relevant to an evaluation of the costs and benefits of the migration and the potential need for a regulatory response. Here, where the activity is probably quite bank-like, I am going to revert to the use of the term shadow bank. First, to what extent does the activity, as practiced by shadow banks, entail reliance on leverage or on maturity or liquidity transformation that could lead to a bank-like creditor run dynamic? Bank regulation is primarily aimed at preventing the occurrence of such destabilizing runs or minimizing their ill effects, and so the need for bank-like regulation is greater in the presence of material run risk. Second, are banks still informally or indirectly at risk despite the migration to nonbank entities? This could be the case if banks sponsor the shadow banks and implicitly or explicitly provide them with a liquidity backstop or credit support, and it would call for greater regulatory attention either to the shadow banks conducting the activity or to the banks' connection with those shadow banks. Third, is the activity at issue primarily migrating out of the most systemic banks--global systemically important banking organizations (GSIBs)--or smaller banks? Migration of activity out of GSIBs might on net be beneficial for financial stability because it would leave the GSIBs less systemic, even if the activity migrates to less-regulated shadow banks, though I would caution that an especially careful analysis would be needed before reaching this conclusion. In this regard, I would note that one way to limit the growth of shadow banking that simply arbitrages bank regulation is to make sure that the regulated sector itself is not unnecessarily burdened. This aim lies behind our efforts to tailor banking regulation by reference to the risks posed to the economy and the financial system by banks of different sizes, scopes, and business activities. In addition, it suggests a couple of additional considerations for evaluating specific forms of shadow banking. Here, though, the relevance of these considerations is for determining whether to adjust banking regulation, as much as it is for determining whether regulation of the shadow banks would be warranted. One such consideration is whether the activity is high-risk, and whether banks have a good track record in addressing the attendant risks. Migration may be of less concern where banks historically have done a poor job of managing the risks of the activity. Another salient consideration is whether the activity at issue has significant synergies with core banking activities. If so, then migration out of the traditional banking sector could damage the efficiency of banks and increase their vulnerability. Short-Term Wholesale Funding While I favor assessment of the specific risks and costs associated with a particular form of nonbank intermediation, I also believe that the greatest risks to financial stability are the funding runs and asset fire sales associated with reliance on short-term wholesale funding, and thus I place particular emphasis on this factor. If there is one lesson to be drawn from the financial crisis, it is that the rapid withdrawal of funding by short-term credit providers can lead to systemic problems as consequential as those associated with classic runs on traditional banks. 5 When financial intermediaries must rapidly liquidate a substantial amount of longer-term assets that they can no longer fund, the impact can reverberate throughout the financial system. The resulting declines in asset prices can trigger margin calls on other investors, who themselves may need to de-lever by selling their own holdings, adding to the fire sale-induced price impact on these, and potentially other, assets. In the worst case, the result can be the kind of generalized asset price decline and liquidity freeze observed at the height of the financial crisis. The total amount of short-term wholesale funding within the financial system is lower today than immediately before the crisis, but volumes are still large relative to the size of the financial system. For example, nearly half of the liabilities of broker-dealers consist of short-term wholesale funding, an amount that is nearly the same as it was during the crisis. 6 Numerous regulatory reforms have addressed the use of short-term wholesale funding by prudentially regulated institutions. The Board has finalized the liquidity coverage ratio 7 and is developing the net stable funding ratio to diminish large banks' vulnerability to abrupt changes in short-term wholesale markets. The Board's annual Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review provides an opportunity for supervisors to assess and, where necessary to contain risks, require changes to the specific funding practices of large banking organizations. 8 Finally, in order to increase the resilience of firms that continue to use significant amounts of such funding, we have also incorporated a measure of a firm's reliance on short-term wholesale funding into the calibration of both the capital surcharge for U.S. GSIBs and our proposed long-term debt requirement for those firms. 9 These measures, applicable as they are only to prudentially regulated banking organizations, do nothing to address the risks of short-term wholesale funding by nonbank intermediaries. Indeed, constraints imposed on banking organizations may prompt more short-term wholesale funding to migrate outside the regulated sector. In the past, bank backstops were generally needed for shadow banks to obtain substantial amounts of such funding. But it is not so far-fetched to think that, with time and sufficient economic incentive, the financial, technological, and regulatory barriers to the disintermediation of prudentially regulated banking firms could be overcome. Indeed, we have observed some investment funds exploring the possibility of disintermediating dealers by lending cash against securities collateral to other market participants. While it would be inadvisable to apply bank-style regulation to all entities that make use of short-term wholesale funding, a degree of consistent regulatory treatment is desirable to address bank-like risks in the shadow banking sector and to forestall regulatory arbitrage. The Board has advocated for international measures to forestall the development of highly volatile funding structures outside the regulated sector. Consistent with this position, we will be developing a regulation that would establish minimum haircuts for securities financing transactions (SFTs) on a market-wide basis, rather than just for specific classes of market participants. SFTs include repo, reverse repo, securities lending and borrowing, and securities margin lending--transactions that are the lifeblood of many kinds of shadow banks. SFTs are a key component of the healthy functioning of the securities market. But, in the absence of sensible regulation, they also carry the potential for prompting the fire sale dynamic described earlier. While the haircuts and other conditions associated with SFTs today are considerably more conservative than during the period leading up to the crisis, there is good reason to believe that this conservatism could be eroded as economic conditions continue to improve and credit growth accelerates. A system of numerical haircut floors for SFTs would require any entity that wants to borrow against a security to post a minimum amount of excess margin to its lender, with the amount varying depending on the asset class of the collateral. Like the minimum margin requirements that U.S. regulators have imposed on derivatives contracts, numerical floors for SFT haircuts would serve as a mechanism for limiting the build-up of leverage in the financial system. They could also mitigate the risk to financial stability posed by pro-cyclical margin calls during times of financial stress, since putting a regulatory floor under SFT haircuts during good times would reduce the amount by which they would increase during periods of stress. Institutional Considerations While the analytics of shadow banking, or nonbank intermediation more generally, lean toward a case-by-case balancing of risks and economic benefits, significant institutional issues also need to be addressed. Today I will mention only two. First is the issue of what form of regulation is appropriate once analysis suggests that a response is needed. By authorizing the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) to designate nonbanks as systemically important institutions, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act fills the gap that existed in the pre-crisis period, when firms like Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and AIG largely escaped the perimeter of prudential regulation. Designation by FSOC places firms under the regulation and supervision of the Federal Reserve Board. While the Board can shape the particulars of its oversight to the nature of each designated firm, the statute requires liquidity standards, risk management standards, resolution plans, and concentration limits, with the additional strong presumption of capital standards. As important as the designation authority is to preclude the Lehmans or AIGs of the future, it is almost surely not the optimal regulatory approach for most activities that can be characterized as shadow banking or that are conducted by nonbank intermediaries so as to raise financial stability concerns. The vast majority of firms engaged in such activities will not satisfy the statutory test for designation. In any case, it is unclear that all of the statutory prudential requirements for designated firms would be necessary or appropriate in dealing with the risks to financial stability posed by the activities of these firms. In many instances, and especially where funding vulnerabilities are at the heart of a business model, it is the activity itself that needs to be regulated in some way, whether there are a few large firms involved or many smaller ones. A tool that might be better targeted to actual risks, while avoiding unnecessary "bank-like" regulation would be what I have previously termed "prudential market regulation"--that is, a policy framework that builds on the traditional investor-protection and market-functioning aims of market regulation by incorporating a system-wide financial stability perspective. This approach would take into account such considerations as system-wide demands on liquidity during stress periods and correlated risks that could exacerbate liquidity, redemption, or fire sale pressures. The specific policies associated with prudential market regulation might be transaction-specific or apply to certain kinds of business models. One example of such a measure is the SFT minimum haircut idea I mentioned earlier. Generally, though, prudential market regulation would be a tool more available to market regulators, since it would apply to activities on a market or transactional basis. In her important speech last year, Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Chair Mary Jo White provided a roadmap for just such a regulatory approach for the asset management industry. 10 The SEC has since begun to develop that approach. 11 The second institutional issue is the question of which regulators would make the assessment and policy tradeoffs that I contemplate in addressing financial stability risks associated with nonbank financial intermediation. The natural answer would be the regulator with authority to act. While this may well be the best answer from a policy perspective, it does raise some potential issues on its own. For example, if regulators with responsibility for one sector believe that the failure of regulators with responsibility for another sector to act on financial stability concerns is creating debilitating disadvantages for firms in the first sector, they might be tempted to relax regulation on their firms, even though they might agree that the best outcome would be to retain their existing regulations but have the other sector subject to some constraints as well. This seems to me not a bad description of what happened in banking for a good part of the three decades beginning in the mid-1970s, when the banking agencies pursued a variety of deregulatory measures in part because they believed that the franchise of commercial banking was being eroded by various capital market activities that were not subject to appropriate prudential requirements. Conclusion The Financial Stability Board study to which I referred earlier notes that the growth of shadow banking in the United States in recent years has been relatively modest. With the regulated financial sector so much more resilient than in pre-crisis days, the financial system as a whole is obviously safer. Moreover, much of the innovation occurring in lending and payments arenas today carries the promise of genuinely increased efficiency, and does not appear to be just an arbitrage against the stronger post-crisis regulatory regime. But if history is any guide, the grace period we are now experiencing will not last forever. New forms of intermediation may carry new risks, or older forms may acquire new risks as they expand and adapt to new circumstances. If we are to pursue a policy of case-by-case assessment that permits healthy forms of nonbank intermediation while protecting the financial system, financial regulators will need to develop effective and supple mechanisms for what I have termed prudential market regulation. 1. For a fuller discussion, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), " Shadow Banking after the Financial Crisis ," remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Conference on Challenges in Global Finance, San Francisco, California, June 12. Return to text 2. Some mutual funds may in fact use a form of synthetic leveraging that could complicate an assessment of financial stability implications. See 80 Fed. Reg. 62279 (October 15, 2015), footnote 35. Return to text 3. For a discussion of potential concerns with marketplace lending, see Antonio Weiss (2015), remarks delivered at the Information Management Network Conference on Marketplace Lenders , New York, New York, October 29. Return to text 4. Financial Stability Board, Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2015 (Basel, Switzerland: Financial Stability Board, November 12). Return to text 5. See, for example, Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2010), "Regulating the Shadow Banking System," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington: Brookings Institution, Fall). Return to text 6. See Stanley Fischer (2015), " Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy ," speech delivered at the 59th Annual Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 2, Table 1. Return to text 7. 79 Fed. Reg. 61440 (October 10, 2014). Return to text 8. For a fuller description, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), " Liquidity Regulation ," remarks delivered at the Clearing House 2014 Annual Conference, New York, New York, November 20. Return to text 9. See 80 Fed. Reg. 49082 (August 14, 2015) (GSIB risk-based capital surcharge final rule); and www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/bcreg20151030a1.pdf (long-term debt proposal). Return to text 10. See Mary Jo White (2014), " Enhancing Risk Monitoring and Regulatory Safeguards for the Asset Management Industry ," speech delivered at the New York Times DealBook Opportunities for Tomorrow Conference, New York, New York, December 11. Return to text 11. See 80 Fed. Reg. 62274 (October 15, 2015). Return to text Last Update: November 17, 2015 Back to Top

Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Outreach Meeting, Arlington, Virginia Share Watch live On behalf of the Federal Reserve Board, let me join my colleagues from the other bank regulatory agencies in welcoming you to this sixth and final outreach meeting being held as part of the interagency review process under the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA). As you know, EGRPRA requires the federal banking agencies to conduct a decennial joint review of our regulations to identify those that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome. At the third outreach meeting this past spring, I suggested that we could regard the EGRPRA review as a success only if it leads to significant reduction in regulatory burden for smaller banks. Over the course of this year, there has been a wide range of comments on a wide range of regulatory practices. But many have been concentrated in what are obviously a few key areas of concern to smaller banks. These include simplifying the regulatory capital rules for smaller community banks; modifying the information collected by Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, the so-called "Call Report"; and updating certain regulations and supervisory practices under the Community Reinvestment Act to reflect current banking practices. First, many commenters have urged a change regarding the application of the Basel III capital requirements to community banks. They have argued that simpler capital rules are needed to reduce the compliance burden for smaller institutions because it is disproportionate to the benefits of the framework's increased risk sensitivity. The greater detail of the Basel III framework requires a degree of categorization, recordkeeping, and reporting that can be particularly costly for smaller community banks. As I have publicly stated before, I believe that it is possible to develop a simpler set of capital requirements for smaller banks that will be consistent both with the safety and soundness aims of prudential regulation and with our statutory obligations such as the Collins Amendment. Second, commenters have called for changes to the Call Report. The Call Report is filed quarterly and used by regulators to monitor the safety and soundness, performance, and risk profile of each institution and to assess the condition of the banking system. Many of the comments have advocated modifying the types and amounts of information collected by the report for community banks to align more closely with the relatively straightforward business models of these firms. Here, I am pleased to say, the federal banking agencies have not waited for the end of the EGRPRA comment process to respond. In September, we published proposals that would streamline and simplify regulatory reporting requirements for community banks arising from the Call Report. These proposals, published under the auspices of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, would eliminate or revise several Call Report data items. The proposals complement other efforts aimed at lessening burden associated with the Call Report. These efforts include accelerating the start of a statutorily required review of the appropriateness of the data items collected by the Call Report, evaluating the feasibility and merits of creating a streamlined version of the Call Report for community banks, and holding teleconferences and webinars to explain reporting requirements and any upcoming changes. As we complete the EGRPRA review process, we will certainly consider other opportunities for change. Third, commenters have made recommendations as to how regulations and supervisory practices implementing the Community Reinvestment Act should be modernized to reflect the ways that banking services are now being provided and that banks are interacting with the communities they serve. Some commenters have requested that the regulations' asset thresholds, which are used to determine the examination method for banks of different sizes, be raised. Others have asked for cost-saving procedural changes, such as updating the requirement to maintain hard copies of a bank's public file so as to reflect changes in technology. Here again, I believe there should be ways the federal banking agencies can be responsive to this set of concerns. As this is the last outreach meeting of this EGRPRA process, I think it useful to add that we are committed to a systematic analysis and consideration of all the comments that we receive. This will allow us to prioritize recommendations and act as quickly as possible to adopt them. It is in that spirit of creating priorities for action that I identified those three areas that have commanded attention from so many commenters. Thank you again for your participation in today's session. I look forward to hearing your views. Last Update: December 02, 2015 Back to Top
