is achievable and will greatly enhance the robustness and resilience of our financial system. I have focused here on the reform efforts around LIBOR, which is only one reference rate, albeit one that is widely used and a core part of our financial system. But, the need for stronger governance and more accountability spreads much further within the set of benchmark rates, and further to encompass a wide range of practices within the financial system. For example, accusations have recently surfaced related to business practices within foreign exchange markets. While the concerns are technically very different than the practices uncovered around LIBOR submissions, the common theme is the willingness of a small number of market participants to behave improperly and contribute to a decline in confidence in the integrity of benchmark rates specifically and of major financial institutions more generally. Next Steps I have discussed some of the observed problems in major reference rates that reflect egregious personal behavior. Some individuals responded to poorly-designed incentives and weak controls at some of the largest financial institutions. The regulatory community has already taken important steps to mitigate those concerns and real progress has been made. While this has helped to restore some of the integrity of particular reference rates, such as LIBOR, more work needs to be done before confidence in these rates are put on a firmer foundation. I’ll conclude by emphasizing two of the next steps that I think are most essential for the successful reform of LIBOR. First, the definition of LIBOR should be broadened so that it more accurately reflects the observed funding patterns of large banks and puts the rate on a broader, more stable base of observable transactions. The LIBOR administrator is actively considering ways to do this while remaining true to the spirit of LIBOR and how it is used in financial contracts. Accomplishing this will make markets that need a reference rate that embodies bank credit risk more robust and resilient and will strengthen the financial system. Second, we still face the problem that the reference rate for a large stock of derivatives contracts is based on a relatively small, underlying cash market. This means there still is a powerful incentive for individuals to attempt to manipulate the rate for their own gains. One promising solution, outlined in Governor Powell’s recent speech on reference rates, is to work with market participants to find an alternative reference rate that is based on a deeper underlying cash market and that meets the needs of all market participants. Of course, any rate that serves as a critical financial benchmark must meet the principles for good governance and production outlined by IOSCO. This combination—a more robust and resilient LIBOR for transactions that require a reference rate with a bank credit risk component and the development of an alternative reference rate for transactions like interest rate derivatives that don’t—will strengthen our financial system and help undo some of the damage caused by earlier transgressions. But this is only a necessary and not a sufficient set of conditions. To achieve the outcome desired, financial institutions also need to have in place the appropriate incentives and controls. Thank you for your attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Lorie Logan, William Riordan, Kevin Stiroh, Joseph Tracy and Nathaniel Wuerffel assisted in preparing this speech. 2 Charles Dickens. A Tale of Two Cities 3 See McConnell, “Systemic Operational Risk: The LIBOR Manipulation Scandal.” Journal of Operational Risk, 8(3):59-99. 4 See Darrell Duffie and Jeremy Stein. “Reforming LIBOR and Other Financial-Market Benchmarks.” September 19, 2014. 5 CFTC UBS, 2012 , page 12. 6 CFTC UBS, 2012, page 13. 7 CFTC Barclays, 2012 , page 13. 8 The Wheatley Review of LIBOR: Final Report . 9 Principles for Financial Benchmarks: Consultation Report , International Organization of Securities Commissions. 10 Reforming Major Interest Rate Benchmarks , Financial Stability Board. 11 Reforming U.S. Dollar LIBOR: The Path Forward , Remarks by Jerome H. Powell at the Money Marketeers of New York University, September 4, 2014. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

, and at the end of my talk, I will be happy to answer questions you may have about the economic outlook. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Open Market Committee. National Economic Conditions Since the official end of the Great Recession more than five years ago, the U.S. economy has grown at a disappointing 2.2 percent compound annual rate. Several times over that period it looked as though growth was breaking out on the upside, but each time such hopes were dashed. We are again at a similar junction. A wide array of economic indicators now suggest that growth in the U.S. has picked up and is widely expected to be around 3 percent during the second half of 2014 and in 2015. These forecasts seem quite reasonable to me and are consistent with views I have expressed in the past. Various “headwinds” have been impeding economic activity, but some of these forces have gradually subsided, allowing the substantially improved underlying fundamentals to exert themselves more forcefully. For example, fiscal restraint, which was a big factor last year, has subsided and is likely to disappear altogether next year. Credit availability has also improved, reflecting healthier bank balance sheets and improving job and income prospects for prospective borrowers. In addition, the excess supply of housing built up over the boom of the previous decade has been worked off, and both home prices and rents suggest that the supply of housing is not keeping pace with demand. This has allowed supportive financial market conditions, spurred, in part, by a very accommodative monetary policy, to shine through. As a result, aggregate household net worth has climbed relative to income and consumer balance sheets are healthier. On the business side, financial markets conditions suggest that risk aversion has subsided, leading to some firming in business investment spending. All of these developments help boost the confidence of consumers and businesses that this consensus forecast will in fact unfold. Of course, as with any forecast, there is some meaningful chance that growth will be either weaker or stronger than the point forecast. While I believe that the risks around this consensus forecast are reasonably well balanced, I also believe that the likelihood that growth will be substantially stronger than the point forecast is probably relatively low. Several factors lead me to this conclusion. First, despite the fact that the household deleveraging process appears to be largely over and aggregate household net worth has been restored to pre-crisis levels, consumer spending is not as strong as one might expect given these conditions. As a result, the personal saving rate is currently significantly above what the historical relationship between household net worth and personal saving would suggest. There are several potential explanations for this development. Access to credit, while certainly improved, is probably still not fully restored, particularly for those with less than sterling credit histories. It is also quite likely that, in the wake of the deep recession and relatively sluggish growth of the past five years, households have higher than normal levels of precautionary saving. Another reason for seeing less than normal upside risk for consumer spending is that the growth stimulus from the consumer durable goods cycle is likely to weaken going forward. For example, sales of light-weight motor vehicles have steadily recovered from a low of 9.4 million units (annual rate) at the depths of the recession to an average of nearly 17 million units over the three months ending in September. The fastest pace of sales in the previous business cycle was 17 million units for all of 2005. While there may be some additional upside potential to these sales given the quite long period over which they were depressed relative to fundamentals, it seems unlikely that they will continue to grow at the rate they have over the past few years. Housing is another area where the upside risks are likely to be less than what we might expect under more normal conditions. We have seen an impressive recovery of multi-family housing starts over the past few years. However, starts of single-family homes continue to languish at relatively low levels despite the fact that home prices have risen substantially over the past two years and mortgage rates remain quite low. Mortgage lenders continue to be extremely risk averse and mortgage credit to those with lower credit scores is still significantly constrained. There is nothing on the horizon that would lead me to believe that situation will change in a material way any time soon. Lastly, over the past few months the exchange value of the dollar has appreciated while growth prospects of key trading partners, particularly the Euro Area, have dimmed. Of course, the appreciation of the dollar is likely due in part to increasing confidence that growth prospects in the U.S. have improved. Therefore, this development does not mean we should abandon the consensus forecast. Rather, as with the other issues I have discussed, I view this development as limiting the upside risk to that forecast. Despite the limiting factors discussed above, the pace of growth envisioned in the consensus forecast implies that overall labor market conditions will continue to improve. But there is a great deal of uncertainty about the resulting path of the unemployment rate, with some forecasters expecting a fairly steep decline to around 5 percent by the end of 2015, while others anticipate a much more gradual decline. In addition to how strong output grows, the ultimate path of the unemployment rate will also depend on the behavior of productivity growth and the labor force participation rate. The labor force participation rate has declined a great deal since 2007, the previous cyclical peak, due to a combination of demographic factors and protracted cyclical weakness in labor demand. The behavior of the participation rate and its likely future path is an issue we continue to monitor and study intently. While I still believe that the participation rate could move back up again as the demand for labor strengthens, I am less confident about this than earlier as the downward trend in participation rates has persisted even as the labor market has improved. What I can say with greater certainty is that there still is a significant underutilization of labor market resources. I come to this conclusion after assessing many labor market indicators, not just the level of the unemployment rate. For example, the fact that the rate of growth of labor compensation costs remains so subdued is consistent with this conclusion. With respect to prices, inflation has been running somewhat below the Federal Reserve’s objective of a 2 percent annualized rate for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. The latest Congressional Budget Office forecast has the four-quarter percent change of the core PCE deflator moving up from 1½ percent in the second quarter of 2014 to 1.9 percent by the fourth quarter of 2015. As with growth, I find this forecast to be quite reasonable, but would argue that the risks are on the side that inflation moves upwards more slowly than this. First, the appreciation of the dollar and weakening of foreign growth prospects that I mentioned earlier both act to dampen inflation pressures. Second, energy production in the U.S. is rising much faster than I would have guessed just a few years ago, helping to reduce energy prices which in turn reduces a wide range of production and distribution costs. Lastly, I would note that research suggests that inflation expectations play a very important role in the inflation process. Those expectations remain well anchored at the present time, despite concerns by some that the amount of slack in the economy has declined substantially. I am quite confident that those expectations will remain well anchored in the future, limiting the increase in inflation set in motion by faster growth and further reductions in slack. So what does this imply for monetary policy? We have made substantial progress with respect to the labor market outlook since we began our current program of large scale asset purchases in 2012. Because it looks very likely that the program will have fulfilled its objectives, I expect to support a decision to end the asset purchase program at the end of this month. At the same time, it still is premature to begin to raise interest rates—the labor market still has too much slack and the inflation rate is too low. The consensus view is that lift-off will take place around the middle of next year. That seems like a reasonable view to me. But, again, it is just a forecast. What we do will depend on the flow of economic news and how that affects the economic outlook. For example, firmer growth, higher inflation, and a more rapid tightening of the labor market could cause us to move earlier. Conversely, should economic growth disappoint, the timing of lift-off could be pushed later. I hope the economy cooperates. If it does and lift-off begins sometime next year, that will be something to be very excited about. It will signal that the economy is finally getting healthier and that the Fed is getting closer to achieving its dual mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability. That would be very good news even if it were to cause a bump or two in financial markets. Regional Economic Conditions Let me now turn to economic conditions a bit closer to home. While Upstate New York outperformed the nation during the Great Recession, it has now returned to its more typical pattern of modest growth. This is not unexpected as many regions in the Northeast have tended to grow more slowly in recent decades as the population has shifted to other parts of the country and as jobs in the once dominant manufacturing industry have diminished. That being said, some parts of the region are really struggling: Syracuse, Utica, Binghamton and Elmira have all yet to see a meaningful recovery in employment, which is troubling. The Capital region, on the other hand, is a true bright spot. While Upstate New York as a whole has gained back only a little more than half of the jobs lost during the Great Recession, Albany is close to regaining all of the jobs that were lost. Though the Capital region’s public sector has exerted some downward pressure on job growth during the recovery, the education and health care sectors have been an ongoing source of stability and strength for the region. Employment in the education sector has climbed nearly 25 percent since the end of the recession, an increase of around 5,000 jobs, and the health care sector has added about 3,000 jobs. And there’s some especially good news to report from the Capital region’s manufacturing sector: jobs are growing, and growing quite strongly—a testament to the success of the area’s burgeoning high tech sector. Since the recovery began, the area has added over 4,000 manufacturing jobs, many of which are tied to computers and electronics. That’s an increase of nearly 25 percent. This pace of job growth is four times as great as the national pace. In fact, there are now more people employed in the Capital region’s manufacturing sector than before the recession. Not many places can say that, and this is certainly not true for the nation as a whole. In part, the success of local manufacturing reflects the presence of strong partnerships between industry and higher education. These cooperative arrangements, which help in the creation, development and commercialization of new products and processes, drive innovation and put local companies at the leading edge of technology. Moreover, these partnerships directly support local jobs. Not only are students gaining real world experience by working in shared facilities while they are in school, but strong connections between local businesses and higher education institutions help workers train for jobs that are available, and help employers find the skilled workers they need. During my last trip to the region, I saw firsthand how universities and companies can successfully work together during my visits to the State University of New York Nanotech Center and the production facilities at Global Foundries. Of course, RPI has a long history of developing cutting edge technologies and fostering start-up companies. RPI’s Emerging Ventures Ecosystem initiative provides an excellent example of how a leading university can help local firms access the knowledge and intellectual property provided by its faculty and students. These types of collaborations are a key ingredient to improving the competitiveness of local businesses and increasing the relevance of the universities to the communities they serve. We should take every opportunity to exploit these partnerships as much as possible to unleash their full potential. The strong foundation that has already been built has clearly been successful, and I expect these partnerships will support the region’s economic vitality going forward. College Graduates Finding Jobs Finally, I know that many of you here today are students, and you may be concerned about your ability to find a good job upon graduation. There is no doubt that this is a difficult time to be graduating from college and starting your career. While finding a job has gotten a bit easier over the past few years, finding a good job can still be a challenge. Indeed, research we’ve conducted at the New York Fed finds that underemployment among recent college graduates has continued to climb even as the unemployment rate has fallen. This is a troubling trend, and one we are actively trying to better understand. Despite the challenges now facing recent college graduates, I want to assure you that the value of a college degree remains high. While the Great Recession and its aftermath have made it more difficult to find a job out of college these past few years, those without a college degree have had an even tougher time. Students who major in technical fields—such as engineering, mathematics and computer science—have tended to have a much easier time finding a good job and have earned a high return on their educational investment. Although it is true that the labor market has been difficult for college graduates in recent years, I am confident that most of you will find good jobs, especially as the labor market continues to improve. Thank you for your kind attention and I would now be happy to take some questions. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

October 20, 2014 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery As I noted earlier at the start of today’s workshop, improving culture in the financial services industry is an imperative. This endeavor is important in order to ensure financial stability over time, but also to ensure the public trust in our financial system. In my remarks today, I will first talk about what I see as the culture problem. Then, I will focus on how incentives could be improved within the financial services industry to encourage better culture and behavior. This includes how we compensate employees of a financial institution, but it also extends to how these firms identify wrong-doers and punish them. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System. 1 The Existing Culture Problem In recent years, there have been ongoing occurrences of serious professional misbehavior, ethical lapses and compliance failures at financial institutions. This has resulted in a long list of large fines and penalties, and, to a lesser degree than I would have desired employee dismissals and punishment. Since 2008, fines imposed on the nation’s largest banks have far exceeded $100 billion. 2 The pattern of bad behavior did not end with the financial crisis, but continued despite the considerable public sector intervention that was necessary to stabilize the financial system. As a consequence, the financial industry has largely lost the public trust. To illustrate, a 2012 Harris poll found that 42 percent of people responded either “somewhat” or “a lot” to the statement that Wall Street “harms the country”; furthermore, 68 percent disagreed with the statement: “In general, people on Wall Street are as honest and moral as other people.” I reject the narrative that the current state of affairs is simply the result of the actions of isolated rogue traders or a few bad actors within these firms. As James O’Toole and Warren Bennis observed in their Harvard Business Review article about corporate culture: “Ethical problems in organizations originate not with ‘a few bad apples’ but with the ‘barrel makers’.” 3 That is, the problems originate from the culture of the firms, and this culture is largely shaped by the firms’ leadership. This means that the solution needs to originate from within the firms, from their leaders. What do I mean by the culture within a firm? Culture relates to the implicit norms that guide behavior in the absence of regulations or compliance rules—and sometimes despite those explicit restraints. Culture exists within every firm whether it is recognized or ignored, whether it is nurtured or neglected, and whether it is embraced or disavowed. Culture reflects the prevailing attitudes and behaviors within a firm. It is how people react not only to black and white, but to all of the shades of grey. Like a gentle breeze, culture may be hard to see, but you can feel it. Culture relates to what “should” I do, and not to what “can” I do. A number of factors have contributed to the cultural failures that we have seen. An important question is whether the sheer size, complexity and global scope of large financial firms today have left them “too big to manage.” Large problems can originate in small corners of these firms, as illustrated by the Financial Products Group experience at AIG, and the “London Whale” episode at JPMorgan. Differences in attitudes and business practices across countries can also be difficult to reconcile within a firm’s overall compliance function. Recent fines against BNP Paribas for violating U.S. sanctions programs and providing dollar funding to a country engaged in genocide and against Credit Suisse for facilitating tax evasion by U.S. citizens, point to these challenges. Another important element affecting culture has been the shift in the prevailing business model away from traditional commercial and investment banking activities to trading; that is, from client-oriented to transaction-oriented activities. Clients became counterparties—the other side of a trade—rather than partners in a long-term business relationship. In general, interactions became more depersonalized, making it easier to rationalize away bad behavior, and more difficult to identify who would be harmed by any unethical actions. High-powered pay incentives linked to short-term profits, combined with a flexible and fluid job market, have also contributed to a lessening of firm loyalty—and, sometimes, to a disregard for the law—in an effort to generate larger bonuses. Often allegiance to an external network of traders has been more important than the ties the trader has to his or her particular employer. This is particularly evident in the illegal manipulations of the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), and with respect to reference rates in the foreign exchange markets. Although cultural and ethical problems are not unique to the finance industry, financial firms are different from other firms in important ways. First, the financial sector plays a key public role in allocating scarce capital and exerting market discipline throughout a complex, global economy. For the economy to achieve its long-term growth potential, we need a sound and vibrant financial sector. Financial firms exist, in part, to benefit the public, not simply their shareholders, employees and corporate clients. Unless the financial industry can rebuild the public trust, it cannot effectively perform its essential functions. For this reason alone, the industry must do much better. As was discussed earlier, in the U.K., seven of its largest banking institutions have recently founded the Banking Standards Review Council under the leadership of Sir Richard Lambert, who joined us today. I would strongly encourage the largest institutions based here in the United States to work to develop collaborative solutions aimed at improving culture and rebuilding the public trust. The Key Role for Senior Leadership Correcting this problem must start with senior leadership of the firm. The “tone at the top” and the example that senior leaders set is critical to an institution’s culture—it largely determines the “quality of the barrel.” As a first step, senior leaders need to hold up a mirror to their own behavior and critically examine behavioral norms at their firm. Sustainable change at any firm will take time. Turning around a firm’s culture is a marathon not a sprint. Senior leaders must take responsibility for the solution and communicate frequently, credibly and consistently about the importance of culture. Boards of directors have a critical role to play in setting the tone and holding senior leaders accountable for delivering sustainable change. A healthy culture must be carefully nurtured for it to have any chance of becoming self-sustaining. Firms must take a comprehensive approach to improving their culture that encompasses recruitment, onboarding, career development, performance reviews, pay and promotion. All of these elements need to be aligned with the desired culture. Through our supervisory process, we have seen that a number of firms have started this process by developing or refining employee surveys and 360 feedback processes to target issues of behavior and culture. Some firms are incorporating case study discussions into training programs to highlight ethical dilemmas and decision-making. Some are revamping senior level promotion criteria to reinforce what are the desired characteristics and behaviors of leaders. These efforts are at various stages in terms of their depth, breadth and maturity. Supervisors will need to see how these frameworks evolve, and more importantly, see evidence of how these efforts yield results in the form of more open and routine escalation of issues, consistent application of “should we” versus “could we” in business decisions, rigor in identifying and controlling of conduct risk, and how compliance breaches factor into compensation. Measurement and accountability for progress in developing a healthier culture across the industry is paramount to us as supervisors and central bankers. An important measurement of progress is employees’ assessment of their firm’s culture. To this end, we encourage the industry to harness the various individual efforts that have been initiated at a number of firms in order to develop a comprehensive culture survey. This anonymous survey would be fielded across firms each year by an independent third-party and the results shared with supervisors. Having a common survey instrument would promote benchmarking of, and accountability for, progress on culture and behavior. A core element of any firm’s mission and culture must be a respect for law. Federal Reserve guidance advises that banks should strive to “[m]aintain a corporate culture that emphasizes the importance of compliance with laws and regulations and consumer protection.” 4 To maintain such a culture, senior leaders must promote effective self-policing. If audit uncovers an instance of fraud in one unit, the firm’s leadership should ask, “Where else could this behavior occur?” If the press reports fraud at a competitor in a particular business line, the same self-assessment should apply. “Could this happen to us, could we have a similar problem here?” When fraud is detected, boards and senior leaders must ensure that they are informed promptly, and that a thorough inquiry is undertaken at once. The senior leaders of financial firms, and those who report to them, must also be proactive in reporting illegal or unethical activity. Early self-reporting sends a powerful message to employees and to regulators about a firm’s respect for law. This is one important reason why those who self-report in a timely way should be treated preferentially, compared to those that drag their feet and whose bad behaviors are only uncovered by enforcement investigations. How will a firm know if it is making real progress? Not having to plead guilty to felony charges or being assessed large fines is a good start. Firms should also pay closer attention to how they and the industry are broadly viewed by the public. Internally, one important marker for progress is the frequency of problems, and whether small problems stay small, or instead, grow into large problems. A healthy culture is one where problems are identified early and promptly addressed. In addition to a strong compliance function, firms need to foster an environment that rewards the free exchange of ideas and views. Individuals should feel that they can raise a concern, and have confidence that the issues will be escalated and fully considered. This is a critical element to prevention. A firm’s employees are its best monitors, but this only works well if they feel a shared responsibility to speak up, expect to be heard and their efforts supported by senior management. Let me give you an example to take this from the abstract to the more specific. As I noted in a speech a few weeks ago on the issue of reference rate reform, in the case of the LIBOR setting process, the information barriers between the traders and LIBOR submitters were paper thin and porous. 5 At times, traders and LIBOR submitters colluded to manipulate LIBOR for the gain of the traders and the firm. What should have happened instead goes like this: A trader asks the LIBOR submitter to adjust the submitted rate. The submitter says “no way,” tells the trader that this request is inappropriate and that the trader will be reported to compliance. The submitter reports the trader’s attempt at manipulation to legal and compliance. Compliance investigates to confirm the facts. The trader is fired and is fully prosecuted for any criminal actions. For this all to happen, a firm doesn’t just have to have the right rules and procedures in place, but it also needs the right culture to ensure that those rules and procedures are followed, that the bad behavior sees the light of day immediately and that the transgressors are punished in a way that is known broadly throughout the firm—that is, a clear example of the consequences is demonstrated to others. How Can Better Incentives Help? In my example, for matters to work properly, I think it is important that all the players—traders, compliance, risk and legal, have the right incentives to behave in the way that is appropriate and that aligns their interests with the broader interests of the firm in rooting out bad behaviors. One way in which incentives can be shaped is through the structure of compensation. I believe that a proper compensation system can be an important tool for enhancing culture, promoting financial stability and rebuilding the public trust in the financial industry. Incentives matter for individual behaviors and decisions in all industries, including the financial industry. Some might argue, however, that risk-takers are drawn to finance like they are drawn to Formula One racing, and that regardless of risk or reward, these types of individuals will always want to push the boundaries. This logic might lead one to conclude that incentives are unlikely to be an effective tool to limit excessive risk-taking and to promote more ethical behavior in the financial sector. I disagree. First, the degree to which an industry attracts risk-takers is not pre-ordained, but reflects the prevailing incentives in the industry. After all, risk-takers have options. Second, and, more importantly, incentives matter even for risk-takers. In my speech on ending too big to fail, I stressed the importance of reducing the likelihood that large financial firms would face insolvency, as well as the need for a credible resolution plan that does not involve taxpayer money. Compensation policies can play a useful role in reducing excessive risk-taking. Similarly, compensation policies can complement an improved culture, and play a role in reducing unethical and fraudulent behavior. Individuals who decide to bend the rules or to step over the line usually do this in the context of an assessment of the expected risks and rewards of their actions. This implies that one objective should be to rebalance the scales so that the expected risks from unwanted behaviors are more likely to outweigh the expected rewards. The expected risks are a function of the likelihood that an individual (or set of individuals) is caught and the attendant consequences. The expected rewards include any financial and psychic benefits to the individual from the behavior if undetected. Improved culture helps to tip the balance in the favor of better behaviors by increasing the likelihood that an individual will both feel an obligation to behave properly, and be prevented by others from carrying out bad behavior. In addition, a strong culture can also reduce the rewards some employees may hope to enjoy. In its simplest form, a strong culture means that individuals who get away with unethical or illegal activities will not have the satisfaction of “bragging rights” about their actions because there are no congratulations for breaking the law or outwitting compliance. A strong culture will reinforce the simple reward of having done the right thing. A clear conscience can be a powerful reward. A well-designed compensation structure can also help favorably tip the balance by effectively extending the time horizon of senior management and material risk-takers, and by forcing them to more fully internalize the consequences of their actions. There are two important dimensions of the structure of compensation—first, how much compensation is paid out immediately versus deferred into the future, and second, the form of the compensation that is deferred—cash, equity, equity options or debt. For deferred compensation, the rules for how it vests and under what conditions it can be forfeited are important. Getting the balance right is critical. For my part, I believe that in order to improve financial stability and rebuild the public trust, more compensation in finance needs to be deferred and for longer periods. Also, I think there needs to be a shift in the mix of deferred compensation away from equity and towards debt. The optimal structure of deferred compensation likely differs with respect to the goals of providing incentives to support prudent risk-taking versus encouraging the right culture. For example, consider trades that might appear to be highly profitable on a mark-to-market basis, but take some time to be closed out and for the profits to be realized in fact, not just on paper. In this case, as long as deferred compensation is set at a horizon longer than the life of the trade, this can ensure the firm’s and the trader’s incentives are aligned and the “trader’s option” is effectively mitigated. This component of deferred compensation could take the form of either cash or equity. However, in contrast to the issue of trading risk, unethical and illegal behavior may take a much longer period of time—measured in many years—to surface and to be fully resolved. For this reason, I believe that it is also important to have a component of deferred compensation that does not begin to vest for several years. For example, the deferral period might be five years, with uniform vesting over an additional five years. Given recent experience, a decade would seem to be a reasonable timeframe to provide sufficient time and space for any illegal actions or violations of the firm’s culture to materialize and fines and legal penalties realized. As I will argue below, I also believe that this longer vesting portion of the deferred compensation should be debt as opposed to equity. 6 I noted earlier that improving a financial firm’s culture will take sustained determination and commitment from its senior leaders. Deferred compensation can play a useful role in reinforcing buy-in of senior leadership to this endeavor. As I discussed last November, an important element of a Title II resolution under Dodd-Frank is that there is sufficient long-term unsecured debt at the holding company level to recapitalize a failing bank. I indicated in my remarks that it would be useful if a meaningful component of this debt was contributed by the senior management and the firm’s material risk-takers. That is, if a bank ran into solvency problems, this component of deferred compensation would be used to recapitalize the restructured bank. The goal is to incent senior management and the material risk-takers to focus on maximizing the long-term “enterprise” value of the firm, not just the short-term share price. In this framework, I would expect the relative size of the debt component of deferred compensation to increase as one moved up the management ranks to the senior managers of the firm. That is, the individuals who have the greatest impact on a firm’s strategic direction should have the strongest incentives to maximize the firm’s long-term enterprise value. If we have this deferred compensation structure in place for financial firms, then we can leverage it to strengthen the incentives for senior leaders to design and implement the necessary changes to improve their firm’s culture. That is, this deferred debt compensation can be used as a “performance bond.” Performance bonds are used in many situations such as security deposits on rental properties. Today, when a financial firm is assessed a large fine it is paid by the shareholders of the firm. Although senior management may own equity in the firm, their combined ownership share is likely small, and so management bears only a small fraction of the fine. Now, having shareholders pay may create market discipline in that they have an incentive to better monitor the firm’s actions. However, financial firms are not transparent enterprises, and it would be difficult even for a diligent shareholder to be able to know when these bad behaviors are taking place, much less to be able to take actions to prevent them. This limits the potential effectiveness of market discipline exerted by shareholders. How can we improve on this situation? Assume instead that a sizeable portion of the fine is now paid for out of the firm’s deferred debt compensation, with only the remaining balance paid for by shareholders. In other words, in the case of a large fine, the senior management and the material risk-takers would forfeit their performance bond. This would increase the financial incentive of those individuals who are best placed to identify bad activities at an early stage, or prevent them from occurring in the first place. In addition, if paying the fine were to deplete the pool of deferred debt below a minimum required level, the solution could be to reduce the ratio of current to deferred pay until the minimum deferred compensation debt requirement is again satisfied—that is, until a new performance bond is posted. Not only would this deferred debt compensation discipline individual behavior and decision-making, but it would provide strong incentives for individuals to flag issues when problems develop. Each individual’s ability to realize their deferred debt compensation would depend not only on their own behavior, but also on the behavior of their colleagues. This would create a strong incentive for individuals to monitor the actions of their colleagues, and to call attention to any issues. This could be expected to help to keep small problems from growing into larger ones. Importantly, individuals would not be able to “opt out” of the firm as a way of escaping the problem. If a person knew that something is amiss and decided to leave the firm, their deferred debt compensation would still be at risk. This would reinforce the incentive for the individual to stay at the firm and to try to get the problem fixed. This might work for senior managers, but what about those material risk-takers who are early in their careers at a firm and do not have much wealth tied up through deferred compensation to serve as an effective performance bond? How do we provide strong incentives for these traders not to put the firm at risk by their potential illegal behavior? In these cases, we can create the performance bond in a slightly different manner. Individuals who enter finance have generally invested heavily to develop the specialized skills required in the field. These skills typically have a higher return in finance than they do in any other occupation. That is, workers in finance earn a premium relative to their next best alternative job outside of the industry. Over the course of a career, this premium can be expected to add up to a significant sum of money. This cumulative premium can act like a performance bond. For this to be the case, however, an individual who is convicted of illegal activities, or who violates a firm’s code of conduct would need to face the risk of being permanently denied employment in the financial industry. Rather than paying for the performance bond upfront, the bond is posted in terms of the privilege to continue to work in the industry. There are several steps that can be taken to implement this concept. The first step is to make it more difficult for employees in finance who cross ethical boundaries to be able to move from one firm to another in order to escape the consequences. Currently, lenders who are considering making a loan to a borrower can look up the borrower’s credit score which reflects the borrower’s performance on past loans. In a similar manner, it would be helpful if financial firms, prior to making a hiring decision, could look up a candidate’s “ethics and compliance score” that reflects the individual’s past performance at other financial firms. Along these lines, one approach would be to create a central registry that tracks the hiring and firing of traders and other financial professionals across the industry. There would be many details to sort out regarding how to do this in a manner that was both transparent and consistent with due process. The database could be maintained by the official sector—specifically, by financial institution supervisors—based on information provided by supervised financial institutions. A similar regime already exists in the broker-dealer context, in which supervised institutions are required to file U4 and U5 forms when they hire and part ways with licensed professionals. Banking supervisors could consider whether it was appropriate to import these concepts to the banking industry. To help support the completeness and accuracy of the filings, the filing firms could be subject to a safe harbor, akin to the civil immunity for filing a Suspicious Activity Report, so that employers do not fear liability for good faith reporting. Under this approach, new regulations could also require that all financial institutions search the database prior to hiring any trader or financial professional; so that any prior reported events could be taken into account in the course of a hiring decision. As I mentioned, there would, of course, need to be adequate safeguards for employees to challenge an entry, consistent with due process. Furthermore, as a complementary step to the registry, it would be helpful if individuals in finance who are convicted of an illegal activity were prohibited from future employment in the financial services industry. Currently, Section 19 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act prohibits anyone convicted of a crime of dishonesty, breach of trust, or money laundering from working at an insured depository institution or bank holding company. 7 One possibility could be to amend Section 19 to cover the entire financial services industry. The precise formulation of an amendment would need to be worked out, but the application should be sufficiently broad so that it also covers asset managers, hedge funds and private equity funds. Like the registry, a broad and permanent industry prohibition changes the time horizon for the perceived costs of misconduct—from a one-time fine, or perhaps a few years in prison, to a lifetime prohibition from earning a living in finance, regardless of the type of employer involved. I would welcome the industry’s participation in developing this concept. Conclusion To ensure the behavior that is required for a safe, sound and trusted financial system, we must also be effective in our role as regulators and supervisors. As part of this, we as supervisors must continually work to improve our own cultures to ensure that we can successively carry out our responsibilities. But it also requires good culture at the institutions that we supervise. Supervisors simply do not have sufficient “boots on the ground” to ferret out all forms of bad behavior within a giant, global, financial institution. Moreover, regardless what supervisors want to do, a good culture cannot simply be mandated by regulation or imposed by supervision. In conclusion, if those of you here today as stewards of these large financial institutions do not do your part in pushing forcefully for change across the industry, then bad behavior will undoubtedly persist. If that were to occur, the inevitable conclusion will be reached that your firms are too big and complex to manage effectively. In that case, financial stability concerns would dictate that your firms need to be dramatically downsized and simplified so they can be managed effectively. It is up to you to address this cultural and ethical challenge. The consequences of inaction seem obvious to me—they are both fully appropriate and unattractive—compared to the alternative of improving the culture at the large financial firms and the behavior that stems from it. So let’s get on with it. Thank you for your attention. 1 Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Steven Manzari, Hamid Mehran, Thomas Noone and Joseph Tracy contributed to this speech. 2 Saabira Chaudhuri, “Banks’ Legal Tab Still Running Higher.” Wall Street Journal , July 23, 2014. 3 O’Toole and Bennis, “What’s Needed Next: A Culture of Candor.” Harvard Business Review, June 2009. 4 Supervisory Letter SR 12-17 . 5 Restoring Confidence in Reference Rates 6 Given the length of the vesting of this component, firms might want to allow this vesting to continue even if an individual leaves the firm. That is, one may not want an individual’s accumulated deferred debt compensation to act as a friction to job mobility. However, even if an individual leaves the firm, the debt compensation would still be at risk of forfeiture. 7 See 12 U.S.C. § 1829. Related New York Fed Content Opening Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Opening Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Opening Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry October 20, 2014 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Let me start by welcoming all of you to this workshop to discuss the issue of culture in the financial services industry. This is an issue that has been on my mind for a long time. In my view, the industry is not close to where it needs to be, and failure to address this situation should not be viewed as a viable option. In a speech last November, I argued that ending “too big to fail” is a prerequisite for ensuring financial stability and sustainable economic growth. 1 For one thing, the excessive risk-taking undertaken by large and complex financial institutions was an important element of the financial crisis. For another, in terms of culture within these institutions, it doesn’t seem like things today are much better. An “apparent lack of respect for law, regulation and the public trust” persists. I said that I believe that this reflects “deep-seated cultural and ethical failures.” Why did I raise this issue, and why in a speech about too big to fail? Just as excessive risk taking can cause more damage when it occurs in large, complex and interconnected financial firms; the consequences of cultural and ethical failures in these same firms are also more severe and harmful to the economy. I suggested that breaking up these large financial institutions did not seem to be the most efficient means of making the financial system more stable. But, this view was predicated on the assumptions that both the too big to fail problem and the culture problem could be solved. Correcting one but not the other would still leave the financial sector and the economy vulnerable. Or, put another way, fixing the culture problem in the finance industry is also an imperative for achieving financial stability. Today’s workshop is a part of that effort. I thank all of you for your willingness to participate in what I expect will be frank and informative discussions. Culture is not an easy thing to pin down and talk about. Establishing and maintaining the culture of an institution takes work and constant effort, and is a journey as much as a destination—you will never be quite sure if you have gotten exactly where you wanted, but you have to stay committed to the path. I think we’ll find that there are many different elements that have contributed to the current state of affairs and, likewise, an array of tools that will have to be brought to bear to move the industry’s culture to where it needs to be. This morning will be aimed at putting some parameters around the problem—by looking at structural changes that have occurred in the financial sector, and at how compensation and other incentives have evolved over time. This afternoon will be focused on solutions—both those that are being led by the industry itself, and those that are available to the government through enforcement. So let’s get started. I am now very honored to introduce Sir David Walker as our keynote speaker today. David, as chairman of Barclays, a longtime member of the Group of Thirty, and in several other official capacities, has been at the forefront of corporate governance issues and efforts to reform of the industry. David, we look forward to hearing your thoughts. 1 Ending Too Big to Fail Related New York Fed Content Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services Industry By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Panel Remarks at the International Symposium of the Banque de France - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Panel Remarks at the International Symposium of the Banque de France November 7, 2014 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the International Symposium of the Banque de France, Central Banking: The Way Forward? Paris, France As prepared for delivery If all goes according to our forecast and the U.S. economy continues to make progress towards the Fed’s dual mandate goals of maximum sustainable employment and 2 percent inflation, the Federal Reserve will likely begin to raise its federal funds rate target off the zero lower bound sometime next year. For the United States, the start of the normalization of U.S. monetary policy will be a very welcome development. It will indicate that the U.S. economy has made great strides in healing itself from the damage caused by the U.S. housing boom and bust, and the financial crisis. However, this shift in policy will undoubtedly be accompanied by some degree of market turbulence. Moreover, it could create significant challenges for those emerging market economies (EMEs) that have been the beneficiaries of large capital inflows in recent years. What can the Federal Reserve do to minimize these risks? These are some of the very important issues raised by Helene Rey’s work. Let me begin by highlighting some of the key points I will be making. As always, the thoughts I offer today are my own, and should not be interpreted as representing the position of the FOMC or the Federal Reserve System. First, what we may see in terms of market strains and macroeconomic adjustment during this normalization process will not be new. Changes in Fed policy, and especially the tightening of monetary policy, have often created challenges for countries abroad, especially in EMEs. Second, these countries, as a group, are better equipped today to handle those challenges than at perhaps any time in the past. This reflects the fundamental improvements and stronger policy frameworks that many EMEs have put in place over the past 15 years. Third, given the dollar’s role as the global reserve currency, the Federal Reserve has a special responsibility to manage U.S. monetary policy in a way that helps promote global financial stability. Like other central banks, our monetary policy mandate has a domestic focus. But, our actions often have global implications that feed back into the U.S. economy and financial markets, and we need to always keep this in mind. For most of us, the market volatility that we saw during the so-called “taper tantrum” in the spring and summer of 2013 still remains fresh in our minds. EME financial markets were hit hardest, with declines in equity prices, a widening in sovereign debt spreads and a sharp increase in foreign exchange rate volatility. In the U.S., we saw a spike in Treasury yields, with the 10-year rate rising by more than 100 basis points from early May before peaking in early September. Most commentary about this period has focused on the shift in expectations with respect to U.S. monetary policy—and, in particular, to uncertainty about the timing and implications of Fed tapering—as the catalyst for these moves. This focus seems generally right to me, although other factors also played a role. 1 From one perspective, the unconventional nature of recent U.S. monetary policy adds little that is fundamentally new to the challenges that face the EMEs. These policies simply represent a way of easing, necessitated by our coming up against the zero lower bound. Central bankers have managed differences across countries in cyclical positions and policy stances many times in the past. This time should not be fundamentally different. But, from another perspective, we have less experience operating with unconventional monetary policy, and this creates more potential uncertainties. These uncertainties put a premium on keen listening skills on our part and continued dialogue both among central bankers as well as between central bankers and the market. In my view, it is important to recognize that our large scale asset purchase programs affect the size of term risk premia globally. This new set of monetary policies affects financial asset prices in a different way compared to changes in short-term interest rates, and we should be humble regarding what we claim about our understanding of the importance of this distinction. Looking ahead, it seems likely that markets will remain focused on vulnerabilities that they might have ignored prior to the taper tantrum in 2013. The greater premium on strong fundamentals, policy coherence and predictability will likely remain. There will be no one right answer in managing the trade-offs that come with the changed environment, and adjustment will sometimes be difficult. Moreover, we will undoubtedly experience further bumps in the road. The renewed volatility we saw last month is evidence enough of that. Yet, I think we can remain generally optimistic on the outlook so long as market participants continue to appropriately discriminate across countries, rather than treating EMEs as a homogenous group. Furthermore, many EMEs generally appear to be better equipped today to handle the Fed's prospective exit from its exceptional policy accommodation than they were in past tightening cycles. This reflects the fundamental reforms these EMEs have put in place over the past 15 years, as well as the hard lessons they learned from past periods of market stress. Among the positives are: The absence of the pegged exchange rate regimes that often were undermined violently in the past during periods of stress; Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; Larger foreign exchange reserve liquidity cushions; Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now generally low to moderate inflation rates; Generally improved fiscal discipline; and Better capitalized banking systems, supported by strengthened regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Of course, progress has not been uniform across EMEs, and more work remains to further strengthen institutional structures in some countries. In particular, vulnerabilities remain in several important EMEs. Still, the fundamental improvements I’ve cited leave many EMEs better positioned than in the past to weather those times in the cycle when the external environment turns from welcoming to wary. The impact that changes in Fed policy can have beyond our borders has led to calls for us to do more to internalize those impacts, or even further, to internationally coordinate policymaking. As I’ve already noted, Fed policies have significant effects internationally, given the central place of U.S. markets in the global financial system and the dollar’s status as the global reserve currency. In pursuing our policy responsibilities, we seek to conduct policy transparently and based on clear principles. We are mindful of the global effects of Fed policy. Promoting growth and stability in the U.S., I believe, is the most important contribution we can make to growth and stability worldwide. There is, of course, the argument that Fed policy has been too accommodative for too long, creating risks for financial stability worldwide. Here, I think it’s important to consider carefully the counterfactual. Would countries beyond our borders really have been better off with a weaker U.S. economy? The fundamental issue is whether U.S. monetary policy has helped support our dual objectives of stable prices and maximum sustainable growth, and whether this support is consistent with a healthy global economy. Moreover, it is far from clear that explicitly coordinated policy would produce better outcomes for the global economy generally, or the EMEs specifically. Central banks have challenges enough in tailoring policies to their own domestic circumstances. I believe that it would be taking on too much to attempt to collectively fashion policy in reference to global conditions. Monetary policy meant to suit everybody is likely in the end to suit nobody. Similar considerations underlie the widespread move in the emerging world away from fixed exchange rate regimes. Policymakers worldwide have learned that a framework capable of responding in a disciplined but flexible manner to changing domestic conditions works best over the long run. While explicit coordination looks neither feasible nor desirable, there is more that central banks in general, and the Fed in particular, could do to be better global stewards. As an example, recent events demonstrate the importance of effective Fed communication. It is clear in retrospect that our attempts in the spring of 2013 to provide guidance about the potential timing and pace of tapering confused market participants. In particular, markets seemed to conflate tapering with monetary policy tightening and raised their expected paths for policy rates. Lately, we seem to have done better: markets now seem to understand that policy rates will likely remain exceptionally low for a considerable period of time even now that the asset purchase program has been completed. As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and improve our communications. This includes regular press conferences following Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings by the Fed chair; the publishing of growth and inflation forecasts of FOMC participants; and a concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts that the FOMC will look at to assess progress toward our mandate. We are, though, still learning how to more effectively communicate, especially given our new and expanded set of policy instruments. A second area in which we can and must do better is safeguarding financial stability. Simply put, we failed to act both early enough and decisively enough to stem the credit excesses that spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. The U.S. was not alone in this shortcoming, but given our position in the global financial system, we especially should have done better. We've taken important steps reflecting both new legislative mandates and a broader effort to rethink our regulatory and supervisory framework. In particular, systemically important banking organizations must now hold amounts of capital and liquidity that are better aligned with their risk profiles, compensation schemes for these institutions will be more focused on rewarding long-term results and the official sector is making progress in solving the "too-big-to-fail" dilemma. All of this remains very much a work in progress. But, these efforts should help us to avoid repeating the mistakes of the recent past, and to take a more proactive stance toward mitigating potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. Since the recent financial crisis, central banks worldwide have been engaged in a broad rethinking of how to better fulfill their mandates. Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often emanate from getting policy wrong domestically. Recession or instability at home is often quickly exported. Equally important, growth and stability abroad makes all our jobs easier. This means that there are externalities in the work we do, so that more effective fulfillment of our domestic mandates helps to bring us to a better place collectively. Ensuring global growth and stability is and will remain our joint and common endeavor. 1 Market participants also had to evaluate the possibility that growth in China and other EMEs might be slowing even as growth in the U.S. and other advanced economies was picking up. The subsequent market movements as investors withdrew funds from EME investments were an abrupt shock for these EMEs generally, especially after the long earlier period of abundant liquidity and ample inflows. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 13, 2014 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak with you here today. In my remarks, I will assess the outlook for the U.S. economy and the progress that the Federal Reserve has made toward its dual mandate objectives of maximum employment in the context of price stability. I will argue that we are now closer to achieving these objectives. That is the reason why the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) ended its latest Treasury and agency MBS asset purchase program last month. But we still have further to go. Although the U.S. labor market has shown substantial improvement, there still is a meaningful gap between where we are and full employment. Also, inflation continues to undershoot the FOMC’s 2 percent objective. This argues for patience with respect to the timing of lift-off of the federal funds rate and the beginning of the normalization of monetary policy. Although patience is appropriate, if all goes well, I anticipate that we will begin to raise short-term rates sometime next year. That would be a welcome development, because it would indicate that the U.S. economy has largely recovered from the damage caused by the housing boom and bust, and the financial crisis. However, we need to be mindful that this shift in policy most likely will be accompanied by some degree of market turbulence. Moreover, the normalization of U.S. monetary policy could create significant challenges for those emerging market economies (EMEs) that have been the recipients of large capital inflows in recent years. This leads to an important question: what can the Federal Reserve do to address these risks? I will make three observations about the potential international spillovers from normalizing U.S. monetary policy. First, what we may see in terms of market strains and macroeconomic adjustment during this normalization process will not be new. Changes in Fed policy, and especially the tightening of monetary policy, have often created challenges for countries abroad, especially EMEs. Second, these EMEs, as a group, are better equipped today to handle those challenges than in the past. This reflects the fundamental improvements and stronger policy frameworks that many of these countries have put in place over the past 15 years. Third, given the dollar’s role as the global reserve currency, the Federal Reserve has a special responsibility to manage U.S. monetary policy appropriately in order to promote global financial stability. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the FOMC or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The U.S. Economic Outlook and the Implications for Monetary Policy Since the official end of the Great Recession more than five years ago, the U.S. economy has grown at a disappointing 2.3 percent annualized rate. Several times over that period, it appeared that growth was breaking out on the upside and forecasts were raised, but each time such hopes were disappointed. We are again at a similar junction. Over the past two quarters, the pace of economic growth has picked up. In particular, real GDP rose at a 3.5 percent annual rate last quarter, and is widely expected to grow at around a 2½ to 3 percent annual rate through the end of 2015. This time, however, I believe that we are less likely to be disappointed. That is because several of the various “headwinds” that have impeded U.S. economic activity in recent years have subsided. This allows the improving underlying fundamentals to exert themselves more forcefully. For example, fiscal restraint, which had a significant impact on economic growth last year, has abated, and is likely to disappear altogether next year. Credit availability has also improved, reflecting healthier bank balance sheets and improving job and income prospects for potential borrowers. In addition, the excess supply of housing that built up during the boom of the previous decade has been worked off. This lessening of headwinds has allowed supportive financial market conditions spurred, in part, by very accommodative monetary policy to shine through. As a result, I expect that both consumption and business investment spending will strengthen over the next few quarters. On the consumer side, household balance sheets are now healthier, reflecting higher aggregate household net worth relative to income and less leverage. Also, sturdy employment gains and falling energy prices are boosting real income growth. Together with accommodative financial conditions, this should lend support to further gains in consumer spending. Similarly, despite some recent market turbulence, conditions on the business side are supportive to sustained gains in investment. Credit to businesses is generally readily available, cash flows are strong and corporate balance sheets are healthy. The energy sector is another bright spot that has been supporting business investment and the U.S. economy. New extraction technologies have had a dramatic impact on this sector, with natural gas production up 15 percent since 2010, and crude oil production up a remarkable 35 percent. 2 Moreover, natural gas prices have fallen significantly in recent years and are far lower than those in most other industrialized economies. These developments have dramatically boosted jobs and incomes in these industries, with beneficial spillovers to manufacturing competitiveness more generally. Of course, as with any forecast, there is some meaningful chance that growth will turn out to be either weaker or stronger than expected. However, I believe that the risks around this forecast are reasonably well balanced, and that the likelihood that growth will be substantially weaker or stronger than the forecast is relatively low. The subsiding headwinds that I discussed earlier are the primary reason for seeing the downside risks as limited. At the same time, there are a few factors that suggest that there is a relatively low likelihood of growth ending up substantially above the forecast. Three considerations seem important for assessing the degree of upside risk to growth. First, the upside from housing is likely limited compared to what one might expect under more normal conditions. We have seen an impressive recovery of multi-family housing starts over the past few years. In contrast, starts of single-family homes remain at low levels despite the fact that home prices have risen substantially over the past two years and mortgage rates have remained low. A contributing factor is that mortgage lenders continue to be extremely risk averse, and mortgage credit to those with lower credit scores is still significantly constrained. There is little on the horizon that would lead me to believe that this situation will change in a material way any time soon. Second, because motor vehicle sales are now close to their pre-recession levels, the future growth impetus from this cyclical sector probably will also be restrained. Finally, growth in the rest of the world has slowed and the dollar has appreciated somewhat. This will limit the growth in U.S. exports, and suggests that the trade sector is unlikely to be a strong wind at the back of the U.S. economy over the next year or two. With respect to prices, inflation has been running somewhat below the Federal Reserve’s objective of a 2 percent annualized rate for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. For example, over the past twelve months, the overall PCE deflator has risen by 1.4 percent, and the core PCE deflator, which excludes food and energy, has increased by 1.5 percent. Moreover, for the next few months, inflation is likely to moderate further as the impact of falling gasoline prices and the firmer dollar feed into the official U.S. inflation statistics. Thereafter, I expect that inflation will begin to move back towards our 2 percent objective, pushed there as slack in the economy continues to diminish and pulled there by well-anchored inflation expectations. In assessing inflation expectations, I currently put more weight on survey-based measures of inflation expectations as opposed to market-based measures. Survey-based measures have been generally stable, consistent with inflation expectations remaining well-anchored. However, market-based measures, such as those based on breakeven inflation derived from the difference between yields on nominal versus Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), have registered declines over the past few months, even on a 5-years forward basis. Research done by my staff suggests that much of this decline in market-based measures of inflation compensation reflects a fall in the inflation risk premium—that is, what investors are willing to pay to protect themselves against inflation risk. Adjusting for the fall in the inflation risk premium, inflation expectations appear to have declined much less than implied by TIPS inflation breakeven measures. So what does this assessment of the outlook imply for monetary policy? Since September 2012, when the last program of asset purchases was announced, there has been substantial improvement in the labor market outlook. Because the asset purchase program had fulfilled the FOMC’s stated objectives, the FOMC decided to end the program last month. At the same time, it still is premature to begin to raise interest rates—there remains slack in the labor market and the inflation rate is still too low. Hence, the last FOMC statement states: “The Committee anticipates, based on its current assessment, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time following the end of its asset purchase program this month.” But this sentence should not be viewed as an iron-clad commitment. As the statement goes on to say: “However, if incoming information indicates faster progress toward the Committee’s employment and inflation objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases in the target range for the federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated. Conversely, if progress proves slower than expected, then increases in the target range are likely to occur later than currently anticipated.” In other words, what the FOMC does going forward will depend on how the economy evolves, and how this affects the labor market and the inflation outlook. In considering the appropriate timing of lift-off, there are three important reasons to be patient. First, the Committee is still undershooting both its employment and inflation objectives. Unemployment is too high and inflation is too low. Thus, monetary policy needs to be very accommodative in order to close these gaps relative to the Committee’s objectives. Second, when interest rates are at the zero lower bound, the risks of tightening a bit too early seem considerably greater than the risks of tightening a bit too late. A premature tightening might lead to financial conditions that are too tight, resulting in a weaker economy and an aborted lift-off. This would be problematic in that it would harm the Fed’s credibility and, more importantly, would be difficult to rectify. The U.S. experience during the Great Depression and the Japanese experience over the past two decades illustrate the risks of raising interest rates too soon, especially when inflation is running below the central bank’s objective. Finally, given the still high level of long-term unemployment, there could be a significant benefit to allowing the economy to run “slightly hot” for a while in order to get these people employed again. If they are not employed relatively soon, their job skills will erode further, reducing their long-term prospects for employment and, therefore, the productive capacity of the U.S. economy. All that said, I hope the economic outlook evolves so that it will be appropriate to begin to raise interest rates sometime next year. While raising interest rates is often portrayed as a difficult task for central bankers, in fact, given the events since the onset of the financial crisis, it would be a development to be truly excited about. Raising interest rates would signal that the U.S. economy is finally getting healthier, and that the Fed is getting closer to achieving its dual mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. That would be very good news, even if it were to cause a bump or two in financial markets. Global Implications of U.S. Monetary Policy Normalization Let me now turn to the implication of U.S. policy normalization for foreign economies. Like other central banks, our monetary policy mandate has a domestic focus. Our monetary policy actions, though, often have global implications that feed back into the U.S. economy and financial markets, and we need to always keep this in mind. For most of us, the market volatility that we saw in the spring and summer of 2013 during the so-called “taper tantrum” still remains fresh in our minds. EME financial markets were hit the hardest, with declines in equity prices, a widening in sovereign debt spreads and a sharp increase in foreign exchange rate volatility. In the U.S., we saw a spike in Treasury yields, with the 10-year rate rising by more than 100 basis points from early May before peaking in early September. Most commentary about the catalyst for these moves has focused on the shift in expectations with respect to U.S. monetary policy—and, in particular, to uncertainty about the timing and implications of Fed tapering. This focus seems generally right to me, although other factors also played a role. From one perspective, the unconventional nature of recent U.S. monetary policy adds little that is fundamentally new to the challenges that face EMEs. These policies simply represent a way of easing that was necessitated by hitting the zero lower bound on the federal funds rate. Central bankers have managed differences across countries in cyclical positions and policy stances many times in the past. This time should not be fundamentally different. But, from another perspective, we have less experience operating with unconventional monetary policy, and this creates more potential uncertainties. These uncertainties put a premium on keen listening skills on our part and clear communication among central bankers as well as between central bankers and market participants. In my view, an important fact is that our large scale asset purchase programs affect the size of term risk premia globally. This new set of monetary policies affects financial asset prices in a different way compared to changes in short-term interest rates, and we should be humble regarding what we claim to understand about this distinction. Looking ahead, it seems likely that markets will remain focused on vulnerabilities that they might have ignored prior to the taper tantrum in 2013. The greater premium on strong fundamentals, policy coherence and predictability will likely remain. There will be no one right answer in managing the trade-offs that come with the changed environment, and adjustment will sometimes be difficult. We will undoubtedly experience further bumps in the road. The renewed volatility we saw last month is evidence enough of that. Yet, I think we can remain generally optimistic about the prospects for adjustment so long as market participants continue to appropriately discriminate across countries, rather than treating EMEs as a single group. Furthermore, many EMEs generally appear to be better equipped today to handle the Fed's prospective exit from its exceptional policy accommodation than they were during past tightening cycles. This reflects the fundamental reforms that EMEs have put in place over the past 15 years, as well as the hard lessons learned from past periods of market stress. Among the positives are: The absence of pegged exchange rate regimes that often came undone violently during periods of acute stress; Improved debt service ratios and generally moderate external debt levels; Larger foreign exchange reserve cushions; Clearer and more coherent monetary policy frameworks, supporting what are now generally low to moderate inflation rates; Generally improved fiscal discipline; and Better capitalized banking systems, supported by strengthened regulatory and supervisory frameworks. Of course, progress has not been uniform across EMEs, and more work remains to further strengthen institutional structures in some countries. In particular, vulnerabilities remain in several important EMEs, and some EMEs are now being hit by a sharp adverse turn in their terms of trade due to the recent fall in global commodity prices. Still, the fundamental improvements I’ve cited leave many EMEs better positioned than in the past to weather those times in the cycle when the external environment becomes more difficult. The impact that changes in Fed policy can have beyond our borders has led to calls for us to do more to internalize those impacts, or even further, to internationally coordinate policymaking. As I’ve already noted, we are mindful of the global effects of Fed policy, given the central place of U.S. markets in the global financial system and the dollar’s status as the global reserve currency. Accordingly, we seek to conduct policy transparently and based on clear principles. Promoting growth and stability in the U.S., I believe, is the most important contribution we can make to growth and stability worldwide. There is, of course, the argument that Fed policy has been too accommodative for too long, creating risks for financial stability worldwide. Here, I think it’s important to consider carefully the counterfactual. Would countries beyond our borders really have been better off with a weaker U.S. economy—an economy that might have required exceptional monetary policy accommodation for a much longer period of time? The fundamental issue is whether U.S. monetary policy has helped support our dual objectives of maximum employment in the context of price stability, and whether this support is consistent with a healthy global economy. Moreover, it is far from clear that explicitly coordinated policy would produce better outcomes for the global economy generally, or EMEs specifically. Central banks face enough challenges in tailoring policies to their own domestic circumstances. I believe that it would be taking on too much to attempt to collectively fashion policy in reference to global conditions. Monetary policy meant to suit everybody is likely in the end to suit nobody. Similar considerations underlie the widespread move in the emerging world away from fixed exchange rate regimes. Policymakers worldwide have learned that a framework capable of responding in a disciplined but flexible manner to changing domestic conditions works best over the long run. While explicit coordination looks neither feasible nor desirable, there is more that central banks in general, and the Fed in particular, could do to be better global stewards. As an example, recent events demonstrate the importance of effective Fed communication. It is clear, in retrospect, that our attempts in the spring of 2013 to provide guidance about the potential timing and pace of tapering confused market participants. Market participants seemed to conflate the prospective tapering of asset purchases with monetary policy tightening, and pulled forward their expectations about the likely timing of liftoff and raised their expected paths for policy rates. Lately, we seem to have done better: market participants now seem to share the Committee’s current assessment that policy rates will likely remain exceptionally low for a considerable period of time, even now that the asset purchase program has been completed. As you know, we’ve taken a number of steps in recent years to increase transparency and improve our communications. This includes regular press conferences by the Fed chair following FOMC meetings; the publishing of growth, inflation and short-term rate forecasts of FOMC participants; and a concerted attempt to lay out the guideposts that the FOMC will look at to assess progress toward our mandate. We are, though, still learning how to more effectively communicate, especially given our new and expanded set of policy instruments. A second area in which we can and must do better is safeguarding financial stability. Simply put, we failed to act both early enough and decisively enough to stem the credit excesses that spawned the financial crisis and the Great Recession. The U.S. was not alone in this shortcoming, but given our position in the global financial system, we especially should have done better. We've taken important steps through new legislative mandates and a broader effort to rethink our regulatory and supervisory framework. In particular, systemically important banking organizations must now hold amounts of capital and liquidity that are better aligned with their risk profiles, and the official sector is making progress in ensuring no financial firm will be too-big-to-fail. All of this remains very much a work in progress. But, these efforts should help us to avoid repeating the mistakes of the recent past, and enable us to take a more proactive stance toward mitigating potential future vulnerabilities. Of course, we at the Fed are not alone here. Since the recent financial crisis, central banks worldwide have been engaged in a broad rethinking of how to better fulfill their mandates. Let me close with a final thought. The largest problems that countries create for others often emanate from getting policy wrong domestically. Recession or instability at home is often quickly exported. Equally important, growth and stability abroad makes all our jobs easier. This means that there are externalities in the work we do, so that more effective fulfillment of our domestic mandates helps to bring us collectively to a better place. Ensuring global growth and stability is and will remain our joint and common endeavor. Thank you for your kind attention. 1 Agria Sbordone, Thomas Klitgaard, Jonathan McCarthy and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing this speech. 2 See Table 1.2 in the U.S. Department of Energy’s Monthly Energy Review, October 2014. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Testimony on Improving Financial Institution Supervision: Examining and Addressing Regulatory Capture - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Testimony Testimony on Improving Financial Institution Supervision: Examining and Addressing Regulatory Capture November 21, 2014 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Testimony before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Financial Institutions and Consumer Protection Subcommittee As prepared for delivery I. Introduction Chairman Brown, Ranking Member Toomey, and members of the Subcommittee, thank you for this opportunity to testify on the effectiveness of financial institution supervision and the issue of regulatory capture. In 2008 and 2009 our country faced its worst financial crisis since the Great Depression. I mention those years as a touchstone for my remarks today. Despite the passage of time and an economy that is steadily improving, the financial crisis is hardly something that happened in the remote past. For the too many people who are still unemployed or underemployed, or who otherwise continue to struggle financially, it is living history. While the causes of the crisis remain subject to debate, it is undeniable that banking supervisors could have done better in their prudential oversight of the financial system. This conclusion raises two fundamental questions: First , how can we improve the stability of the financial system? In other words, how can we make the financial system more resilient and productive? Second , how can we improve our supervision of financial institutions? The Federal Reserve is working diligently to improve both stability and supervision. The two concepts are linked. Since the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has made significant changes to the substance and process of supervision. As a result, the financial system is unquestionably much stronger and much more stable now than it was five years ago. II. Substantive changes Since the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve has redoubled its attention to bank capital. Capital is the financial cushion that banks hold to absorb loss. 1 It provides an economic firebreak that helps prevent systemic stress from turning into a full-blown crisis. Before the crisis, capital requirements were too low and inconsistent across jurisdictions. Moreover, too much of the capital held by banks was of poor quality, and their internal capital assessments were not forward-looking. 2 Since the crisis, new regulation and heightened supervision have increased both the quantity and the quality of equity capital at the largest financial institutions that we regulate and supervise. The Federal Reserve and other federal banking regulators implemented so-called “Basel III” international capital standards in July 2013, which raised the minimum ratio of common equity Tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets. Federal regulation also now requires stricter criteria for instruments to qualify as regulatory capital and higher risk weights for many classes of assets. And the Federal Reserve mandated a new minimum supplementary leverage ratio that includes off-balance sheet exposures for the largest, most internationally active banking organizations and a leverage surcharge for large U.S. banking organizations. In support of these new regulations, capital assessment has become a focus of supervision since the financial crisis. Examiners monitor capital reserves and put banks through periodic stress tests that are evaluated on a cross-firm basis. This has been one of the great advancements of bank oversight following the crisis. These evaluations enable supervisors to assemble a composite assessment of the nation’s banking sector, which materially assists the Federal Reserve in its statutory mandate to promote financial stability. 3 The Dodd-Frank Act mandates supervisory stress tests that assess whether large bank holding companies have a sufficient level of capital to absorb losses during adverse economic conditions. 4 The Federal Reserve also conducts a capital planning exercise, called the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review or “CCAR.” This evaluation combines the quantitative results from the Dodd-Frank Act stress tests with a qualitative assessment of whether the largest bank holding companies have vigorous, “forward-looking capital planning processes that account for their unique risks.” 5 The criteria for both sets of stress tests are dynamic and change in response to evolving risks. For example, past tests have assumed a sharp, sudden, and widespread drop in markets triggered by, say, a large Eurozone shock. The tests also evaluate market interconnectedness, including the risk of major counterparty default. To increase public transparency, the Federal Reserve now publishes the overall results of its stress tests. This helps rebuild confidence in the strength of the financial system. The most recent round of stress tests concluded in the first quarter of this year. In my view, the results were encouraging, although not uniformly satisfying. In general, “firms participating in CCAR have more than doubled their Tier 1 common capital since 2009, an increase of $500 billion of additional, high-quality capital in the U.S. financial system.” 6 This impressive statistic notwithstanding, the Federal Reserve objected to capital plans from five of the 30 participating firms. Four of those five firms submitted plans that raised firm-specific, qualitative concerns. The remaining firm failed to meet a minimum quantitative requirement. 7 The consequences of failing to pass a stress test can be severe. If its capital plan has been rejected, the Federal Reserve may, among other things, restrict a bank holding company from paying or increasing dividends on its common stock or increasing any repurchase of its common stock, or both. 8 For example, as a result of this year’s CCAR, Citigroup was not permitted to begin a new common stock repurchase program or to increase its quarterly common stock dividend. 9 As a companion to improved capital, the Federal Reserve also assesses liquidity—that is, how quickly a bank can convert its assets into cash. Prior to the crisis, liquidity practices did not generally anticipate the possibility of severe drops in the prices of saleable assets. Following the crisis, the Federal Reserve imposed new liquidity regulations, including the Basel III Liquidity Coverage Ratio. The objective of these new regulations is to require large firms to hold levels of liquid assets sufficient to protect against constraints on their funding during times of financial turmoil. We have also implemented liquidity stress test assessments for systemically important financial institutions. These assessments provide important insight into the adequacy of liquidity positions and bank preparedness for upcoming regulatory standards. Beyond capital and liquidity, the Federal Reserve has increased its focus on risk management practices at the largest and most systemically important financial institutions. We learned from the crisis that risk management in the financial services industry had not always kept pace with changing market practices. We have responded in several ways. For example, we have paid greater supervisory attention to corporate governance. We significantly increased the depth and frequency of interaction between senior supervisors from the Federal Reserve and directors and executives at banks. This supplements our ongoing assessment of management’s oversight of risk. Our review entails a critical analysis not only of firm policies, procedures and limits, but also of the quality of the risk reports escalated to senior management, the capabilities of the firm’s risk monitoring program, and the adequacy of control functions. We have also increased our enforcement activity for violations of law or unsafe or unsound conduct. Since 2009 the Federal Reserve has taken 36 public enforcement actions against institutions supervised by the New York Fed, which included $1.2 billion in fines. On top of this, five firms supervised by the New York Fed paid $1.3 billion into a qualified settlement fund for mortgage borrowers, and the same five institutions were required to provide over $2 billion in other foreclosure prevention assistance. These statistics do not include non-public enforcement actions, including restrictions on the further growth of banks that do not have satisfactory risk management regimes. And, earlier this year, we assisted in consigning the concept of “too big to jail” to history when Credit Suisse and BNP Paribas pleaded guilty to criminal charges. I am gratified that the Attorney General and the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York have acknowledged the work of the Federal Reserve in supporting our law enforcement partners. 10 The New York Fed has also devoted significant resources and attention to the reform of bank culture and conduct. Increased capital and liquidity are important tools to promote financial stability, but in the end a bank is only as trustworthy as the people who work within it. I have personally delivered a strong message that the culture of Wall Street is unacceptable. 11 Bad conduct by bankers damages the public trust placed in banks. In my view, this loss of trust is so severe that it has become a financial stability concern. If bad behavior persists, it would not be unreasonable—and may even be inevitable—for one to conclude that large firms are too big and complex to manage effectively. Our nation’s largest financial institutions need to repair the loss of public trust in banks. This means a back-to-basics assessment of the purpose of banking, including duties owed to the public in exchange for the privileges banks receive through their bank charters and other functions of law. Among these privileges are deposit insurance and access to a lender of last resort. As part of this effort, I have proposed four specific reforms to curb incentives for illegal and unduly risky conduct at banks. First , banks should extend the deferral period for compensation to match the timeframe for legal liabilities to materialize—perhaps as long as a decade. Second , banks should create de facto performance bonds wherein deferred compensation for senior managers and material risk takers could be used to satisfy fines against the firm for banker misbehavior. Third , I have urged Congress to enact new federal legislation creating a database that tracks employees dismissed for illegal or unethical behavior. Fourth , I have requested that Congress amend the Federal Deposit Insurance Act to impose a mandatory ban from the financial system—that is, both the regulated and shadow banking sectors—for any person convicted of a crime of dishonesty while employed at a financial institution. III. Supervisory process In tandem with our attention to capital, liquidity, and risk management, we have made important changes to the process of supervision. For starters, the Federal Reserve now makes its most consequential supervisory decisions on a system-wide level through the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee or “LISCC.” The committee comprises representatives across professional disciplines from several Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors. The New York Fed supplies only three of its 16 members. LISCC sets supervisory policy for the 15 largest, most systemically important financial institutions in our country and develops innovative, objective, and quantitative methods for assessing these firms on a comparative basis. LISCC also coordinates the supervision of the largest supervised institutions through its Operating Committee, which reviews and approves supervisory plans for exams, receives regular updates on major supervisory issues, and makes material supervisory decisions regarding matters that affect the firms’ safety and soundness. In this respect, the Operating Committee provides an important safeguard against regulatory capture by ensuring that no one person or Reserve Bank has the power to make a final decision on a matter of significance. Another procedural change is our increased application of cross-firm, horizontal review. This technique enables peer-to-peer comparison of banks, facilitates a better assessment of the overall health of the financial system, and safeguards against regulatory capture by providing insight from across the Federal Reserve System. The analysis is done not only at the level of the Board of Governors—for example, through CCAR and Dodd-Frank stress testing—but also within the New York Fed. We hold weekly discussions among senior supervisory and risk officers to identify developing concerns that may pose a systemic risk. A current subject of horizontal analysis is leveraged loans—specifically, whether lax underwriting practices for such loans could pose a significant risk to financial stability. In addition, we have reorganized the supervision group at the New York Fed in a number of ways that promote unbiased analysis and professional objectivity. Many of these changes directly reflect the recommendations in a 2009 report that I commissioned from David Beim, which was featured in the recent This American Life program about supervision at the New York Fed. For example: Over the last five years, we have reassigned some of our most senior personnel to front-line positions at the largest supervised institutions. We also recruited experienced executives with financial backgrounds from outside the New York Fed. The purpose of these personnel changes was to position leaders with the confidence and depth of professional experience necessary to challenge the leadership of supervised financial institutions. We increased training, especially for more senior examiners. Since 2011, we have required enhanced training for senior supervisory officers on corporate governance, business strategies, and risks. Our goal is to deliver stronger and clearer supervisory views to boards of directors and senior management. Also since that year, we have offered a customized management development program for managers in the supervision group. We hired more risk specialists and created the role of business-line specialist to assess the risks and vulnerabilities in firms’ business models. We continue to require that examiners rotate to another institution after three to five years. This tenure allows enough time to gain an understanding of a firm without sacrificing examiner independence. We have taken concrete steps to encourage examiners to speak up, which we view as a core competency. For example, we evaluate examiners on their level of engagement with colleagues and their willingness to share insights. We created programs to encourage peer recognition of good ideas, including funding for new supervision ideas proposed and voted on by supervisory staff. We increased the opportunities for feedback to senior managers, including the head of supervision, in addition to other channels already provided by the New York Fed. Among other improvements, we conduct regular town halls and provide a standing, on-line forum as a device to funnel questions to group leaders. In both settings, questions and answers are offered in an open, transparent manner. And we require examination teams to spend more time at New York Fed headquarters and less time “in the field.” Additional time at headquarters promotes cross-firm discussion and direct communication between senior managers and examiners. For example, we offer a seminar series at which group leaders discuss key issues in supervision with our supervision staff. Each and together, these improvements to the substance and process of supervision contribute to financial stability by providing greater insight into bank resiliency and risk. But these enhancements are not self-executing. They depend on the hundreds of examiners who are dedicated professionals working in the public interest. Our examiners fulfill their obligations with considerable care, mindful of the stakes to Main Street when something goes wrong on Wall Street. I am grateful for their efforts. IV. Reasonable expectations Before concluding, let me offer a broader view of what we at the Federal Reserve expect from prudential supervision. Very briefly, I submit that supervision should be fair, conscientious, and effective. Fair supervision means that the rules are applied consistently across the firms we supervise. We all need to know the rules and follow the same rule book. It also entails a commitment to independence from business or political influence, as envisioned by the Federal Reserve Act one hundred years ago. Conscientious supervision means we must be committed to sustained and, if necessary, radical self-improvement. The Beim report is an example of our willingness to commission and accept self-critical analysis and our commitment to improve. But we cannot stop there. To this end, we will be working with the Board of Governors on its upcoming review of whether the LISCC Operating Committee receives information that is sufficient to reach sound supervisory decisions. One subset of this system-wide inquiry will analyze regulatory capture—specifically, how divergent views are presented to decision makers at the Board. The review is expected to take several months. Effective supervision means tough supervision and demands a focus on large banks that pose systemic risk. Bank supervisors cannot prevent all fraud or illegal conduct or forestall all undesirable behavior in large, complex financial institutions. But we can help create more resilient, less complex, and better managed organizations that promote, rather than undermine, financial stability. V. Conclusion The Federal Reserve will continue to improve its supervision and regulation of financial institutions. We understand the risks of doing our job poorly and of becoming too close to the firms we supervise. We work hard to avoid these risks and to be as fair, conscientious, and effective as possible. Of course, we are not perfect. We cannot catch or correct every error by a financial institution, and we sometimes make mistakes. But in my view, a good measure of the effectiveness of supervision is the improved strength and stability of banks since the financial crisis. Thanks in part to enhanced supervision and regulation, banks “have the ability to meet their financial obligations and continue to make a broad variety of financial products and services available to households and businesses even in times of economic difficulty.” 12 I can promise you that we will always strive to improve and that we will work hard to earn and retain your trust. I look forward to taking questions. 1 I use the terms “bank” and “financial institution” interchangeably, but note that the two terms are not synonymous in federal regulation. 2 See Joint Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, “Regulatory Capital Rules: Regulatory Capital, Implementation of Basel III, Minimum Regulatory Capital Ratios, Capital Adequacy, Transition Provisions, and Prompt Corrective Action,” June 12, 2012, at 32. 3 See, e.g., 12 U.S.C. § 5365(a)(1). 4 See 12 U.S.C. § 5365(i). 5 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Press Release, October 23, 2014. 6 Daniel Tarullo, “Stress Testing after Five Years,” Remarks at the Federal Reserve Third Annual Stress Test Modeling Symposium, Boston, Massachusetts, June 25, 2014. 7 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2014: Assessment Framework and Results, March 2014, at 7-8. 8 See 12 C.F.R. §§ 225.8(c)(2) and (e)(2)(iv). 9 See Citigroup, Inc., “Citi Statement on 2014 CCAR Results,” March 26, 2014. 10 See U.S. Department of Justice, “ BNP Paribas Agrees To Plead Guilty To Conspiring To Process Transactions Through The U.S. Financial System For Sudanese, Iranian, And Cuban Entities Subject To U.S. Economic Sanctions ,” June 30, 2014 . 11 See William Dudley, “Ending Too Big to Fail,” Remarks at the Global Economic Policy Forum, New York City, November 7, 2013; William Dudley, “Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services Industry,” Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, October 20, 2014. 12 Scott G. Alvarez, Regulatory Rulemakings, Testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, United States House of Representatives, April 8, 2014. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

. In general, I will paint a reasonably positive picture—an economy that is likely to make further progress towards the Federal Open Market Committee’s (FOMC) objectives of maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability. In fact, if my own forecast is realized, I would expect to favor raising the FOMC’s federal funds rate target sometime in 2015. This would be a welcome development, because it would signify that the economy has healed sufficiently to warrant a somewhat less accommodative monetary policy. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the FOMC or the Federal Reserve System. The Growth Outlook Is Improving Since the official end of the Great Recession more than five years ago, the U.S. economy has grown at a disappointing 2.3 percent annualized rate. Several times over that period, it appeared that growth was breaking out on the upside, but each time such hopes were disappointed. We are again at a similar junction. Over the past few quarters, the pace of economic growth has picked up and the broad consensus is that the U.S. economy will grow at about a 2 ½-3 percent annual rate over the next year. 1 Will these forecasts once again turn out to be too optimistic? Subject to a few caveats that I discuss later, my view is that the likelihood of another disappointment has lessened. The consensus forecast seems like a reasonable expectation, in part, because several of the “headwinds” restraining U.S. economic activity in recent years have subsided. First, the housing sector is currently in much better balance. The overhang of housing associated with the housing boom has largely been absorbed, and a recovery in housing prices has significantly shrunk the proportion of borrowers that are underwater on their mortgages—that is, those households that have outstanding mortgage balances higher than the value of their homes. Also, measures of distress such as mortgage delinquencies and homes entering the foreclosure process have fallen. Second, consumers are in better financial shape. Households are carrying less debt, with total household liabilities roughly $500 billion below their cyclical peak in 2008. Moreover, lower interest rates have facilitated significant mortgage debt refinancing, which has lowered the household debt service burdens. Depending on the particular measure used, household debt service burdens relative to income have fallen back to levels last seen in the 1980s and 1990s. In addition, household net worth has recovered sharply, boosted primarily by higher financial asset valuations, but also by some recovery in home prices. Third, the fiscal restraint that has held back growth in recent years has ended, with the federal budget deficit now at a level consistent with a stable to slowly declining federal debt-to-GDP ratio. In the aggregate, state and local governments have also ended their retrenchment. One important piece of evidence in this regard is the fact that state and local government employment is now rising at between 5,000 and 10,000 per month, after generally contracting during the 2009 to 2012 period. Now that these headwinds have subsided, buoyant financial market conditions spurred, in part, by a very accommodative monetary policy should do more to support economic activity. In particular, compared to historical patterns, the current household net worth-to-income ratio is high relative to the personal saving rate. This suggests some scope for a decline in the household saving rate. If this were to occur, consumption growth would outstrip income growth. Similarly, financial market conditions are conducive to sustained gains in business fixed investment. Equity prices are high, borrowing costs are low, cash flows are strong and corporate balance sheets are healthy. Another positive development for both the U.S. and the global economy is the sharp decline in energy prices. Let’s start with the U.S. perspective. Despite the impressive recent gains in natural gas and crude oil production, the U.S. still is a net importer of energy. As a result, falling energy prices are beneficial for our economy. In economist parlance, falling energy prices are a positive “terms of trade” shock for the U.S. Over the near-term, this will lead to a significant rise in real income growth for households and should be a strong spur to consumer spending. Since energy expenditures represent a higher proportion of outlays for lower income households, falling energy prices disproportionately raise their real incomes. Also, because such households are more liquidity constrained, with budgets that often bind paycheck to paycheck, they have a higher tendency to spend any additional real income. As a result, much of the boost to real household income from falling energy prices is likely to be spent, not saved. More broadly, the decline in energy prices also will be supportive to the global growth outlook in two other ways. First, by pulling down inflation in many countries it will spur more expansive monetary policy. We are already seeing this response in Europe and Japan. Second, the decline in energy prices is also likely to ease the global fiscal stance. Over the near-term, for oil exporting governments, falling revenue will not be fully offset by reduced expenditures. This will cause major oil exporters to run either smaller budget surpluses or bigger budget deficits. In the aggregate, the swing from oil producers to consumers is quite large. For example, a $20 per barrel decline in global oil prices results in an income transfer of about $670 billion per year from producers to consumers. 2 This understates the total effect because it does not include any knock-on reductions in other energy prices—such as for natural gas—that, outside the U.S., often are linked to oil prices. Obviously, if the oil price declines were to both intensify and persist, this would have negative implications for oil and gas investment in the U.S. At a minimum, as cash flows fall, some producers will cut back on their drilling activity rather than plug the shortfall with outside financing. Nevertheless, there are several reasons why I don’t think this risk should be overstated, especially if oil prices stabilize around current levels. First, even after the large gains in recent years, oil and gas investment remains a small fraction of GDP. Second, domestic natural gas investment should be relatively unaffected because U.S. natural gas prices are largely insensitive to global energy price developments. This reflects the high costs associated with exporting natural gas and the fact that most of our oil production is used for transportation purposes. Thus, the ability to substitute lower cost natural gas for oil is limited. Third, extraction costs vary appreciably across the different major oil fields. There is not a single critical price that will constrain production or investment. Fourth, with respect to oil produced by fracking, productivity gains have cut drilling costs and raised oil production, so breakeven costs per barrel have been falling. Finally, if oil investment were to soften, this would lead to lower breakeven costs as resources currently in short supply—e.g., water, welders, housing and transport—became more available and less expensive. Of course, as with any forecast, there is some meaningful chance that growth will turn out to be either weaker or stronger than expected. However, I believe that the risks around this forecast are reasonably well balanced. The subsiding headwinds that I discussed earlier are the primary reason for seeing the downside risks as limited. In contrast, the ongoing geopolitical risks remain substantial. At the same time, several factors suggest that growth is unlikely to turn out to be substantially stronger than the consensus forecast. First, the upside from housing relative to the forecast is likely limited. Although there has been an impressive recovery of multi-family housing starts over the past few years, single-family housing starts are growing only slowly and are unlikely to climb much faster over the next year or two. The demand for new homes is still hindered by tight credit conditions for homebuyers. Mortgage lenders continue to be extremely risk averse in extending new credit, and mortgage availability to those with lower credit scores is still significantly constrained. I don’t anticipate that this situation will change in a material way any time soon. Second, because motor vehicle sales are now close to their pre-recession levels, the future growth impetus from this cyclical sector will likely also be restrained going forward. Third, growth in the rest of the world has slowed slightly and the dollar has appreciated somewhat. This will limit the growth in U.S. exports, and suggests that the trade sector is unlikely to provide much support to growth over the next year or two. Inflation: Lower Now, but Likely to Drift Gradually Higher Next Year Let me now turn to discuss the inflation outlook. Inflation has been running below the Federal Reserve’s objective of a 2 percent annualized rate for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) deflator. For example, over the past twelve months, the overall PCE deflator has risen by 1.4 percent, and the core PCE deflator, which excludes food and energy, has increased by 1.6 percent. Recently, the overall index has been pulled down by sharply lower oil and gasoline prices. Also, I expect that core goods prices will be held down somewhat over the near-term by the recent appreciation of the U.S. dollar. Nevertheless, I expect inflation will begin to move back towards our 2 percent objective in 2015. As the economy expands and the labor market continues to tighten, resource slack should decline and this should gradually exert some upward pressure on prices. Also, despite some softness in market-based measures of inflation compensation, inflation expectations still seem well-anchored and this should also work to pull inflation gradually higher. Implications for Monetary Policy So, what does this assessment of the growth and inflation outlook imply for monetary policy? Since the September 2012 announcement of the Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities asset purchase program, there has been substantial improvement in the labor market outlook. Recognizing its success in meeting the FOMC’s stated objectives, the FOMC decided to end the asset purchase program at the end of October. Now that we have ended our asset purchase program, attention has turned to the monetary policy normalization process. There are four important questions regarding this process: When to begin? How to begin? How fast to go? And, how far to go? Let me consider each question in turn. With respect to the question of when to begin, it is still premature to begin to raise interest rates, that is, to “lift off” from the zero lower bound. As the FOMC concluded in its most recent statement: “The Committee anticipates, based on its current assessment, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time following the end of its asset purchase program this month.” But this sentence should not be viewed as an iron-clad commitment unaffected by economic and financial developments. The statement goes on to say: “However, if incoming information indicates faster progress toward the Committee’s employment and inflation objectives than the Committee now expects, then increases in the target range for the federal funds rate are likely to occur sooner than currently anticipated. Conversely, if progress proves slower than expected, then increases in the target range are likely to occur later than currently anticipated.” In other words, the FOMC’s monetary policy actions and the timing of lift-off will depend on how the economic outlook evolves, particularly with respect to the labor market and inflation. In considering the appropriate timing of lift-off, there are three important reasons to be patient. First, the Committee is still undershooting both its employment and inflation objectives. Unemployment is too high and inflation is too low. Thus, monetary policy needs to be very accommodative in order to close these gaps relative to the Committee’s objectives. Second, when interest rates are at the zero lower bound, the risks of tightening a bit too early are likely to be considerably greater than the risks of tightening a bit too late. A premature tightening might lead to financial conditions that are too restrictive, resulting in a weaker economy and, in turn, an aborted lift-off. This would be problematic in that it would harm the Fed’s credibility and, more importantly, would be difficult to rectify. The U.S. experience during the Great Depression and the Japanese experience over the past two decades illustrate the risks of raising interest rates too soon, especially when inflation is running below the central bank’s objective. Finally, given the still high level of long-term unemployment and the outlook for inflation, there could be a significant benefit to allowing the economy to run “slightly hot” for a while in order to get those that have been unemployed for a long time working again. I believe this can be done without jeopardizing our price stability objective. If the long-term unemployed are not employed relatively soon, their job skills will erode further, reducing their long-term prospects for employment and, therefore, the productive capacity of the U.S. economy. This would be a very unfortunate outcome for them, their families and the country. Market expectations that lift-off will occur around mid-2015 seem reasonable to me. Although that could change depending on how the economy evolves, my views on “when” do not differ appreciably from the most recent primary dealer and buy-side surveys undertaken by the New York Fed prior to the October FOMC meeting. 3 I hope the economic outlook evolves so that it will be appropriate to begin to raise interest rates sometime next year. While raising interest rates is often portrayed as a difficult task for central bankers, in fact, given the events since the onset of the financial crisis, it would be a development to be truly excited about. When the FOMC begins to raise its federal funds rate target, this would indicate that the U.S. economy is finally getting healthier, and that the Committee believes it is on a sustainable track to achieving its dual mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. That would be very good news, even if it were to cause a bump or two in financial markets. So, when the appropriate time comes, how is the process of monetary policy normalization likely to unfold? In this regard, the revised policy normalization principles and plans that the FOMC released following the September FOMC meeting are informative. 4 In particular, the Committee will begin to normalize monetary policy by first raising its target range for the federal funds rate and short-term interest rates will be the primary tool used for tightening monetary policy. After lift-off looks sustainable and the federal funds rate is somewhat above the zero lower bound, the Committee will cease to reinvest those funds generated by maturing Treasury securities and prepayments of agency MBS securities. The Committee anticipates that the balance sheet will gradually normalize passively as these assets run off, not actively via asset sales. The effective federal funds rate will be pushed into a higher target range by raising the interest rate paid on excess reserves (IOER). The overnight reverse repo repurchase (ON RRP) facility will play a secondary role, in the sense that it will be used “only to the extent necessary” to help put a floor under the federal funds rate, and it will be phased out when it is no longer needed. With respect to “how fast” the normalization process will proceed, that depends on two factors—how the economy evolves, and how financial market conditions respond to movements in the federal funds rate target. Financial market conditions mainly include, but are not necessarily limited to, the level of short- and long-term interest rates, credit spreads and availability, equity prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar. When the FOMC adjusts its short-term federal funds rate target, this does not directly influence the economy since little economic activity is linked to the federal funds rate. Instead, monetary policy affects the economy as the current change in short-term interest rates and expectations about future monetary policy changes influence financial market conditions more broadly. Developments in financial market conditions are thus an important element in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy to the economy. Changes in financial market conditions influence economic growth through a number of channels. For example, a stronger equity market raises household wealth and lowers the desired personal saving rate—lifting consumer spending. A stronger equity market also reduces the cost of capital for business, which may help encourage greater investment spending. Lower long-term interest rates push down business financing costs, which also supports investment spending. At the same time, lower mortgage rates support housing demand and reduce household interest outlays. A weaker dollar supports growth by making imports more expensive and by increasing export competitiveness. The combined effect is to increase net exports. If the linkage from the federal funds rate to financial market conditions were stable over time, there would be no need to focus on financial market conditions. In a world in which the linkage was solid and unchanging, adjustments to the short-term interest rate and communication about future policy would have a predictable and reliable effect on financial market conditions. Central bankers, then, could keep their focus narrowly on their policy rate. However, as has been very clear, especially in recent years, this linkage is not stable. Thus, how much one pushes on the short-term interest rate lever depends, in part, on how financial market conditions respond to such adjustments. Imagine driving a car where the connection between the gas pedal and the engine speed was variable and uncertain. The driver would have to constantly monitor and adjust the pressure on the gas pedal to achieve the desired speed. Similarly, we will have to monitor and adjust short-term interest rates to achieve financial market conditions consistent with achieving our labor market and inflation objectives. All else equal, less responsiveness implies larger interest rate adjustments and vice versa. Quickly, let me give two examples that illustrate how variable this linkage can be. First, during the 2004-07 period, the FOMC tightened monetary policy nearly continuously, raising the federal funds rate from 1 percent to 5.25 percent in 17 steps. However, during this period, 10-year Treasury note yields did not rise much, credit spreads generally narrowed and U.S. equity price indices moved higher. Moreover, the availability of mortgage credit eased, rather than tightened. As a result, financial market conditions did not tighten. As a result, financial conditions remained quite loose, despite the large increase in the federal funds rate. With the benefit of hindsight, it seems that either monetary policy should have been tightened more aggressively or macroprudential measures should have been implemented in order to tighten credit conditions in the overheated housing sector. Second, during the financial crisis, especially during the fall of 2008, financial market conditions tightened dramatically even as the FOMC was cutting its federal funds rate target to zero. Monetary accommodation turned out to be insufficient to produce an easing of financial market conditions, and the economy fell into a deep recession. Over time, financial market conditions have become a much more important factor in evaluating the appropriate setting of monetary policy and the level of short-term interest rates. This reflects several factors. First, over the past few decades, as the U.S. capital markets have grown in size and scope, the U.S. financial system has become much less bank-centric. This has loosened the linkage between the federal funds rate and financial market conditions. Second, the U.S. economy and financial markets have become more interconnected globally. Thus, the impact of U.S. monetary policy has become more diffused, and financial market conditions have come to depend increasingly not only on developments in the U.S., but also on developments elsewhere. As an example, the low level of U.S. 10-year Treasury yields presumably is due, in part, to the fact that long-term interest rates in Europe and Japan are much lower. So, if the effect of short-term rate changes on financial market conditions has become less predictable and more variable over time, what implications does this have for U.S. monetary policy? From my perspective, there are three major implications that deserve attention. First, when lift-off occurs, the pace of monetary policy normalization will depend, in part, on how financial market conditions react to the initial and subsequent tightening moves. If the reaction is relatively large—think of the response of financial market conditions during the so-called “taper tantrum” during the spring and summer of 2013—then this would likely prompt a slower and more cautious approach. In contrast, if the reaction were relatively small or even in the wrong direction, with financial market conditions easing—think of the response of long-term bond yields and the equity market as the asset purchase program was gradually phased out over the past year—then this would imply a more aggressive approach. The key point is this: We will pursue the monetary policy stance that best generates the set of financial market conditions most consistent with achievement of the FOMC’s dual mandate objectives. This depends both on how financial market conditions respond to the Fed’s policy actions and on how the real economy responds to the changes in financial conditions. The second major implication is to be cautious about overreliance on simple monetary policy rules, such as the Taylor Rule, that do not include measures of financial market conditions in their formulation. As you may recall, in a Taylor Rule the nominal federal funds rate depends on an equilibrium or neutral real rate of interest—which is assumed to be constant over time—the deviation of the level of economic activity from estimates that would be consistent with long-run price stability and the deviation of inflation from the central bank’s target. As I have noted elsewhere, the Taylor Rule formulation has a number of characteristics that make it a useful input into the policy-setting process. First, it very explicitly focuses on the two parameters—the long-term inflation objective and the level of potential output consistent with that objective—that map directly to the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate objectives. Second, standard Taylor Rules are self-equilibrating. They respond to economic shocks and forecast errors in a way that pushes the economy back toward the central bank’s objectives. Market participants incorporating information about the rules in their price-setting decisions helps keep inflation expectations well-anchored. Third, academic research shows that Taylor-type rules typically perform quite well across a wide range of economic models. This is important because we want guides to policy that are robust; that is, guides that are not overly sensitive to model-specific assumptions about how the economy works, or how households and businesses alter their expectations and behavior in response to changes in monetary policy. 5 Despite these attractive features, I do not believe that simple policy rules can take the place of in-depth analysis of economic and financial market conditions. While simple policy rules provide useful benchmarks to policymakers, their very virtue—their simplicity—is also a significant shortcoming. Policy rules cannot capture all of the information that is relevant for policymaking. In particular, such rules do not capture the fact that the linkage between the federal funds rate and financial market conditions can be very loose. This is a critical shortcoming because this looseness affects the stability of the relationship between monetary policy and economic outcomes. If the relationship between monetary policy, financial conditions and the real economy were stable over time, then following a relatively simple and unchanging policy rule would likely generate acceptable results. However, if the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy is more variable and uncertain, as I believe it is, then an approach that takes this explicitly into consideration will be more effective. The third implication that stems from the fact that financial market conditions matter in the conduct of monetary policy pertains to the so-called “Fed put” with respect to equity prices. The notion here is that because the Federal Reserve cares about unanticipated and undesired changes in financial market conditions, the Fed will respond to weakness in equity prices by easing monetary policy—essentially providing a put to equity investors. The expectation of such a put is dangerous because if investors believe it exists they will view the equity market as less risky. This will cause investors to push equity market values higher, increasing the likelihood of an equity market bubble and, when such a bubble bursts, the potential for a sharp shock that could threaten financial stability and the economy. Let me be clear, there is no Fed equity market put. To put it another way, we do not care about the level of equity prices, or bond yields or credit spreads per se. Instead, we focus on how financial market conditions influence the transmission of monetary policy to the real economy. At times, a large decline in equity prices will not be problematic for achieving our goals. For example, economic conditions may warrant a tightening of financial market conditions. If this happens mainly via the channel of equity price weakness—that is not a problem, as it does not conflict with our objectives. In contrast, when we want financial market conditions to be extremely accommodative—as has been the case in recent years when we have been far away from our employment and inflation objectives—then we will take into consideration a broad set of developments with respect to interest rates, the stock market and other measures of financial conditions in choosing the appropriate stance for monetary policy. Because financial market conditions affect economic activity only slowly over time, this suggests that we should look through short-term volatility and movements in financial markets. We should not respond until we become convinced that the movements will likely, without action on our part, prove sufficiently persistent to conflict with achievement of our objectives. Often, financial markets can be quite volatile and move a lot without disturbing underlying economic performance. Finally, let me turn to the issue of “how much,” in other words, what federal funds rate target over the long term is consistent with our employment and inflation objectives. This issue is more difficult to judge for a number of reasons. First, it depends on how financial conditions evolve in response to our monetary policy adjustments. Second, it depends on other factors, such as potential real GDP growth, which in turn, depends on the growth of the labor force and productivity growth trends. My current thinking, in this regard, is that the equilibrium federal funds rate consistent with 2 percent inflation will be somewhat lower in the future than in the past. In part, this reflects the likelihood that potential real GDP growth will likely be somewhat lower going forward due to slower growth in the labor force. But my confidence in this conclusion may change on the basis of incoming empirical evidence. In fact, I suspect my views will evolve as I see how the economy responds over time to higher interest rates and tighter financial market conditions. Conclusion In my remarks today, I have provided my current thinking about the U.S. growth and the inflation outlook, and the implications for monetary policy. To sum up, the U.S. economic outlook looks brighter, with growth likely to be somewhat above the trend of the past five years. The risks to growth appear generally balanced, without unusually high risks that growth will either be much stronger or weaker than my forecast. On inflation, I remain confident, despite the recent softening, that inflation will begin to move up towards our 2 percent objective next year. This move will not likely happen immediately, however, given the recent weakness in energy prices and the fact that non-energy import price trends are also likely to soften a bit over the near-term. With respect to monetary policy, I believe that market expectations as captured by the most recent New York Fed’s surveys of primary dealers and market participants are reasonable—with lift-off expected to take place sometime around the middle of next year. But, life is uncertain and my judgment of the appropriate timing could change in response to incoming data and other factors that change the economic outlook. When we do begin to tighten monetary policy, the pace of tightening will depend not only on the outlook but also on how financial market conditions respond as we begin to remove monetary policy accommodation. Financial market conditions are an important transmission mechanism of monetary policy. This is why I don’t favor indiscriminately adhering to simple policy rules that exclude financial market conditions. I hope the FOMC can begin to raise its federal funds rate target next year. This would signify that the economy has made sufficient progress towards the FOMC’s objectives and that the time had finally come to begin to unwind the current high degree of monetary policy accommodation. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 See, for example, the latest Blue Chip consensus survey (volume 39, no. 11, November 10, 2014). The median real GDP forecast for 2015 (fourth quarter over fourth quarter) is 2.9 percent. 2 Current world oil consumption is 92 million barrels per day (International Energy Agency, October Oil Market Report). 3 See Primary Dealer Surveys and Pilot Survey of Market Participants . 4 See Policy Normalization Principles and Plans . 5 See Conducting Monetary Policy: Rules, Learning and Risk Management . By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
