Governor Jerome H. Powell At TMPG Best Practices @ 10: A Look Back and a Look Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Share I am honored to join you to celebrate the first 10 years of the Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG). The TMPG has become an essential forum where industry participants gather under the auspices of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to address market practice issues as they arise in the fast evolving markets for Treasury securities. Outside this room, you are competitors, and that vigorous competition serves your firms, your customers, and ultimately the U.S. taxpayer. But when members of the TMPG attend meetings, they bring their long experience and deep expertise to bear to safeguard the functioning and overall health of these markets. As I have heard a number of people say, TMPG members check their partisan interests at the door. The TMPG is the place where market participants recognize and address their responsibilities to each other. I know that they take that responsibility seriously, and I encourage all of the market participants here today to take the TMPG's recommendations just as seriously and to adopt them as best practices that will enhance the market's functioning. I first encountered Treasury markets in a serious way 25 years ago, when I served as Under Secretary of the Treasury for Finance under President George H. W. Bush. These markets made national headlines when we learned that a Salomon Brothers' trader had repeatedly circumvented Treasury auction rules to corner the market for the on-the-run two-year Treasury. As it became clear that Salomon's senior management had known about the issue for several months without alerting regulators, the scandal threatened to bring down one of the largest financial firms of that time. Over one memorable August weekend, we first prohibited the firm from dealing in government securities on behalf of customers, and then reduced that sanction as top Salomon management left the firm and Warren Buffett, then a large Salomon shareholder, agreed to assume the chairmanship of the board of directors. This event takes up a chapter in Buffett's biography, The Snowball , and it is a good illustration of why we need the TMPG. I reread that chapter every couple of years, and it still gives me nightmares. 1 After the dust settled, we had to grapple with the wider implications of the scandal for the market itself and particularly the role of regulatory oversight. We certainly could have used a TMPG to help us with this work, but none existed at that time. Our recommendations were summarized in a joint report to the Congress issued by the Treasury Department, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the Federal Reserve Board. Among the issues we considered were how to encourage a level playing field for all market participants, and when and where regulators should respond to the periodic technical difficulties the market sometimes experienced. As we drew up the report, we were deeply aware of the importance that Treasury markets held for the American economy. The sale of Treasury bonds, notes, and bills finances the U.S. government, and those securities are in turn a primary vehicle for savings for a wide range of U.S. households. Treasury securities are also an important source of collateral within the financial system. This last role has become all the more critical in recent years as regulations have required banks to hold larger amounts of high-quality liquid assets so that they can safely meet their potential liquidity needs. We also knew that, despite the misconduct by Salomon Brothers, Treasury markets generally worked quite well. These markets are and have long been among the deepest and most liquid markets in the world. It was important to make the auction system more robust to potential manipulation, and we made several recommendations to do so and to open up the process to greater competition. However, in other areas that already worked well, we chose, for example, to open up issuance of securities that were in short supply (or "squeezed") when needed rather than to risk negatively affecting the functioning of Treasury markets by instituting more invasive regulation. There is certainly a role for regulation, but regulation should always take into account the impact that it has on markets--a balance that must be constantly weighed. More regulation is not the best answer to every problem. There is also a role for a body such as the TMPG to address market problems. The TMPG's approach to "fails" in the Treasury and mortgage-backed securities markets provides a good example. Fails--that is, the failure to deliver collateral in either a cash or repurchase agreement transaction--impose a cost on the party expecting delivery. If the practice were to become too frequent, then it could seriously impair market functioning. But at the same time, it doesn't make sense to simply outlaw the practice, since that limits flexibility in a way that may not always be called for and would likely reduce market liquidity. The TMPG's recommendations were carefully calibrated to set financial incentives that would minimize fails and have been a marked success. The TMPG also plays an important role in helping to "fill in the cracks" between the competing regulations that various Treasury market participants face. Many different institutions and individuals depend on these markets, and the regulatory system reflects that. The Government Securities Act gave the Treasury Department some rulemaking authority over all government securities brokers and dealers. But the act also required these firms to register with the SEC. At the same time, the Federal Reserve regulates many of the banks that are active in these markets, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York also plays an essential role, both as fiscal agent for the U.S. government and, by nature of its frequent activity in these markets, in conducting monetary policy operations. And of course, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission regulates Treasury futures markets. The agencies work well together, but there is real value in having an industry group help to identify issues that cross regulatory boundaries. I'll give two examples. First, in 2016, the TMPG conducted a study of financial benchmarks and uncovered uses of ICAP's federal funds open rate that had not previously been well understood. 2 As ICAP decided to stop publishing the rate, the TMPG also helped to guide market participants to an alternative that is aligned with the International Organizations of Securities Commissions Principles for Financial Benchmarks while steering the market away from the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) as a potential alternative--a move that now seems prescient given the subsequent news around the long-run risks to LIBOR. More recently, the TMPG has been busy creating a map of clearing and settlement in Treasury markets, work that I am sure all of the regulatory agencies will find to be of great interest. All of this is incredibly valuable. In fact, my only regret about the TMPG is that we didn't think of creating something like it earlier. As regulators, we fully support your work, and will continue to make sure that our own rules support these markets. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority's (FINRA's) new collection of the Treasury transactions of its members through its Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine, or TRACE system, will do much to improve the regulatory agencies' understanding of the dynamics of this market. But as in the past, we should also be concerned about creating a level playing field. For that reason, the Board of Governors is continuing to negotiate with FINRA for it to act as our agent in collecting similar data from banks. We do not want to create a regulatory arbitrage where the same activity done within a broker-dealer is treated differently than when it is done within a bank. The TMPG and similar groups around the world play an important role by helping both regulators and industry leaders address market concerns before they threaten market function. I thank the members for their service and look forward to today's discussions. 1. Alice Schroeder, The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life (New York: Bantam, 2009). Return to text 2. The ICAP Fed Funds Open rate was a daily indicator published by ICAP, a broker in the federal funds market, as to where a representative federal fund transaction would be priced at the start of the U.S. trading day. ICAP did not consider the rate to be International Organizations of Securities Commissions compliant, although it was nonetheless used as a financial benchmark by some market participants. ICAP ceased publication of the index in September 2016. Return to text Last Update: October 05, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the 2017 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C. Share Thank you for inviting me to speak here at the Institute of International Finance Annual Membership meeting. I am pleased to note that there have been signs lately that a sustainable global recovery may finally be materializing. This is certainly good news, although significant risks and uncertainties remain. One important question is how the emerging market economies (EMEs) will fare as global monetary conditions normalize. In our intertwined world, prospects for these economies are a significant driver of prospects for the United States and other advanced economies. In my remarks today I will argue that, despite the risks and uncertainties, EMEs are likely to manage that normalization reasonably well. As many observers have noted, EME economic prospects are strongly linked to the evolution of capital flows. 1 Accordingly, I will first review the recent rebound in EME capital inflows and analyze the drivers of this rebound. Against this backdrop, I will then discuss how the prospects for EMEs depend on three factors: Vulnerabilities in the EMEs themselves; the evolution of advanced-economy monetary conditions, including those in the United States; and market responses to that evolution. As always, my comments here represent my own views. The Rebound in Economic Growth and Capital Flows in Emerging Markets After real GDP growth plummeted in many EMEs during the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), economic activity rebounded sharply ( slide 1 ). But that recovery proved to be short lived and was followed by a notable, widespread fall in EME growth as advanced economies remained sluggish, economic imbalances in China mounted, and commodity prices plunged. Lately, however, the streak of weak growth in the EMEs appears to have been broken: The downward trend in Chinese growth has flattened, growth in other EMEs has picked up some, and Brazil seems to be moving into recovery mode. The factors that underlie the pickup in EMEs to a large extent represent a reversal of developments that led to the slowing. The improvement in the performance of the advanced economies has become more widespread. Chinese authorities have bolstered their economy by providing more credit stimulus. And commodity prices have bounced back from their lows in early 2016, bolstering activity and allaying financial stability concerns in commodity-exporting economies. These developments have also contributed to a modest reversal of the slowdown in global trade seen in recent years. 2 A rebound in capital flows has come along with the pickup in economic performance in the EMEs. Slide 2 shows net private capital flows to EMEs--the difference between gross private inflows and gross private outflows. These private net inflows are quite volatile, as the experience of the past 10 years shows. Strong pre-GFC net inflows to major emerging markets (the black line)--hovering in the neighborhood of 3 to 4 percent of EME gross domestic product (GDP)--were interrupted by a collapse during the crisis, but inflows quickly recovered and stayed strong through 2010. After that, net inflows trended down for several years and turned negative by 2015. Part of this retrenchment reflected Chinese net inflows turning into net outflows due to what might be considered special circumstances--notably, changes in expectations of Chinese exchange rate policy. But even taking China out of the picture, as shown by the dashed blue line, there was a clear downward trend in net inflows. Over the past couple of years, however, net inflows have recovered and have averaged, if China is excluded, 0.7 percent of GDP in 2016 and about 1-1/2 percent of GDP in early 2017. As shown in slide 3 , other measures of capital flows, such as flows into EME investment funds, show an even sharper rebound. The recent recovery of investor appetite for EME exposure has shown up in asset prices as well. Emerging-market credit spreads have declined, and equity prices have risen ( slide 4 ). These developments are not occurring in isolation, but in the context of a general improvement in the global outlook and in investor risk sentiment. The improvement in economic fundamentals raises the following question: To what extent can the recent recovery in EME capital flows be explained by these better economic fundamentals? One way to shed light on this question is to compare the recent behavior of EME capital flows with what we might expect from a model of these flows based on historical data. In a recent study, Federal Reserve staff regressed net private capital inflows into several key EMEs on measures of investment opportunities in these economies, monetary policy variables, and risk sentiment variables. 3 As can be seen in slide 5 , by comparing the solid and dashed lines, the model does a fairly good job overall of fitting the data. It is instructive to look at what the model tells us about the slowing of flows between 2010 and 2015. Note that the falloff in commodity prices (the red portion of the bars) was the largest contributor to the slowdown in flows. The decline in economic growth differentials between the EMEs and advanced economies (the yellow portions) was also a major contributor. In fact, growth differentials became a slightly negative contributor in 2015 after being substantially positive in 2010. 4 Monetary policies (the blue portions) also became less of a factor in 2015 in driving flows to EMEs. As for the recent rebound in flows, over the past year the model's predicted net inflows (the dashed line) have actually been significantly above actual net inflows (the solid line), suggesting that there is some room for flows to increase further without raising concerns. The model attributes the recovery of flows primarily to the turnaround in commodity prices and, to a substantially lesser extent, to improvements in risk sentiment (as seen by some waning of the negative contribution from the slashed green bars). The growth differential is not playing a major role because the rise in EME growth has been accompanied by a rise in advanced-economy growth. 5 All in all, this evidence suggests that the recent pickup of capital flows to EMEs has not outrun its fundamental determinants, which provides some encouragement that these flows will not reverse themselves and endanger EME prospects, a situation that is also encouraging for U.S. prospects. Risks to Emerging Market Economy Prospects from the Future Course of Monetary Policy Some observers have noted that the risk of a reversal of EME capital flows may become more pronounced as U.S. and global interest rates return to more normal levels. These developments could encourage capital to return to the advanced economies and, by raising domestic interest rates and putting downward pressures on emerging market currencies, could also enlarge EME debt burdens. In assessing this risk, as I mentioned earlier, three elements are important: first, the vulnerabilities in the EMEs themselves; second, the evolution of advanced-economy monetary policies; and, third, how markets might respond to that evolution. Let me discuss each of these elements in turn. Emerging Market Economy Vulnerabilities There is clear empirical evidence that the response of EME financial markets to different shocks, including changes in U.S. interest rates, depends importantly on the state of economic fundamentals in the EMEs themselves. For example, Bowman and coauthors document in their study that a deterioration in a country's economic conditions significantly increases its vulnerability to adverse effects from changes in U.S. interest rates. 6 A case in point is the so-called taper tantrum in 2013, when rises in sovereign bond spreads were significantly greater in those EMEs with greater relative vulnerabilities. There is little doubt that over the past couple of decades, EME macroeconomic fundamentals and policy frameworks have improved substantially. One way you can see this improvement is through an index of aggregate EME vulnerability (the black line in slide 6 ), which is based economic data on a variety of variables from 13 major economies. 7 According to this index, EME vulnerabilities today stand well below those in the 1990s--a period during which financial crises in EMEs were much more prevalent. That said, the vulnerability index has been trending up since 2008. Part of this increase in the vulnerability index can be attributed to a run-up in bank credit to the private sector, which brings me to a key risk for EME prospects: the position of EME corporates. Observers have been expressing concerns about the mounting levels of corporate debt and the risk that a normalization of global conditions could exacerbate debt service burdens of EME corporations--particularly those with elevated levels of dollar-denominated debt--by raising global interest rates, boosting the value of the dollar, and perhaps damping economic activity. Given the prominence of this risk, I will discuss EME corporates in a bit more detail. Since 2008, the debt of EME nonfinancial corporations has tripled in dollar value, reaching roughly $27 trillion in the first quarter of 2017. As a share of GDP, as shown by the black line in slide 7 , it has nearly doubled, to over 100 percent of GDP. China's situation is distinct from many other EMEs. On the one hand, as can be seen by the red line, its corporate debt, at 170 percent of GDP now, is much higher than most other EMEs and substantially above the level we saw in East Asia before the Asian crisis. On the other hand, Chinese corporates are much less exposed to changes in exchange rates and global interest rates. But the rising amount of debt by itself does not tell us whether this debt is excessive and how vulnerable EME corporates are to global monetary and market shocks. For that assessment we need to drill down deeper into the health of the corporate sector. In a recent study, Beltran and coauthors undertake such an analysis using a common metric of debt service capacity--the interest coverage ratio, or ICR, which is the ratio of earnings to interest expense. 8 All else being equal, this ratio is lower for firms that are less profitable, more leveraged, and have a higher cost of borrowing. Using firm-level data, the authors classify the debt of those firms with an ICR of less than 2 as "debt-at-risk." 9 They find, as shown by the black line in slide 8 , that this measure of risky EME corporate debt has almost tripled since 2011 to about 30 percent of GDP. But this share is still considerably lower than the 46 percent of GDP debt-at-risk in East Asia on the eve of the Asian crisis (the horizontal dashed black line in the chart). For China, though, the debt-at-risk now exceeds what we saw in East Asia before the Asian crisis. Outside of China (the dashed blue line), EME debt-at-risk, at about 10 percent of GDP, seems much more manageable. However, as can be seen by the blue portions of the bars in slide 9 , debt-at-risk in a number of EMEs, including South Korea, India, Turkey, and Brazil exceeds that average level. How will EME corporate debt fare going forward as global normalization proceeds? The results of the study I just discussed imply that a 1 percentage point increase in EME corporate borrowing costs by itself would not be so problematic, at least outside of China. 10 What this shock would do to debt-at-risk is shown by the red cross‑hatched portions of the bars in the chart. But it would be a bigger deal if the rise in borrowing costs was accompanied by a more generalized adverse turn of events in EMEs, modeled here as a 20 percent earnings reduction and a 20 percent hit to the value of EME currencies against the dollar. The estimated effects of these additional shocks on debt-at-risk are shown by the slashed red portions of the bars. 11 In this case, aggregate EME debt-at-risk rises from about 30 percent of GDP to around the level seen prior to the Asian financial crisis. 12 Notably, the increase comes mainly from China, where debt‑at‑risk jumps to about 85 percent of GDP. Outside of China, risky debt also rises substantially but seemingly not to levels that would be considered unmanageable. Overall, based on this analysis, I would conclude that corporate debt represents a moderate degree of vulnerability for EME prospects. The situation is not alarming, but risks are significant and bear close watching, especially in China. The Evolution of Federal Reserve Policy What of the evolution of monetary conditions in the advanced economies? I will confine myself here to Fed policy. One factor that favors easier adjustment in EMEs is that U.S. monetary policy normalization has been and should continue to be gradual, as long as the U.S. economy evolves roughly as expected. Since the start of normalization in December 2015, the federal funds rate has risen to about 1‑1/4 percent from its effective lower bound ( slide 10 ). The median projections of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants (the blue dots) have it rising to 2.9 percent by the end of 2020, fairly close to what is regarded by the median participant as its long-run value and significantly below its average value in the years prior to the GFC. As reflected in the FOMC's recent communications, the shrinkage of the Fed's balance sheet is also expected to proceed quite gradually, with slowly phased-in increases in caps on the monthly reductions in the Federal Reserve's security holdings. The expectation of gradual policy normalization should reduce the likelihood of outsized movements in interest rates. Indeed, even if we add, say, a 50 basis point term premium to the expected long-run federal funds rate, this value would still leave long-term U.S. interest rates (shown in slide 11 ) well below their pre-GFC averages. As long as global financial conditions normalize in an orderly fashion, EMEs should have sufficient time to adjust. And, as we saw earlier, interest rate changes of this magnitude should not lead to generalized corporate distress in EMEs, although undoubtedly some corporates are more exposed and could experience difficulties. Market Response All that said, market movements can be noisy, which brings me to what I believe is the most uncertain element--the potentially volatile behavior of markets even in an environment of relatively contained EME vulnerabilities and of gradual and clearly communicated advanced-economy monetary policies. So far, markets have behaved in a manner consistent with a relatively benign scenario for EMEs: Risk sentiment is holding up, credit spreads in emerging markets have been declining, equities are up, long-term yields have hardly budged, and the dollar has been declining. Markets, however, can turn on a dime, and reactions can be outsized. This concern may be especially relevant at present, given the low level of volatility and elevated asset prices in global markets, which may increase the likelihood and severity of an adjustment. Most of the time bouts of market turbulence lead to relatively quick corrections that leave markets more resilient without substantially depressing global growth. The taper tantrum of 2013 that I mentioned earlier is a good example. Ultimately, the policy adjustments made by some of the most affected economies, along with the more realistic appraisal of risks by global investors, likely left the global economy in a somewhat better position than before the episode. That said, however, market tantrums pose complex economic and financial challenges, and such episodes carry a significant risk of snowballing into something bigger that more substantially threatens the economic expansion. Conclusion To conclude, I have suggested that the most likely outcome is that the challenges posed to EMEs by the normalization of global financial conditions will be manageable. 13 So far, capital flows have been moving in line with market fundamentals. Although, EME vulnerabilities have been rising, they are still well below the levels of the crisis-prone years of the 1980s and 1990s. Global monetary conditions are expected to normalize only gradually, as the Federal Reserve and other advanced-economy central banks continue to stress clear communication and transparency. And the reaction of EME financial markets so far has been benign. But significant risks of more adverse scenarios remain. The corporate debt situation in EMEs has been worsening, particularly in China, and market reactions to even small surprises can be unpredictable and outsized. Even with these risks, however, the best thing the Federal Reserve can do--not just for the United States, but for the global economy at large--is to keep our house in order through the continued pursuit of our dual mandate. Finally, it bears remembering that Fed policy normalization is occurring not in isolation, but in the context of a solid U.S. economic recovery, which should benefit all economies around the world. References Ahmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (2014). "Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World?" Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 48 (November), pp. 221-48. Alfaro, Laura, Gonzalo Asis, Anusha Chari, and Ugo Panizza (2017). "Lessons Unlearned? Corporate Debt in Emerging Markets," NBER Working Paper 23407. Washington: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Ayala, Diana, Milan Nedelijkovic, and Christian Saborowski (2015). " What Slice of the Pie? The Corporate Bond Market Boom in Emerging Economies (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper WP/15/148. Washington: International Monetary Fund, July. Beltran, Daniel, Keshav Garud, and Aaron Rosenblum (2017). " Emerging Market Nonfinancial Corporate Debt: How Concerned Should We Be? " IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 1. Bowman, David, Juan M. Londono, and Horacio Sapriza (2015). "U.S. Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 55 (July), pp. 27-59. Bruno, Valentina, and Hyun Song Shin (2015). "Capital Flows and the Risk-Taking Channel of Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 71 (April), pp. 119‑32. Cavallo, Eduardo, Andrew Powell, Mathieu Pedemonte, and Pilar Tavella (2015). "A New Taxonomy of Sudden Stops: Which Sudden Stops Should Countries Be Most Concerned About?" Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 51 (March), pp. 47-70. Chen, Jiaqian, Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, and Ratna Sahay (2014). " Spillovers from United States Monetary Policy on Emerging Markets: Different This Time? (PDF) " IMF Working Paper WP/14/240. Washington: International Monetary Fund, December. Chow, Julian T.S. (2015). "Stress Testing Corporate Balance Sheets in Emerging Economies," IMF Working Paper WP/15/216. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September, available at http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid=8A054997E3FBA6EC30B9601BA692B9F4?doi=10.1.1.698.5498&rep=rep1&type=pdf (PDF) . Clark, John, Nathan Converse, Brahima Coulibaly, and Steve Kamin (2016). " Emerging Market Capital Flows and U.S. Monetary Policy ," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 18. Fratzscher, Marcel (2012). "Capital Flows: Push Versus Pull Factors, and the Global Financial Crisis," Journal of International Economics, vol. 88 (November), pp. 341-56. Fratzscher, Marcel, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2013). "On the International Spillovers of U.S. Quantitative Easing," ECB Working Paper 1557. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, June. Ghosh, Atish R., Jun Kim, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Juan Zalduendo (2012). " Surges (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper WP/12/22. Washington: International Monetary Fund, January. Hausman, Joshua, and Jon Wongswan (2011). "Global Asset Prices and FOMC Announcements," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 30 (April), pp. 547-71. International Monetary Fund (2014). " Moving from Liquidity to Growth-Driven Models ," chapter 1 of Global Financial Stability Report. Washington: IMF, April, pp. 1-65. --------- (2016a). " Financial Stability Challenges in a Low-Growth, Low-Rate Era ," chapter 1 of Global Financial Stability Report. Washington: IMF, October, pp. 1-48. --------- (2016b). " Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets ," chapter 2 in World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long. Washington: IMF, April, pp. 63-99. --------- (2017). " Is Growth at Risk? " chapter 1 of Global Financial Stability Report . Washington: IMF, October, pp.1-52. Koepke, Robin (2015). "What Drives Capital Flows to Emerging Markets? A Survey of the Empirical Literature," IIF Working Paper. Washington: Institute of International Finance, April, available at https://www.iif.com/publication/capital-flows/what-drives-capital-flows-emerging-markets-2 . Pomerleano, Michael (1998). " Corporate Finance Lessons from the East Asian Crisis (PDF) ," Note 155. Washington: World Bank Group, October. Powell, Jerome H. (2013). " Advanced Economy Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies ," speech delivered at "Prospects for Asia and the Global Economy," the 2013 Asia Economic Policy Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, Calif., November 4. --------- (2016). " The Global Trade Slowdown and Its Implications for Emerging Asia ," speech delivered at "CPBS 2016 Pacific Basin Research Conference," sponsored by the Center for Pacific Basin Studies at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, Calif., November 18. Tepper, Alexander, Jeffrey Moore, Myeongguk Suh, and Sunwoo Nam (2013). " Estimating the Impacts of U.S. LSAPs on Emerging Market Economies' Local Currency Bond Markets ," Staff Report 595. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January. 1. For more on this linkage, see Powell (2013). Return to text 2. For more on the global trade slowdown, see Powell (2016). Return to text 3. The specific variables in the regression include the GDP growth differential between EMEs and advanced economies, commodity prices, EME interest rate differentials with advanced economies, measures of the Federal Reserve's quantitative easing, the VIX (which is the one-month-ahead option-implied volatility of the S&P 500 index), and country-specific emerging market credit spreads (see Clark and others, 2016). Note that, because of special factors driving its flows over the past few years, China is not included in this analysis. Other studies that have also examined determinants of EME capital flows include International Monetary Fund (2016b), Koepke (2015), Ahmed and Zlate (2014), Fratzscher (2012), and Ghosh and others (2012). Generally, these papers find that many factors, including both "pull" and "push," affect EME capital flows. Return to text 4. This negative contribution reflects that the average growth differential between the selected group of EMEs, which does not include China, and the advanced economies itself became negative. Return to text 5. Variants of the model applied to gross capital inflows, rather than net capital inflows, give qualitatively similar results. In particular, the model of gross flows also finds that the pickup in these flows has been less strong than predicted by the model. However, the relative contribution of the risk variables to the pickup in EME flows relative to the turnaround in commodity prices is somewhat larger with the gross flows model than the net inflows model. The consequences of net versus gross flows for the recipient economies can potentially differ as, for example, Cavallo and others (2015) have argued. Return to text 6. See Bowman, Londono, and Sapriza (2015). Other papers that have looked at the effects of U.S. monetary policies on EME asset prices and the channels through which these effects are transmitted include Bruno and Shin (2015); Chen, Mancini-Griffoli, and Sahay (2014); Fratzscher, Lo Duca, and Straub (2013); Tepper and others (2013); and Hausman and Wongswan (2011). Return to text 7. Variables used in creating the index include external debt, the current account position, foreign reserves, public debt, control of inflation, and bank credit to the private sector. Return to text 8. See Beltran, Garud, and Rosenblum (2017). Other studies that have recently investigated EME corporate vulnerabilities include Alfaro, Chari and Panizza (2017); International Monetary Fund (2014, 2016a); and Chow (2015). Return to text 9. An ICR of 2 or less is often associated with increased likelihood of distress. For example, just before the Asian financial crisis, firms in Indonesia, South Korea, and Thailand had an average ICR of 2 (see Pomerleano, 1998). Return to text 10. A 1 percentage point positive shock to the borrowing costs of EME corporates undoes about half of the decline in average borrowing costs from 2009 to 2016. Although on the face of it, this shock does not seem too large, as discussed in Beltran and others (2017), it is applied to the average interest rate on the entire existing debt, not just on new debt. Given that the average interest rate for EME firms is about 4‑3/4 percent, a 1 percentage point rise increases the interest expense by about a fifth. Return to text 11. The calibration of the shocks is the same as in Beltran and others (2017). A 20 percent earnings shock corresponds to about half of the decline in EME corporate earnings experienced after the global financial crisis. It is difficult to say how much emerging market currencies might depreciate under stress, but 20 percent currency depreciation seems well within the plausible range. While the calibration of the shocks is the same as the above-mentioned study, the effects have been updated to reflect a larger sample of firms that is now available. Qualitatively, the results and conclusions do not change from this update. Return to text 12. In computing the new debt-at-risk after exchange rate shocks, we need the share of debt that is foreign currency-denominated, which is taken from Ayala, Nedelijkovic, and Saborowski (2015). Return to text 13. The IMF's most recent Global Financial Stability Report , released October 11, (IMF, 2017), also concludes that EMEs should be able to handle any reduction in flows from global monetary policy normalization "in a relatively smooth manner, given their enhanced resilience and stronger growth outlook." Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: October 12, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the 41st Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Share We live in a world defined by the rapid pace of technological change. Four of the five largest U.S. companies by market capitalization are classified as "technology companies," where the term describes the products that these companies sell and how they operate. Thanks to decades of investment in information technology, especially in electronic communication networks, consumers now expect services to be available instantly at their fingertips. This statement is true for almost every industry and every aspect of daily life, including financial transactions. This evening, I will consider how technology is changing the delivery of retail banking and payments services. I will discuss the roles of banks, fintech companies, and other stakeholders in moving the United States forward to a better payment system. I will also review the Federal Reserve's collaboration with these payment system stakeholders in pursuing that goal. I will argue that, for policymakers as well as the private sector, the challenge is to embrace technology as a means of improving convenience and speed in the delivery of financial services, while also assuring the security and privacy necessary to sustain the public's trust. As always, the views I express here are my own. Retail Banking Innovation As with so many sectors of the economy, technology is transforming the retail banking sector. The banking industry has traditionally been characterized by physical branches, privileged access to financial data, and distinct expertise in analyzing such data. 1 But in today's world companies need not be bound by physical infrastructure and related overhead expenses. For example, companies can take advantage of an explosion in available data, and leverage advances in computing power, via cloud computing, analytical tools, and off-the-shelf machine learning tools, to make sense of those data. The banking industry is adjusting to this world, and facing significant challenges to traditional banking business models. For example, today financial technology can support access to credit through innovative approaches to gathering and analyzing data. Historically, a customer seeking a loan has provided financial statements to a bank or other traditional lending institution. More recently, the use of a fintech platform may allow a lender to quickly monitor and analyze more up-to-date data from a broader range of sources, including those outside of the traditional lending process, to verify an applicant's identity and make inferences about the applicant's overall financial health. For example, a business loan applicant could submit information such as shipping data or customer reviews as additional input to more traditional data sources. With this additional information, the bank would have a more complete picture of an applicant's day-to-day activity and overall financial capacity, and potentially a greater ability to provide credit to customers, including some who might have been otherwise denied a loan based on traditional data. Fintech firms are also finding ways to use banks' data, in some cases without entering into an explicit partnership with the bank. With customers' permission, fintech firms have increasingly turned to data aggregators to "screen scrape" information from financial accounts. In such cases, data aggregators collect and store online banking logins and passwords provided by the bank's customers and use them to log directly into the customer's banking account. This information can be used to provide consumers with convenient real-time snapshots of their financial information across multiple banks and accounts. These examples highlight that there is a balance that needs to be achieved in this innovative environment. 2 On the one hand, new technologies have enabled banks and other firms to find different ways of meeting consumers' demand for speed and convenience. On the other hand, these same technologies raise new considerations about data security and safety, as well as consumer privacy and protection. Policymakers and the financial industry must assure that enhanced convenience and speed in financial services do not undermine the safety, security, and reliability of those services. Retail Payments Innovation Technology is also shaping changes in retail payments. As with retail banking, retail payments will need to evolve to meet consumer expectations of constant connectivity and instant access while assuring security and privacy. It is not news that consumers' lives, including the way they pay, are now intertwined with mobile phone usage. While the overall amount of time we spend on our phones continues to grow, the duration of individual phone sessions is actually shrinking. In late 2015, Google estimated that the average mobile session lasts only 70 seconds, and may be repeated dozens of times per day. 3 As a result, payment innovators have had to create new ways to move money that are not only fast and mobile-focused, but also sufficiently "frictionless" that consumers can now fit commerce into these brief interludes. This development has ushered in a world of multiple smartphone apps that allow for "instant" payments. We can use a payments app to move funds instantly to anyone who has that app. 4 Some banks have similarly collaborated to build faster payments applications that leverage their deposit account systems. And we are already moving to a world in which we need not open a special app or go to our bank's website in order to send money. Many people here will have taken an Uber or Lyft, and then paid your driver without relaunching the app, much less reaching for your wallet. Similarly, payment providers can now leverage the application programming interfaces (APIs)--essentially the protocols--of smartphone messaging services to integrate their payment tools directly into messaging applications: Nowadays, consumers can simply "attach" money while messaging a friend. Innovation in retail payments can also offer tangible benefits to consumers beyond convenience. Improvements in security, such as our ability to authenticate consumers and detect fraudulent transactions, are also possible through innovation. For instance, mobile payments introduce a wide array of ways to authenticate a consumer's identity, including two-factor authentication codes sent via text message to the phone; biometrics, like a fingerprint or face scan; device identification information; IP address; and geolocation data. Similarly, increased access to transaction data and cloud computing resources means that we have smarter, faster computational processes--like enhanced neural networks--to detect payments that do not match a consumer's spending patterns and help prevent fraudulent transactions. Both security and convenience are crucial elements for successful payments innovation. Consumers will not store their funds in a system that is not secure and will not want to transfer funds out of an otherwise secure system if the process is cumbersome. The Role of Banks in Payments Innovation The examples I have highlighted so far illustrate payments innovations from fintech firms and banks alike. I want to spend a moment highlighting the special role of banks in the payments process, and how banks are needed in order to create innovations that can be used broadly across the economy. The traditional role of banks in the payments process has been to hold deposits and enable their transfer from one individual or business to another. A depositor might withdraw cash from the bank's ATM to pay a friend or write a check to make a payment. Over time, we have moved from ATMs and paper checks toward electronic payments and online payments through banking platforms--payment methods for which banks are still perceived as essential. More recently, consumer-facing technology has become front and center. At times, the payments process is so seamlessly integrated that one can forget that there is even a bank in the process, as with the Uber and Lyft example. But despite this shift in focus, payments innovation is still fundamentally about how, when, and where an individual's deposits can be held, transferred, and packaged with other information. And banks are still important players in making that happen. Even where this reality is obscured by several layers of technology, there is almost always a bank involved in consumer transactions. Given their importance in holding and transferring funds, banks continue to have a key role to play in the design and safety of more efficient retail payment systems. Without bank participation, it would be difficult to change how funds are transferred in a way that brings pervasive benefits to consumers. For example, if the aim is to capture the speed and continuous nature of today's commerce in the payment system as a whole--as has become a focus for many countries, including the United States--it would be difficult to do so without banks allowing the transfer of their deposits on a 24x7 real-time basis. Of course, individual payment systems are already doing this for consumers within their own network. But achieving these benefits on a broad scale would be challenging without the banking system's participation, because of the large role banks have in holding and transferring funds. All this is to say that we are at a critical juncture in the payment system's evolution, where technology is rapidly changing many facets of the payments process. Fintech firms and banks are seizing these technological changes in their own ways. But a collective and collaborative effort by all payment stakeholders will also be important as the United States works to achieve a payment system that has broad reach and can seamlessly integrate with other systems to transfer funds in a reliable, secure, and convenient manner. When we pay with cash or write a check, we don't spend a lot of time worrying about who our recipient banks with; that universality seems an appropriate standard for new payment options as well. Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System At the Federal Reserve, we believe it is important to embrace opportunities provided by technological change to improve the convenience and safety of the U.S. payment system. About five years ago, we launched our payment system improvement initiative, which committed the Federal Reserve to working with the full range of payments system stakeholders to achieve a faster, more secure payment system. We saw that technology was transforming the nature of commerce and end-user expectations for payment services. We saw some players coming to market with innovative product offerings, but it was a fragmented approach. Meanwhile, other countries were advancing on initiatives to improve the speed and safety of their payment systems, creating a gap between the U.S. payment system and those abroad. While the Federal Reserve does not have plenary authority over payment systems, as is the case in some other countries, we have often played an important role as a leader and catalyst for change. It was in this role that we issued a call to action asking stakeholders to come together in pursuit of a better payment system for the future--focusing on speed, security, efficiency, international payments, and collaboration. 5 I believe a collaborative approach ensures that change is designed by those whose commitment and expertise are needed to improve the payment system. Stakeholders – including banks, fintech companies, consumer groups, regulators, and others -- answered our call to action, signing up for two task forces convened by the Federal Reserve. More than 300 stakeholders joined the Faster Payments Task Force, and around 200 joined the Secure Payments Task Force. Let me first touch upon the Faster Payments Task Force, which has recently completed its work. 6 The Faster Payments Task Force's mission was to identify and assess alternative approaches for implementing a safe, ubiquitous, faster payments system in the United States. The task force began its work by developing a set of effectiveness criteria laying out desirable attributes for faster payment solutions covering the broad categories of ubiquity, efficiency, safety and security, speed, legal framework, and governance. While the task force was focused on improving speed and convenience, it also underscored the importance of safety and security by establishing 11 criteria of a total of 36 focused on those objectives. The task force encouraged its members to submit proposals for faster payment solutions that would meet the criteria that its members had agreed upon. A diverse range of task force members rose to the challenge by submitting 16 proposals to be vetted against its criteria. 7 These proposals represent a broad universe of creative and innovative ways to deliver faster payments by embracing technology. They range in structure from solutions that use a centralized clearing and settlement mechanism to others that focus on distributed networks. Some are based on traditional assets held in transaction accounts, and others depend on new asset forms like digital currencies. The role of the task force process was not to recommend or implement a faster payment solution, but rather to offer a range of ideas to move the United States further along the path to a better payment system. We believe that the task force has successfully carried out this role. We are very grateful to the members of the Faster Payment Task Force for all of their work and for the collaborative spirit they brought to the job. But there is more to be done to advance our collective vision of a ubiquitous, real-time, secure future payment system. Last month, the Federal Reserve reaffirmed its commitment to that vision in the paper, "Federal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey," which outlines refreshed strategies and tactics that we, in collaboration with the payment industry, will employ to make further progress. 8 I will mention just a few. One of the recommendations from the Faster Payments Task Force work was to establish an industry governance framework for collaboration and decision-making on faster payments. To move forward in creating this framework, the task force established the Governance Framework Formation Team to develop, publish, and solicit public comment on a proposal for a governance framework. This work group will carry out many of the task force recommendations and the Federal Reserve, at the request of the task force, is chairing and facilitating this effort. In addition, the Federal Reserve is considering providing settlement services--a traditional core function of a central bank--to address the future needs of a ubiquitous real-time retail payments environment. We plan to actively engage with the industry and other stakeholders to further understand gaps and requirements for real-time retail payments settlement and assess alternative models that will support needs over the long term. We also plan to explore and assess the need, if any, for other related Federal Reserve services or capabilities. In carrying out this assessment, we will be guided by current and potential market developments and challenges, as well as our long-established criteria for offering new products and services. These criteria include the need to fully recover costs over the long term; the expectation that the new service will yield clear public benefit; and the expectation that other providers alone cannot be expected to provide the service with a reasonable effectiveness, scope, and equity. 9 The Federal Reserve will also continue to support the ongoing work of the Secure Payments Task Force. This task force has been working to educate stakeholders on payment security practices, risks, and actions that could enhance payment security. These are challenging topics, because they require stakeholders to be open and forthcoming about potential vulnerabilities if there is to be substantial progress. The Federal Reserve will also pursue two new efforts focused on security. Early in 2018, we plan to launch a study analyzing payment security vulnerabilities. This study is similar to other research efforts that the Federal Reserve has pursued to build foundational and collective understanding of the U.S. payment system. We also plan to build upon the contributions of the Secure Payments Task Force to establish work groups focused on approaches for reducing the cost and prevalence of specific payment security vulnerabilities. In a world of ever-escalating threats to the integrity of our payment system, this collective action is needed to sustain public confidence. These were just a few of our new initiatives. The package of next steps the Federal Reserve outlined in its recent paper confirm that we remain steadfast in our commitment to work with industry and other stakeholders to achieve a better payment system through both leadership and action. Summary Rapidly changing technology is providing a historic opportunity to transform our daily lives, including the way we pay. Fintech firms and banks are embracing this change, as they strive to address consumer demands for more timely and convenient payments. A range of innovative products that seamlessly integrate with other services is now available at our fingertips. It is essential, however, that this innovation not come at the cost of a safe and secure payment system that retains the confidence of its end users. The examples I have drawn upon today highlight that fintech firms and banks must each play a role in assuring that enhancements to convenience and speed do not undermine safety and security. More broadly, the Faster and Secure Payments Task Forces demonstrate the importance of broad and diverse stakeholder input, which are essential if the United States is to implement safe, ubiquitous real-time retail payments. Working together, we can achieve a safe and fast payments system that meets the evolving needs of consumers and our dynamic economy. 1. See, e.g., Miklos Dietz, Somesh Khanna, Tunde Olanrewaju, and Kausik Rajgopal, "Cutting Through the Noise around Financial Technology," McKinsey & Company, February, 2016, www.mckinsey.com/industries/financialservices/our-insights/cutting-through-the-noise-around-financial-technology. Return to text 2. See Lael Brainard, " Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack? " (speech delivered at the Northwestern Kellogg Public-Private Interface Conference on "New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research & Practice," Evanston, Illinois, April 28, 2017). Return to text 3. "Your Guide to Winning the Shift to Mobile," Google, Micro-Moments, September 2015, https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/marketing-resources/micro-moments/micromoments-guide-pdf-download/. Return to text 4. Cashing the funds out of the app to use for other payments, however, has traditionally taken longer. Return to text 5. See Federal Reserve System, " Strategies for Improving the U.S. Payment System (PDF) ," January 26, 2015. Return to text 6. See Faster Payments Task Force (2017), "The U.S. Path to Faster Payments, Final Report Part Two: A Call to Action," https://fasterpaymentstaskforce.org/ . Return to text 7. The task force recommended establishing an external Qualified Independent Assessment Team to conduct objective proposal assessments. On behalf of the task force, the Federal Reserve selected McKinsey & Company to conduct a comprehensive assessment of each faster payment solution proposal against the task force's set of criteria. Return to text 8. See Federal Reserve System, " Federal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey (PDF) ," September 6, 2017. Return to text 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Policies: The Federal Reserve in the Payments System ," revised 1990. Return to text Last Update: October 18, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Roundtable of the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video) Share Watch Live Good morning. I am sorry that I am not able to be with you today at the FRBNY for this important meeting. I thought that I would begin by discussing the LIBOR related events that have brought us here, and then talk about the way forward. LIBOR gained negative public attention when reports began to surface during the financial crisis that employees at some banks had attempted to manipulate the rate by altering the quotes they submitted for use in the calculation of LIBOR. A number of agencies, including the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), the Department of Justice, and the U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), took the lead in investigating and prosecuting the cases of LIBOR manipulation that were uncovered. The Federal Reserve also joined in international efforts to strengthen LIBOR. Among other things, we joined the ICE Benchmark Administration's (IBA's) LIBOR Oversight Committee as an observer, and we also worked intensively with international authorities and IBA in developing and encouraging the reforms set out in IBA's Roadmap for LIBOR. But at the same time, as we and other authorities collected data on the transactions underlying banks' submissions to LIBOR, we began to see that those transactions were relatively few and far between. As a result, many began to question whether LIBOR could be truly and permanently fixed. To be sure, much has been done to address the cases of attempted manipulation, and LIBOR has much stronger governance in place than it did before the crisis. The question instead was whether there were enough actual LIBOR transactions to form a stable basis for this critical rate. Since many of the pressures around LIBOR stem from the low level of underlying transactions, let me share some data regarding activity in U.S. dollar wholesale funding markets. Today, there are 17 banks that submit quotes in support of dollar LIBOR. Some have suggested requiring more banks to submit LIBOR data, but doing so would not materially improve the situation. The panels in Figure 1 show the distribution of daily aggregate wholesale dollar funding volumes for the 30 global systemically important banks (or GSIBs). The data here include all of the Eurodollar, federal funds, CD, and commercial paper transactions that the Federal Reserve has access to--the most complete picture of U.S. dollar unsecured funding that I am aware of. For one-month funding, shown in the top panel, the median daily volume of transactions by these banks since money-market reforms took effect last year was just over $1 billion. For three-month funding (the middle panel), the most heavily referenced LIBOR tenor, the median is less than $1 billion per day. On some days we see less than $100 million. If we compare this to the more than $100 trillion in outstanding volumes of U.S. dollar LIBOR contracts, it should be clear that the activity in this market is miniscule compared to the size of the contracts written on it. In our view, it would not be feasible to produce a robust, transaction-based rate constructed from the activity in wholesale unsecured funding markets. A transactions-based rate from this market would be fairly easy to manipulate given such a thin level of activity, and the rate itself would likely be quite volatile. Thus, LIBOR seems consigned to rely primarily on some form of expert judgment rather than direct transactions. As we discussed these issues with the officials in the United Kingdom who oversee and regulate LIBOR, we also became aware that they were receiving a steady stream of requests, and sometimes demands, from banks seeking to leave the LIBOR panels. The use of expert judgment in submissions allows LIBOR to be published every day, but many banks are now understandably uncomfortable with being asked to provide judgment about something that they do very little of. In his July speech, Andrew Bailey discussed the efforts of the FCA to keep these banks on the panels. Market participants should understand that the official sector has done everything it can to stabilize and strengthen LIBOR. Without the intervention of U.K. authorities, LIBOR would be in a weaker state today. But that balancing act has grown increasingly difficult. As time has passed, some banks have grown more resistant to public-sector entreaties to remain on the panels. As you know, one bank left the U.S. dollar panel last year. At the same time, we have had to confront the fact that, if banks could not be persuaded to voluntarily remain on panels, then the legal powers to compel them to do so were limited. Under European Union benchmark regulations, which LIBOR will soon be subject to, authorities can only compel submissions to a critical benchmark for a period of two years. Given this time limit, brokering a voluntary agreement with the submitting banks to stay on for a longer period was the last, best choice that authorities had available to guarantee some further period of stability for LIBOR. CFTC Chairman Chris Giancarlo and I have publicly supported the FCA's efforts to secure an agreement with the submitting banks to stay on through the end of 2021, and we have encouraged the U.S. banks that submit to LIBOR to cooperate with FCA's effort. Of course, LIBOR may remain viable well past 2021, but we do not think that market participants can safely assume that it will. Users of LIBOR must now take in to account the risk that it may not always be published. While the public's understanding of this risk has increased significantly since Andrew Bailey's speech, the official sector has been concerned about it for some years, as reflected for example in our public comments and in the annual reports of the Financial Stability Oversight Council. Given our understanding of the risks to LIBOR, the Federal Reserve convened the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (or ARRC) in 2014 in cooperation with the Treasury Department and CFTC. Consistent with recommendations from the Financial Stability Board (FSB), we charged the ARRC with identifying a robust alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR and with developing a plan to encourage its use in some derivatives and other transactions as appropriate. The ARRC has accomplished the things that we asked of it. I want to thank the members for their work and also to extend my special thanks to Sandie O'Connor as the chair of the ARRC. Sandie will discuss the ARRC's work shortly, but I'll make a few points. First, I'd note that, like most market participants, the ARRC members initially had a difficult time conceiving of any kind of transition from LIBOR. As is the case for all of you, a transition will be a complicated task for the broker-dealers and other members of the ARRC, and will involve significant costs. Over time, however, I think the ARRC members have developed a greater understanding of the risks to LIBOR and now see that, despite those complications and costs, a transition may prove necessary. I also think that, having had time to consider the transition plans that Sandie will talk about, ARRC members have become more comfortable with the idea that a transition is feasible, even if the necessity of achieving it is regrettable. Second, it is clear that any rate the ARRC selected as a potential alternative needed to be highly robust. There would be no point in selecting a rate that might find itself quickly in the same kinds of conditions that LIBOR is in now. In our view, the ARRC has chosen the most robust rate available. In general, only overnight unsecured or secured funding markets appeared to have enough underlying transactions to produce a robust rate. The overnight Treasury repo market is the largest and most active market in any tenor of U.S. rates markets. Figure 2 illustrates the point: the transactions underlying the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), at about $700 billion per day or more, are much larger than the volumes in overnight unsecured markets, even much larger than estimates of the volume in Treasury bills, and they dwarf the volumes in other term markets. The alternative reference rate needs to be able to stand the weight of having trillions of dollars written on it, and the ARRC has definitely met this standard in choosing SOFR. Third, we charged the ARRC with devising plans for a voluntary transition that encouraged the use of their recommended rate where appropriate. We have never told anyone that they cannot use LIBOR. The ARRC did consider whether other cash products could move from LIBOR to the rates it evaluated, but their paced transition plan has focused on derivatives because that is where the largest gross exposures to LIBOR are, and because it may be easier for many derivatives transactions to move away from LIBOR to a new rate. Now, however, market participants have realized that they may need to more seriously consider transitioning other products away from LIBOR, and the ARRC has expanded its work to help ensure that this can be done in a coordinated way that avoids unnecessary disruptions. Sandie will discuss plans to eventually create a term reference rate, which may help to smooth any transition. That term reference rate would have to be built by first developing futures and OIS markets that reference SOFR. It will likely never be as robust as SOFR itself, and so derivatives transactions will almost certainly need to be based on the overnight rate, but a term reference rate could conceivably be used in some loan or other contracts that currently reference LIBOR. All of the work that we will talk about today will help, but we have to acknowledge that the transition will be complicated. Unfortunately, as I have discussed, we cannot guarantee that it won't be necessary. The most complicated aspects involve the legacy contracts that reference LIBOR, many of which do not have strong language in place if LIBOR were to stop publication. The FSB has been working with the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (or ISDA) to devise better language for derivatives, and ISDA's Scott O'Malia and Katherine Tew Darras will discuss that work later this morning. As people now consider the risks around LIBOR for other types of contracts, they will need to go through their documentation to understand what the fallback language is and how it can be improved. We will also discuss those issues today. This is important work, both for the parties to these contracts and for our financial stability. While there may be no perfect contract language or fallback, good risk management requires that we work together to find language and fallbacks that are robust and that limit unintended valuation changes. So, while much work has been done, there is more still to do. I have been heartened in seeing that many market participants are already confronting these issues. For some, Andrew Bailey's speech was a difficult wake-up call. But the efforts we have undertaken with the ARRC show what is possible when the official sector works collectively with market participants. If market participants are willing to continue to work together, then we can safely achieve the transitions needed to create a better and more robust system that will help to ensure our ongoing financial stability. View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: November 02, 2017 Back to Top
