June 25, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at OPEN Finance Forum, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning. I’m an economist, so I’m going to start with some numbers. The unemployment rate for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people is nearly double the national average. 1 And the unemployment rate specifically for transgender people is three times the national rate. 2 As President of a Federal Reserve Bank, I am focused on two vital economic goals: maximum employment and stable prices for the U.S. economy. These statistics paint a clear picture of why conferences like this one are so important: We are not where we need to be. Before I go any further, I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. Let me say, as an ally, that it’s a genuine honor to be invited to open today’s Forum. This Pride Month marks 50 years since the Stonewall uprising. We’ve come a long way since the 1960s, but we still have far to go. It was also a great honor to be able to fly the Pride flag outside the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for the first time this June. But, given that it is 50 years since Stonewall, it’s clear we have more catching up to do. And this is where we owe OPEN Finance a great debt of gratitude. OPEN Finance gives us the tools we need to assess how we’re doing, and where we need to make progress. With the support of OPEN Finance, and the dedication of the Open Network at the New York Fed, we’ve introduced a number of new policies and measures that drive our efforts to make the Bank the open and inclusive employer we aspire to be. I’d personally like to thank David Ignell and Gil Carroll, presidents of our Open Network, for their work moving us forward. These efforts are important because they send a message to LGBT employees and the organization as a whole about our values and culture. I’d like to share one specific example. We recently created the option to add gender pronouns to our official e-mail signatures. This is a part of an organization-wide effort to raise awareness around the use of pronouns. On its own, it may seem like a small change, but it sends a loud message that part of respecting one another is using the correct pronouns. This effort has been well received, and a big part of that is because it’s created spaces for conversations that just weren’t happening before. But policies can only go so far. In fact, we can have world-class policies, but if we don’t have a culture where people feel comfortable bringing their whole selves to work, rules alone won’t get us to where we need to be. This is true of every element of diversity and inclusion. In a culture where taking extended leave damages your career prospects, a generous parental leave policy won’t make up for that. In a culture where people don’t feel that their voices are welcome, few will speak up. In a culture that fails to embrace differences, we won’t reap the benefits of diversity. The data are clear. Nearly half of LGBT people are closeted at work, and the top reason LGBT workers don’t report negative comments they hear about LGBT employees is they don’t believe that anything will be done about it. 3 This gets to the heart of why the “inclusion” piece of diversity and inclusion is essential, and a personal priority. Obviously, there’s a moral imperative for diversity, and numerous studies have shown the benefits to both productivity and the bottom line. 4 But for me, it’s my experiences as both an academic and a policymaker that have made inclusion so important. Economics is a profession that has a glaring diversity issue. As economists, we have not done enough to create a diverse profession or an inclusive culture. When I’m sitting in a room and see a bunch of people who look and sound the same, I know it’s a problem. When everyone has an identical view, it’s easy to assume it’s because that view is the right one. But for me it raises questions: Who isn’t in the room? Who’s missing, and why aren’t they here? I’m always on the hunt for different perspectives on how to interpret the data, new takes on old problems, and innovative approaches to tackle the challenges that lie ahead. If I have a bunch of cookie-cutter theories and explanations that look like my own, I know it’s highly probable we’ve not been challenging ourselves enough. Most CEOs will tell you that that their people are their greatest asset. I know that to be true. That’s another reason why an inclusive culture is something that’s so important, and needs to be embedded across an organization. It’s not enough for diversity to live in HR documents and policies. We need to create an environment where everyone has the potential to flourish; to bring their best, most innovative, and creative selves to work; and to do the best work of their careers. So how do we make progress? We need to have honest and open conversations every day. Not just about work performance and ideas, but on everything. We need to make sure that everyone—regardless of their background, their age, the color of their skin, their sexual orientation, or their gender identity—feels their perspectives are heard and valued. Creating an inclusive culture has no end date. Like so many aspects of culture and values, it’s not a project with a deadline, where we can say, “OK, we’re done now.” Instead, we need to be constantly reassessing our goals, refining what we do, and how we do it. We need to be vigilant, attuned to change, and open to new ideas. Because it’s one thing to create an open culture, but a much harder challenge to keep it that way. I’m reminded of a quote by Brené Brown, which I believe sums this up: “To not have the conversation because of discomfort is the definition of privilege…” When we step back, when the dialogue—however uncomfortable it may be—stops, or is never initiated in the first place, is when there’s a problem. It’s the conversations that aren’t spoken that erode trust, alienate people, and take us back. I’d like to conclude where I began. I spend a lot of time examining data, and it’s a source of constant disappointment and frustration that LGBT people, women, and people of color continue to have less economic opportunity than their straight, white, male counterparts. Creating equality of opportunity at the national level is a challenge the United States continues to struggle with. But it’s both the right thing to do and the only way we’ll reach our full economic potential. Creating a more diverse—and equally important—a more inclusive Federal Reserve is a key priority. We have come a long way, but there’s no doubt we still have far to go. And this is a journey without a final destination. When someone tells me “we’re done,” is when I know we have the furthest to go. It’s also a journey that is so much easier when we do not walk alone. Partners like OPEN Finance are crucial to our progress. Once again, I’d like to thank you for inviting me to open today’s forum. I know it’s going to be a productive and insightful day, and one full of the conversations we all need to be having more frequently. 1 LGBT Demographic Data Interactive . Los Angeles, CA: The Williams Institute, UCLA School of Law, January 2019. 2 James, Sandy E., Jody L. Herman, Susan Rankin, Mara Keisling, Lisa Mottet, and Ma’ayan Anafi. The Report of the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey . Washington, DC: National Center for Transgender Equality, chap. 9, 2016. 3 Human Rights Campaign Foundation, A Workplace Divided: Understanding the Climate for LGBTQ Workers Nationwide , June 2018. 4 See for example: Hewlett, Sylvia Ann, and Karen Sumberg, For LGBT Workers, Being ‘Out’ Brings Advantages , Harvard Business Review , July-August, 2011; and Hunt, Vivian, and Lareina Yee, Sara Prince, and Sundiatu Dixon-Fyle, Delivering Through Diversity , McKinsey & Company, January 2018. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

July 11, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at University at Albany—SUNY, Albany, New York As prepared for delivery Thank you for that kind introduction and for having me to speak today. I’m an economist, so I naturally have a fascination with data, statistics, and what we can learn from them. But the reason I find economics so interesting isn’t the numbers or the charts—it’s how they shape the everyday lives of people. And that’s the reason running a Federal Reserve Bank is such a privilege. The work we do—our public mission—plays a big role in helping people get jobs, take out mortgages, or grow their businesses. Today I’m going to talk a bit about that work and the health of the economy—both at the national level and for this region, the Federal Reserve’s Second District. Before I go any further I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. I’ve just referred to the Federal Open Market Committee and the Federal Reserve System, but I know it’s not always entirely clear to people what they are, or what they do. The Federal Reserve has two monetary policy goals set by Congress: keeping prices stable, and ensuring there are as many jobs in the U.S. as possible. Underpinning both of these goals is a strong economy, and we use monetary policy to support that. A major part of monetary policy is setting interest rates, and we do this at Federal Open Market Committee—or FOMC—meetings in Washington, D.C. The Federal Open Market Committee consists of the presidents of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors, who sit down as a group every six weeks to decide what interest rate will ensure sustainable growth. We don’t want the economy to grow so fast that it’s unsustainable, or so slowly that it discourages jobs and investment. Just like Goldilocks and her porridge, we don’t want it too hot or too cold—we want it just right. The Macro Outlook We make those decisions by examining a wide range of data and information. Given that our goals are price stability and maximum employment, we tend to focus a lot on data such as the inflation rate, employment, unemployment, and GDP growth. But, that’s not all—we also collect and analyze enormous amounts of other information to help us assess the state of the economy and the economic outlook. 1 So, what does all that information tell us about the current economic outlook? After surging ahead last year, the U.S. economy appears now to be growing at a more moderate pace. I expect GDP growth to be around 2-1/4 percent this year, moderately above my estimate of the long-run sustainable growth rate for the economy. In my past speeches, I often mentioned the fact that we’re nearing the longest expansion on record. Well, as of this month, I can finally say that we’ve reached that milestone. The economy has been growing for 121 months—a little over 10 years. While this is undoubtedly good news, the headline data mask a more nuanced economic picture. Consumer spending has been an important driver of growth, and the most recent readings have been very positive. However, other signs point to slowing growth. In particular, the latest indicators suggest that business fixed investment has softened and that manufacturing production is in decline. And the outlook for growth outside the United States has dimmed, which will weigh on demand for U.S. products. This mixed picture is mirrored in the employment data. On one hand, the unemployment rate, which stands at 3.7 percent, is near the lowest we’ve seen in 50 years. On the other, job growth has slowed this year relative to last year’s pace. Finally, turning to prices, the latest data show that underlying inflation is 1.6 percent, below our 2 percent goal. The major challenge with inflation that’s persistently lower than 2 percent is that low inflation feeds into inflation expectations. If inflation stays too low, people will start to expect it to stay that way, creating a vicious cycle, pushing inflation further down over the longer term, and making it harder to achieve our goals through monetary policy. The Second District All of these numbers tell the story of the U.S. economy at the macro level, but they’re not always reflected in the real experiences of Americans across the country. I referred at the beginning of this speech to the Second District—which includes New York State, parts of New Jersey and Connecticut, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands—and is the area the New York Fed is responsible for. I spent yesterday and today meeting with district business leaders, community organizers, and elected officials, hearing about their work, their successes, and their challenges. People’s experiences are influenced by the macro level, but their local economy plays an equal, and often more important role in shaping their economic opportunity. One aspect of the Fed that we don’t talk about enough is the work our regional economists and our outreach teams do, trying to understand what’s going on at the local level. While the U.S. economy has been growing for the last 10 years, analysis by New York Fed economists shows that not everyone is feeling the benefits equally. Growth is concentrated in the largest cities like New York and San Francisco, and those who benefit the most are those who already have high incomes. 2 A large part of this is because current economic conditions favor highly skilled workers who tend to flock to cities. These big metropolitan areas are successful, but they also suffer from some of the starkest wage inequality in the country. By contrast, upstate New York is less unequal, but the disappearance of manufacturing jobs has held back growth. More equal wage growth is only good news if people have jobs. But many have found themselves in the position of leaving the area in which they grew up to look for work. The Albany area has bucked this trend. The mix of colleges and universities specializing in innovative subjects like nanotechnology, and high-tech businesses, alongside its position as a state capital, has created a real economic success story. I know there are a lot of students in the room, and choosing SUNY was a wise move. Investing in an education that equips you for the future will pay off over the long term. The Tale of Many Economies So what can the Fed do about this complex picture—the tale of many economies I’ve talked about today? Monetary policy is an important tool, but it alone cannot address all the economic issues that we face. The policies we enact at the FOMC are vitally important for sustaining growth at the national level, but they can’t determine everything that happens at the local level. This is where our community development work comes in. Through our research and outreach, we put data and analysis into the hands of community leaders to give them tools to strengthen their local economies. We have programs that use our convening power to bring together stakeholders to share knowledge—our workforce development program is a key example. And finally, we use our research to catalyze action and investment. Tools such as our resource guidebooks serve as a starting point for investors. Conclusion I started by talking about our goals—keeping prices stable and ensuring maximum employment. These things are essential for a strong and prosperous economy. And while the current picture is complex, the economy is in a good place. But not every community has benefited from the growth of the last decade to the same degree. At the New York Fed, we are committed to understanding what drives growth, economic inequality, and what creates opportunity. Those are the insights that drive my fascination with economics and my commitment to the Federal Reserve and its public mission. Those are the insights from the data we need to leverage, so that all parts of the U.S. economy can reach their full potential. 1 John C. Williams, Monetary Policy: A ‘Data Dependent’ Approach , Remarks at the New Jersey Bankers Association’s Economic Leadership Forum, Somerset, New Jersey (January 18, 2019). 2 Abel, Jaison R. and Richard Deitz, Why Are Some Places So Much More Unequal Than Others? , Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review , forthcoming 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

901 Days - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech 901 Days July 15, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (SIFMA), New York City As prepared for delivery Thank you for the kind introduction and the opportunity to speak this morning. It’s a particular pleasure to be sharing the stage with Andrew Bailey, who has played such an important role in leading efforts on establishing robust references rates to replace the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR). This critical undertaking traverses markets and transcends jurisdictions, making international cooperation and coordination essential for success. Before I go any further, I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. Where Have We Come From? Today I’m going to talk about the progress we’ve made, and the path that lies ahead. But first, given that 12 years have passed since LIBOR first became an acute area of concern, it’s important to remember why replacing it is so critical. LIBOR is based on submissions from individual banks. The volume of actual transactions that term LIBOR is based on is very small—totaling around $500 million on a typical day. To most people, $500 million may sound like a lot, but given that $200 trillion of financial contracts reference U.S. dollar LIBOR, it’s really a drop in the ocean. 1 As a result, submissions are largely based on judgment, as opposed to real numbers. When the LIBOR scandal erupted, it became clear that there had been fraud and collusion, both within and across financial services firms, in the pursuit of profit. The reliance on expert judgment, rather than actual data, makes the rate too vulnerable to manipulation. It’s readily apparent to all those in the industry—both firms and regulators—that LIBOR is fundamentally broken. Consequently, banks are increasingly reluctant to provide LIBOR submissions, adding to the level of risk around using the rate. The U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has reached an agreement with banks to keep submitting rates through the end of 2021, but in 2022 the existence of LIBOR will no longer be guaranteed. In other words, LIBOR’s survival is assured for only another 901 days. Those in the market know the full scale of the risks this creates for the financial system. LIBOR isn’t just the rate that banks use to borrow from one another—it’s also the underlying rate on numerous derivatives and loan contracts. The $200 trillion figure I mentioned earlier is the approximate total exposure to U.S. dollar LIBOR. That’s about 10 times U.S. gross domestic product. None of what I am telling you is new, but it’s worth reminding ourselves just how significant reference rates are to the functioning of financial markets, both in the United States and around the world. There’s broad recognition that exposure to LIBOR is a leading risk to financial stability. 2 We need to treat it as such. Progress Has Been Made And, to date, significant progress has been made, moving us toward a safe and sound reference rates regime. What’s more, there’s been notable momentum in recent weeks. But first, let’s take a look back at some of the more significant accomplishments. Back in 2014, the New York Fed and the Board of Governors convened the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC), which is made up of market participants. In an important milestone, the ARRC selected the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) as its preferred alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR in 2017. Since April 2018, the New York Fed has produced SOFR every day. It is based on much higher volumes than LIBOR, and compliant with the Principles for Financial Benchmarks set forth by the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). 3 SOFR is based on transactions—not judgment—making it much more robust. All of this points to the good work that can happen when the private and official sectors come together. Now, there has been some criticism leveled at SOFR, most notably the lack of a term rate, and not enough liquidity in the market. But liquidity has begun to develop in derivatives and cash markets. And, earlier this year Federal Reserve Board economists published research demonstrating how forward-looking term rates can be derived from SOFR futures and swaps markets. However, we are still some time off from a point at which a robust, IOSCO-compliant term rate can be created, and use of such a term rate should be limited to certain segments of the loan market and to fallbacks for new contracts. I want to emphasize that the industry must not wait for a SOFR term rate to transition away from LIBOR. In my view, the biggest challenge isn’t liquidity or the creation of a term rate, it’s a willingness on the part of the market to stop using LIBOR. We need a mindset shift where firms realize that every new U.S. dollar LIBOR contract written digs a deeper hole that will be harder to climb out of. If companies are going to use LIBOR, they need to start including robust fallback language in the contract, so that if LIBOR ceases to exist, chaos does not ensue. This is an area of recent progress I mentioned earlier. The International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) has led great work on the development of contingencies for some derivatives products for the scenario where U.S. dollar LIBOR ceases to exist. The public consultation on fallback language for some non-U.S. dollar derivatives contracts took place last year. The corresponding consultation for U.S. dollar and some other non-U.S. dollar derivatives contracts closed just last week, and I look forward to hearing the results and next steps. Universal changes to derivatives contracts will take out about 95 percent of the exposure—the $200 trillion number. If the market signs up to the ISDA protocol when it’s published early next year, it will be a huge step in the right direction. In addition, the ARRC has released four sets of recommended fallback language for different types of cash products. This fallback language clearly stipulates trigger events, replacement rates, and spread adjustments, and the triggers are close to those that ISDA has consulted on for derivatives. And on Friday, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) staff issued a statement highlighting risks and disclosures for market participants to evaluate proactively as they transition away from LIBOR. While derivatives and institutional cash markets make up the bulk of LIBOR-based contracts, consumer products are a critical area where the industry needs to focus. Ensuring a fair transition away from LIBOR is going to be particularly challenging, and it’s important consumers understand what the changes being made mean in real terms. Last week the ARRC published potential paths forward for adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs). These include a set of guiding principles for ARMs and other consumer products, draft fallback language for new ARMs referencing U.S. dollar LIBOR, and a framework for use of SOFR in new ARMs. Much progress has been made, but there is still much to do. The ARRC transition plan is well underway, but we need to see certain developments in the U.S. financial industry for a smooth transition. Milestones for the future include deeper liquidity in SOFR derivatives markets, greater issuance of SOFR-linked cash products, a reduction in the issuance of LIBOR-linked cash products, and the closing out of legacy positions on cash products, to name a few. These all require the partnership and perseverance of the market. 2022 Is Just Around the Corner 2022 feels like it’s a long way away, but believe it or not 901 days can disappear, almost in an instant. And I don’t always sense urgency among market participants on this issue. Tellingly, contracts referencing U.S. dollar LIBOR, without robust fallback language, continue to be written. My message: don’t wait for term rates to get your house in order. Engage with this issue now and understand what it means for your operations. Recognize where your exposure lies and deal with the contracts that mature after 2021 that lack robust fallback language. This is a problem you have the opportunity to get ahead of now. Don’t wait until January 1, 2022 to manage your business’ transition away from LIBOR, because it’s going to be too late. Conclusion I’ll conclude with this: Reference rates are a complex issue, with numerous countries, a wide range of public and private entities, and trillions of dollars involved. Progress has been made, and the way forward is clear. But we are now at a critical point in the timeline. The very complexity of this issue is why the industry cannot afford to wait any longer. The clock is ticking, and there are 901 days left. 1 Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Second Report , March 2018. 2 Financial Stability Oversight Council. 2018. Annual Report . Washington (revised June 20, 2019). 3 International Organization of Securities Commissions, Principles for Financial Benchmarks, Final Report , July 2013. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

July 18, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at 2019 Annual Meeting of the Central Bank Research Association (CEBRA), New York City As prepared for delivery My wife is a professor of nursing, and she says one of the best things you can do for your children is to get them vaccinated. It’s better to deal with the short-term pain of a shot than to take the risk that they’ll contract a disease later on. I think about monetary policy near the zero lower bound—or ZLB for short—in much the same way. It’s better to take preventative measures than to wait for disaster to unfold. Today I’m going to talk about three things: first, the heightened relevance of the ZLB for monetary policy; second, the strategies designed to mitigate the effects of the ZLB in an economic downturn; and finally, why these strategies are so important for achieving our monetary policy goals. I’ve already referred to monetary policy several times. So, before I go any further, I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. The Global Economic Context Over the past quarter century, a great deal of research has gone into understanding the causes and consequences of the zero lower bound. 1 The achievement of low inflation in the United States—which, all else equal, implied lower interest rates—coupled with Japan’s long period of deflation and near-zero interest rates, reignited concern about the ZLB back in the 1990s. And the experience of the global financial crisis and its aftermath—with many advanced economies facing, or in some cases, crossing the zero lower bound—has moved this from a mostly theoretical exercise to a very practical one. An added impetus to this research has been the growing evidence that the neutral rate of interest rate has fallen significantly. I, working with various coauthors, have devoted a significant chunk of my academic career to studying r-star, or the long-run neutral rate of interest, and its implications for monetary policy. Our current estimates of r-star in the United States are around half a percent. That’s actually now lower than at any time before the Great Recession. 2 We’ve seen similar declines in r-star in other advanced economies, including in Japan and the euro area. As shown in Figure 1 , the weighted average of estimates of r-star for Canada, the euro area, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States is now also half a percent, nearly 2 percentage points below where it stood at the turn of this century. These very low neutral rates are a result of long-term structural factors slowing growth. They’re driven by demographic changes and slow productivity growth, which are unlikely to reverse any time soon. Low r-star implies that many central banks will be grappling with the challenges of life near the ZLB, which is why it’s so critical to consider how the ZLB alters strategies related to monetary policy. Monetary Policy Near the ZLB And that’s exactly the question we looked at around 20 years ago. In a paper and subsequent FOMC briefing in January 2002, my colleague Dave Reifschneider and I evaluated the effects of the ZLB on the macro economy and examined alternative monetary policy strategies to mitigate the effects of the ZLB. 3 This work highlighted a number of conclusions based on model simulations. 4 In particular, monetary policy can mitigate the effects of the ZLB in several ways: The first: don’t keep your powder dry—that is, move more quickly to add monetary stimulus than you otherwise might. When the ZLB is nowhere in view, one can afford to move slowly and take a “wait and see” approach to gain additional clarity about potentially adverse economic developments. But not when interest rates are in the vicinity of the ZLB. In that case, you want to do the opposite, and vaccinate against further ills. When you only have so much stimulus at your disposal, it pays to act quickly to lower rates at the first sign of economic distress. This brings me to my second conclusion, which is to keep interest rates lower for longer. The expectation of lower interest rates in the future lowers yields on bonds and thereby fosters more favorable financial conditions overall. This will allow the stimulus to pick up steam, support economic growth over the medium term, and allow inflation to rise. These first two conclusions featured in my paper with Dave Reifschneider from 2000. In that paper, these ideas were described as modifications of an otherwise standard Taylor rule for monetary policy. The “forward-looking adjustment” to the Taylor rule illustrated the idea of moving in advance of a downturn to provide timely stimulus. The “backward-looking adjustment” illustrated the idea of keeping interest rates lower for longer. Finally, policies that promise temporarily higher inflation following ZLB episodes can help generate a faster recovery and better sustain price stability over the longer run. 5 In model simulations, these “make-up” strategies can mitigate nearly all of the adverse effects of the ZLB. One particular benefit is that such strategies can be highly effective at keeping inflation near the target on average, thereby anchoring inflation expectations at the desired level. The Gravitational Pull of the ZLB But why are these measures so important close to the ZLB? The Fed has two goals: maximum employment and price stability. Our goal for prices—as I’m sure you’re aware—is two percent. The short answer is, in order to achieve our goals. The long answer centers on inflation and inflation expectations. I’m going to give you the long answer! In the last decade it’s proven particularly challenging to keep inflation at our two percent goal. Japan and the euro area have faced similar challenges in terms of sustaining inflation at their goals. One reason it’s been hard to sustain inflation at the target rate is that persistently low inflation due to policy being constrained by the ZLB can feed into inflation expectations. If inflation gets stuck too low—below the 2 percent goal—people may start to expect it to stay that way, creating a feedback loop, pushing inflation further down over the longer term. The lower average level of inflation translates into a lower level of interest rates cuts available during a downturn, making it even harder for policymakers to achieve their goals. 6 In 1980, when core PCE inflation reached a peak of 10 percent, it was hard to conceive of a world where inflation that’s too low would be the preoccupation of central banks. But the 10 years since the Great Recession demonstrate just how much low r-star has changed the economic environment. Unprecedented monetary stimulus in advanced economies supported economic recoveries and significant declines in unemployment, with unemployment rates today near, or in many cases well below, those seen before the crisis. 7 Bold monetary policy actions surely played an important role in averting far greater catastrophes and aided economic recovery. Despite these actions and this success at bringing unemployment to low levels, inflation rates have persistently been below central banks’ goals. The fact that inflation has been running below target in most advanced countries suggests that this challenge is not due to factors specific to a single country. Instead, there are more systemic factors at play, with the root cause being a combination of low neutral interest rates and the lower bound on interest rates. Investors are increasingly viewing these low inflation readings not as an aberration, but rather a new normal. This is evidenced by a broad-based decline in market-based measures of longer-run inflation expectations since the mid-2000s, with the UK providing the exception, as shown in Table 1 . This downward slippage of longer-run inflation expectations, if it persists, implies that in the future central banks start further from their inflation goals and have even less room to maneuver, making the problem of low r-star and the ZLB even more difficult. Conclusion The ZLB has been a topic of study for nearly two decades. But recent history and the outlook for the longer-term future, make it more relevant than ever. Low inflation expectations, very low r-star, and slower growth all point to a challenging world where policymakers need to make the best use of the tools at their disposal to achieve their goals of strong economies and price stability. The key lessons from this research hold today and in the future. First, take swift action when faced with adverse economic conditions. Second, keep interest rates lower for longer. And third, adapt monetary policy strategies to succeed in the context of low r-star and the ZLB. These actions, taken together, should vaccinate the economy and protect it from the more insidious disease of too low inflation. Thank you. Presentation 1 John C. Williams, The Research-Policy Nexus: ZLB, JMCB and FOMC , Remarks at the Conference Celebrating the 50th Anniversary of the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, New York (May 31, 2019). 2 John C. Williams, The Economic Outlook: The ‘New Normal’ is Now , Remarks at The Economic Club of New York, New York (March 6, 2019). 3 David Reifschneider and John C. Williams, Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era , Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 936-66, November 2000. 4 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC Briefing . January 2002. 5 This discussion abstracts from balance sheet policies such as quantitative easing, which can make financial conditions even more favorable to growth. See, for example, Ben S. Bernanke, Vincent R. Reinhart, and Brian P. Sack, Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment , Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , The Brookings Institution, Volume 35, No. 2, pp. 1–100, 2004. 6 Thomas M. Mertens and John C. Williams, What to Expect from the Lower Bound on Interest Rates: Evidence from Derivatives Prices , Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No. 865 , August 2018. 7 John C. Williams, When the Facts Change..., Remarks at the 9th High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System, Zürich, Switzerland (May 14, 2019). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

September 04, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Euromoney Real Return XIII: The Inflation-Linked Products Conference 2019, New York City As prepared for delivery Thank you for the opportunity to speak this morning. In a speech Chair Powell gave last month, he said, “Low inflation seems to be the problem of this era, not high inflation.” 1 Persistently low inflation is just one of the reasons the theme of this conference is very timely. Our Dual Mandate Goals And inflation is one of the topics I’m going to address today. The Fed has two goals set by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. These are also known as the dual mandate. When I talk about price stability, our objective is to keep the inflation rate near our symmetric 2 percent goal, 2 so understanding inflation data and how it fits into the broader economic picture is critically important. This morning I’m going to set the scene for that broader economic picture and explain how changes in the landscape influenced the rate adjustment the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) made in July. I’ll then discuss the challenges on the horizon and how they feed into my thinking on monetary policy. This is as good a time as any to remind everyone that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. The Economic Outlook If you do an online search about recent economic developments, the word “uncertainty” will come up a lot. And it’s true that uncertainty, both at home and abroad, is playing an important role in my thinking about the economic outlook and monetary policy, as I’ll discuss shortly. But when you take a step back and look at where things stand today relative to our goals, the economy is in a favorable place. The current expansion is the longest on record. The economy continues to grow at a moderate pace, as seen in the latest GDP numbers. And this growth has supported month after month of job gains and a pickup in wage growth in the past couple of years. Furthermore, the overall unemployment rate is near the lowest it has been in 50 years. And the benefits of the strong labor market have been broad across the population: Unemployment rates for African-Americans and Hispanics, while still higher than the overall rate, are near their all-time lows. These low rates aren’t just a fluke of how unemployment is measured in the official statistics—the broadest measure of underemployment, called U-6, is at its lowest level since 2000. These are all very positive signs when it comes to assessing our maximum employment goal. The economy is in a good place, but not without risk and uncertainty (there, I said it!). Persistently low inflation is a key area of my attention, with the core PCE inflation rate—which strips out volatile food and energy prices—running at 1.6 percent, nearly half a percentage point below our 2 percent longer-run target. On its own, inflation somewhat below our longer-run goal would not be such a big deal, especially with our economy strong. But the broader context is important. Ongoing disinflationary pressures from abroad, and the risk that inflation expectations in the U.S. may have drifted down after many years of inflation running below 2 percent, form an important part of this picture. If we look beyond the headline GDP figure, which remains good, there are more mixed signals coming from different sectors. Robust consumer spending is balanced by signs of slowing business investment. We’ve also seen a decline in exports and weakening manufacturing data, reflecting slowing global growth and uncertainty related to trade and geopolitical risks. I am carefully monitoring this nuanced picture and remain vigilant to act as appropriate to support continuing growth, a strong labor market, and a sustained return to 2 percent inflation. Monetary Policy Adjustments This brings me to our decision to lower the federal funds rate in July and how that fits into recent history. Cast your minds back to a year ago, when the Fed was continuing along the path of normalizing monetary policy. This context provides useful information for how and why our stance has evolved over time. During the summer of 2018, the economy was growing above trend as businesses rode the wave of fiscal stimulus. The unemployment rate had fallen below 4 percent, a figure not seen since the peak of the tech boom in 2000. The global outlook was still quite positive, and inflation was close to our 2 percent goal. Against that backdrop, very gradually bringing interest rates back to more normal levels was appropriate in order to keep the economy on a sustainable path of growth. But the economic outlook and the uncertainty around that outlook have evolved considerably since then. While there’s not been a dramatic change seen in the overall numbers yet, the more detailed picture that emerged by summer of this year pointed to an outlook of slowing growth and inflation falling short of our goal. This in turn argued for a somewhat more accommodative monetary policy stance. The combination of muted inflation, slowing global growth, and uncertainties related to trade and other global developments led the FOMC to adjust the federal funds rate down by a quarter of a percentage point and conclude the run-off of the Fed’s balance sheet two months earlier than previously indicated. Our policy actions and communications have contributed to an easing of financial conditions that should help sustain the expansion and get us closer to our dual mandate goals. Challenges on the Horizon When I think about the road ahead, my number one goal is to keep the expansion on track. This is how we will keep unemployment low and bring inflation back to 2 percent. I will be watching closely at how both domestic and broader, global developments unfold. At present, slowing global growth and geopolitical uncertainty pose particular challenges. In its latest World Economic Outlook report, the International Monetary Fund downgraded its projection for global growth and highlighted downside risks. 3 Slower global growth reduces demand for our exports and puts a dampener on both U.S. inflation and growth prospects. And these aren’t just projections for the future—we’re seeing manifestations of slowing growth around the world now. Germany, the UK, and China are all experiencing slowdowns, and the euro area is of particular concern. In response, the European Central Bank and several other central banks have either adjusted, or indicated they will adjust their monetary policy stance to support their economies. These concerns about global growth are compounded by broader geopolitical uncertainty. The risk of a no-deal Brexit for the UK is looming large, the political situation in Italy remains fraught, political tensions continue in Hong Kong, and Argentina’s economy is coping with a debt crisis. On our own shores, concerns around trade policy with China are adding to an uncertain picture. My contacts in the business community have said this is making them more cautious about investment. The effects of this angst are already showing up in the investment numbers. An additional fly in the ointment, if you will, is the recently released downward revision for GDP growth covering last year and an announced estimate of a sizable downward revision to payroll employment. One implication of these revisions is that the economy’s underlying momentum was already somewhat less robust than previously thought, even before recent developments pointed to a less rosy outlook. The Path Forward So what will the response from the Fed be to all of these developments? Our role is to navigate a complex and at times ambiguous outlook to keep the economy growing and strong. As events unfold and conditions evolve, it’s critical we understand which developments are mere bumps in the road and those that will affect the outlook in a material way over the longer term. That means maintaining a data-dependent approach that takes into account the risks and uncertainty that are weighing on the economy. I will continue to consult everything from very granular data about individuals’ experiences of employment conditions, through to the macro projections for global growth. We need to consider all of the information available and be flexible in our response. Conclusion Low inflation is indeed the problem of this era. The current outlook of moderate growth, low unemployment, but stubbornly low inflation is a reflection of the broader economic picture—the July rate adjustment an appropriate response to ease financial conditions and support the economy. How the U.S. outlook evolves in the future is fundamentally tied to the fortunes of the economies around the world. As I look ahead, I’m keeping a keen eye on all the data, both domestic and global, and the implications for our economy. With an uncertain outlook, vigilance and flexibility are essential for achieving our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. Persistently low inflation, heightened uncertainty, and global cross-currents make this a particularly challenging time for monetary policy, and my laser focus is on doing the best we can to support a strong economy and achieve our 2 percent inflation goal. Thank you. 1 Jerome H. Powell, Challenges for Monetary Policy , speech delivered at the "Challenges for Monetary Policy" symposium, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 23, 2019. 2 See the FOMC’s Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy , as amended effective January 29, 2019. 3 International Monetary Fund. 2019. World Economic Outlook Update: Still Sluggish Global Growth . Washington, D.C., July. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
