1 Presentation to the SEMI 2013 Industry Strategy Symposium Half Moon Bay, California By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on January 14, 2013 The Economy and Monetary Policy in Uncertain Times1 Thank you. It’s a pleasure to be with you this morning. I’m especially glad to be speaking at a SEMI event. Many of the nation’s semiconductor companies are based in the 12th Federal Reserve District, and your industry contributes in a big way to the vitality of our region’s economy. At the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, we follow the information technology sector closely. In fact, we have our own monthly index of the tech sector’s economic health, called the Tech Pulse Index, published on our website.2 It’s one of the better gauges of the overall health of the sector. And I should add that I’ve greatly benefited from the contacts I’ve made with leaders of the semiconductor industry and other areas of the tech sector. However, my subject today isn’t the latest wonders to come out of Silicon Valley. Instead, I’ll be talking about the uneven progress of the U.S. economy and my outlook for the period ahead. One key theme will be the critical role that uncertainty about the future has played in holding the economy back. That was demonstrated starkly in recent weeks by the political drama surrounding the fiscal cliff, a spectacle that sapped the confidence of consumers and businesses alike. I’ll also talk about what the Federal Reserve is doing to help our economy get back on track. The Fed has taken some bold steps this past year, both in the approaches we take to stimulating the economy and the way we talk about our policy. In particular, for the first time 1 I want to thank Rob Valletta and Sam Zuckerman for their assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 See http://www.frbsf.org/csip/pulse.php. 2 we publicly announced numerical thresholds for unemployment and inflation that will guide us in future policy decisions. In essence, we’ve made it clear that we do not intend to begin to remove monetary accommodation until the economy reaches specific milestones. These initiatives represent important changes in the way the Fed conducts monetary policy and communicates it to the public, although they’re best understood as an evolution rather than a revolution in our approach. I’ll do my best to explain what we’ve done and why we did it. I should note that my remarks represent my own views and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. So then, where do things stand? The economy has been growing in fits and starts for the past three-and-a-half years. Every time economic growth appears to be picking up steam, something happens that brings it back down again. Sometimes the barriers to growth are natural, like the tsunami of 2011, and the drought and Superstorm Sandy last year. Other times they are man-made, like the crisis in Europe and our own fiscal cliff drama. With a little luck and a big boost from the Fed’s monetary stimulus, I expect the recovery to gradually pick up steam. But there’s a significant risk that growth will fall short of my expectations, especially if further political wrangling over the federal budget leads to prolonged confrontation and uncertainty. These dynamics are clearly visible in the job market. We’ve come a long way since the depths of the recession. Payrolls have risen by nearly 5 million jobs from the low point reached about three years ago.3 This increase in jobs has helped bring the unemployment rate down by over 2 percentage points to 7.8 percent. Nonetheless, despite these important gains, we still have a long way to go to get back to an economy operating at its potential. 3 These reported employment gains since the recession are likely to be revised up, according to a preliminary announcement by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The revisions will be implemented with the release of the January 2013 employment report. See U.S. BLS (2012). 3 On the plus side, two sectors hit hard in the recession, autos and housing, have turned the corner, contributing to the recovery. Thanks to pent-up demand, fabulous rates on auto loans, and an improving labor market, motor vehicle sales have rebounded to a rate of roughly 15 million vehicles a year from their recession low of around 9 million. The news on the housing front is also very encouraging. Fewer homes are going into foreclosure. And, with mortgage rates at rock bottom, home sales have picked up. The stepped- up sales activity and the limited inventory of homes have helped support prices. In 2012, home prices look to have risen for the first time since 2006. New housing construction is up significantly from the historic lows that followed the housing crash. Still, the pace of home construction is well below trend levels, and this sector has far to go to get back to full strength. Despite significant progress in areas such as autos and housing, we’re still not seeing the robust job gains needed to bring the economy quickly back to its potential. The gradual pace of recovery stems in large part from the lingering effects of the 2007–08 financial crisis. Many families are still snowed under by debt, leaving them unwilling or unable to spend.4 After experiencing huge loan losses, many lenders have kept credit relatively tight for small businesses and consumers, despite some modest signs of easing. But the direct hangover from the financial crisis is not the only reason for sluggish growth. Most banks and other financial institutions have largely returned to health, and many nonfinancial businesses have been piling up cash. Their balance sheets look exceptionally strong. For businesses that can get credit, interest rates have rarely, if ever, been lower. You would think this is a great time to expand your business. Yet, many businesspeople appear to be 4 See Mian, et al. (2012). 4 locked in a paralyzing state of anxiety. As one of my business contacts said recently, “They’re just not willing to stick their necks out.” What’s going on? The terrifying financial crisis followed by a bumpy recovery, the crisis and recession in Europe, the budget mess in the United States, questions about taxes and health- care reform—these and other factors have combined to undermine the confidence of Americans and make them suspicious about the durability of the economic recovery. Indeed, an index of policy uncertainty developed by academic economists recently soared to the highest level recorded in over 25 years.5 In a pattern reminiscent of the debt ceiling debate in the summer of 2011, the recent rise in uncertainty has been accompanied by a sharp drop-off in business and consumer confidence. There’s pretty strong evidence that the rise in uncertainty is a significant factor holding back the pace of recovery now. At the San Francisco Fed, researchers have looked closely at how uncertainty affects the economy.6 They found that, when uncertainty rises, capital spending and full-time employment fall, but part-time employment goes up. Evidently, businesses hesitate to expand in ways that would be costly to reverse if conditions sour. Instead of hiring full-time workers, they increase the hours of their existing workers and take on part-time workers to meet production and sales needs. More generally, research shows that heightened uncertainty slows economic growth, raises unemployment, and reduces inflationary pressures. This pattern has held over the past three decades, but the effects have been particularly notable in recent years. For example, capital spending has downshifted noticeably since early last year. In particular, business spending on information technology, which had been a source of strength early in the recovery, fell back last year, driven by a sharp drop in spending on 5 The index can be seen at http://www.policyuncertainty.com/results.html. 6 See Leduc and Liu (2012a, b) for estimates of the effects of uncertainty and references to the literature. 5 hardware. The job market also shows the effects of uncertainty. During much of the past year, an unusually large share of job growth involved part-time workers who wanted full-time positions. I spoke earlier about some of the sources of uncertainty. Of course, the one that was uppermost in everybody’s mind was the fiscal cliff. This refers to the massive federal tax hikes and spending cuts that were scheduled to take effect automatically at the beginning of 2013. In terms of potential economic impact, the cliff amounted to a triple whammy. The spending cuts and tax increases represented a crippling dose of austerity for an economy that was already struggling. Higher taxes and lower government spending would have meant less disposable income for consumers, smaller government payrolls, and less work for government contractors. In addition, the political clash stoked uncertainty and held down growth by frightening businesses and consumers. Fortunately, the impasse over the tax aspects of the fiscal cliff was resolved, and most of the scheduled spending cuts were halted, at least temporarily. Still, the federal budget had already become more austere in the past few years as stimulus measures passed during the recession wound down and spending cuts were enacted. That’s weighed on growth and forced the private sector to shoulder more of the burden of powering the recovery. Despite the latest agreement, we are in for greater federal fiscal austerity this year. For example, the end to the two-percentage-point cut in the payroll tax means less money in paychecks. What’s more, it’s unclear how much the fiscal cliff accord will relieve uncertainty. We’ve already moved to the next round of the budget battle as spending issues and the federal debt limit come to the fore. In other words, we still have plenty of drama on these issues to rattle the public for some time to come. 6 As far as my outlook is concerned, I expect the economic expansion to gain momentum over the next few years. When final numbers come in, I expect growth in real gross domestic product—the nation’s total output of goods and services—to register about 1¾ percent in 2012. My forecast calls for GDP growth to rise to about 2½ percent this year and a little under 3½ percent in 2014. That pace is sufficient to bring the unemployment rate down gradually over the next few years. Specifically, I anticipate that the unemployment rate will stay at or above 7 percent at least through the end of 2014. And I expect inflation to remain somewhat below the Fed’s 2 percent target for the next few years as labor costs and import prices remain subdued. My forecast takes into account both the fiscal cliff agreement and the various stimulus measures the Fed has put in place. What about monetary policy then? There’s no question that slow growth, high unemployment, and significant uncertainty are challenges for monetary policy. Let’s look at the goals set for us by Congress. First, there’s maximum employment. Economists think of maximum employment as the lowest unemployment rate that can be sustained without inflation picking up. When unemployment falls below the maximum-employment level, workers are in stronger bargaining positions and wage pressures tend to build up, potentially feeding inflation. It’s not easy to pinpoint the noninflationary unemployment rate. The number moves around depending on structural factors, such as whether workers have skills that match available jobs.7 Economists generally estimate that the noninflationary level of unemployment today is between 5 and 6 percent.8 The current 7.8 percent unemployment rate is clearly well above that. Price stability is the Fed’s second mandated goal. Fed policymakers have specified that a 2 percent inflation rate is most consistent with our maximum-employment and price-stability 7 See Daly et al. (2012), Lazear and Spletzer (2012), and Williams (2012b). 8 See Board of Governors (2012a). 7 mandates.9 But our primary inflation measure averaged only about 1½ percent over the 12 months ending in November, noticeably below this target. And I expect inflation to run about 1½ percent this year as well. Here it is in a nutshell: The Fed is missing on both of its goals, especially the maximum- employment mandate. And there are risks that the economy will slow further. The implications are clear. The Fed must do what it can to help the economy improve. Our main tool for stimulating the economy is to lower the federal funds rate, our benchmark short-term interest rate. We pushed that rate down close to zero in 2008, so there’s not a lot more that can be done on that front. Since then, to provide additional support to the economy, we’ve adopted a series of unconventional stimulus measures. For example, since 2008, we’ve purchased more than $2 trillion in longer-term Treasury and mortgage-backed securities. You may have heard the financial press call these purchases QE1, 2, and 3, with the QE standing for quantitative easing. We also carried out a related program, nicknamed Operation Twist, in which we trimmed our holdings of short-term Treasury securities and built our holdings of long-term Treasuries. The purpose of these programs is to lower longer-term interest rates. They work through one of the most basic principles of economics: the law of supply and demand. Our purchases create huge demand for longer-term Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities. We all know what happens when demand goes up. Prices also rise, and that’s exactly what’s taken place with those securities. As their prices have climbed, their yields have come down. The result is that longer-term interest rates have fallen across the board, producing financial conditions more 9 For more information, see the statement of longer-term goals and policy strategy released by the FOMC in January 2012 (Board of Governors 2012b). 8 favorable for economic growth.10 Lower interest rates have made it cheaper for consumers to buy homes and cars, and for businesses to finance new projects. For example, conventional 30- year mortgage rates have dropped to historically low levels, which helped bring the housing market back to life last year. At our policy meeting last month, we decided to continue adding to our economic stimulus with the goal of speeding progress towards our maximum-employment and price- stability goals. First, we announced we will keep buying mortgage-backed securities at the rate of $40 billion per month, a program started back in September. Second, following the expiration of Operation Twist at the end of 2012, we announced that we will continue to buy $45 billion in longer-term Treasury securities each month.11 Critically, we indicated that we will continue these purchases until the outlook for the job market improves substantially, in the context of stable prices. In other words, instead of setting an expiration date for these purchases as we have in the past, we’ll be looking for convincing signs of ongoing improvement in the labor market and a range of other economic indicators before we stop this program. I anticipate that continued purchases of mortgage-backed securities and longer-term Treasury securities will be needed well into the second half of 2013. Of course, my forecast for the economy may be wrong, and we’ll adjust our plans as appropriate. Moreover, we’ll watch the effects of these programs closely to make sure the benefits to the economy exceed the costs. At last month’s meeting, the Fed also adopted a new way of telling the public about the direction our policy is likely to take in the future. Specifically, we said we expect to keep our benchmark short-term interest rate exceptionally low at least as long as, one, “the unemployment 10 See Williams (2011, 2012a). 11 See Board of Governors (2012c, d). 9 rate remains above 6½ percent”; two, “inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal”; and, three, longer-term inflation expectations remain in check.12 This form of policy guidance represents a major improvement from previous forward- looking Fed statements in which we said we expected to keep our benchmark exceptionally low through a specific date. For example, in October we said we expected low rates “at least through mid-2015.” Now our guidance about future policy is expressed in terms of economic conditions such as unemployment and inflation. This means that the public’s expectations of future monetary policy actions will naturally adjust as the economic outlook evolves, without people needing to wait for the Fed to signal a change. Importantly, such language makes it plain that we will keep rates low as long as needed to promote recovery and move toward our goals of maximum employment and price stability. The new way of communicating our expectations is a logical extension of our long- standing effort to make the Fed a more open and transparent institution. Since the early 1990s, we’ve steadily increased the quantity and clarity of information we provide the public about monetary policy. That’s why I view this move as more of an evolution than a revolution in Fed communications. While this form of guidance makes our policies more transparent and predictable, it does carry some risks. After all, it’s impossible to express all the information that goes into monetary policymaking in terms of a few thresholds. In particular, this guidance shines a bright spotlight on the unemployment rate. This is appropriate, because high unemployment is our biggest problem right now. But the unemployment rate is not the only measure of the health of the job 12 See Board of Governors (2012d). 10 market. It’s best to view this unemployment-rate threshold as a guidepost that helps us determine how well we’re moving toward maximum employment. In the final analysis, we’ll consider all kinds of information about economic conditions to help us decide whether we’ve made enough progress to start raising interest rates. As far as inflation is concerned, keep in mind that our target remains 2 percent on average. Sometimes inflation will go a bit above and sometimes a bit below that level. Setting an inflation threshold at 2½ percent is in no way a slackening of our commitment to price stability or a departure from our 2 percent longer-run inflation target. Instead, the inflation threshold gives us maneuvering room to right the economy while simultaneously making it clear we will tighten policy if inflation starts to edge up too much. Finally, we’re also determined to keep a lid on inflation expectations. We will not allow hard-won confidence in the Fed’s commitment to price stability to melt away. None of the measures I’ve described are cure-alls. By themselves, they won’t turn a tortoise recovery into a hare. But our policies are working, as the newfound vigor in the auto and housing markets demonstrates. I am convinced we are charting the best course to get us to maximum employment and price stability. Thank you very much. 11 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012a. “Economic Projections of Federal Reserve Board Members and Federal Reserve Bank Presidents, December 2012.” December 12. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20121212.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012b. “Press Release.” January 25. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120125c.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012c. “Press Release.” September 13. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120913a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012d. “Press Release.” December 12. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20121212a.htm Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert Valletta. 2012. “A Search and Matching Approach to Labor Markets: Did the Natural Rate of Unemployment Rise?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(3, Summer), pp. 3–26. Lazear, Edward P., and James R. Spletzer. 2012. “The United States Labor Market: Status Quo or a New Normal?” Presented at “The Changing Policy Landscape,” 2012 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY. http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/el-js.pdf Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu. 2012a. “Uncertainty Shocks Are Aggregate Demand Shocks.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-10. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2012/wp12-10bk.pdf Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu. 2012b. “Uncertainty, Unemployment, and Inflation.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-28 (September 17). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012- 28.html Mian, Atif R., Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2012. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump.” Working paper, Princeton University and University of Chicago. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1961211 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2012. “Current Employment Statistics: CES Preliminary Benchmark Announcement.” September 27. http://www.bls.gov/ces/cesprelbmk.htm Williams, John C. 2011. “Unconventional Monetary Policy: Lessons from the Past Three Years.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-31 (October 3). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-31.html Williams, John C. 2012a. “The Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Policies.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-34 (November 13). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012-34.html Williams, John C. 2012b. “Update of ‘What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate?’” November 6 update to FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-05. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-05-update.pdf

1 Presentation to The Forecasters Club New York, New York By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on February 21, 2013 The Economy and Monetary Policy: Follow the Demand 1 Thank you very much. It’s great to be here today with a group of people whose job—like mine—includes trying to predict the course of th e economy. It goes without saying that forecasts are critical for the conduct of monetary policy, which works with a considerable lag. Decisions we make today have their peak economic effects one or two years down the road. So, policy needs to be based on where we think things will be, not where they are now. Of course, having good forecasts is only one part of effective policymaking. For monetary policy to succeed, we also need to understand the underlying factors behind those forecasts. For example, is the pace of recovery being hampered by inadequate aggregate supply, or demand? Should we expect the unemployment rate to return to historical levels, or do we need to adjust to a “new normal”? The appropriate stance of monetary policy hinges on these questions. Today, I’ll discuss some of the reasons the recovery has been so tepid, give my perspective on where we are now, and offer my outlook for the period ahead. In doing so, I’ll dig a little deeper into the key developments shaping the recovery and their implications for monetary policy. Here’s a spoiler alert: The main point I want to convey is that, although the events of the past six years have undeniably left their mark on the supply side of the economy, the primary reason unemployment remains high is a lack of demand. Given the shortfall of demand, it’s crucial that the Fed keep doing all it can to help the economy return to full employment. The Federal Reserve has taken pathbreaking steps in this 1 I want to thank Rob Valletta and Sam Zuckerman for their assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 respect, both in our actions and our words. Last year, we extended our unconventional asset purchases. As for our communications, we have publicly announced numerical thresholds for unemployment and inflation that will guide us in future policy decisions. In a nutshell, we’re saying we don’t expect to pull back monetary accommodation at least until the economy reaches specific milestones. This statement of intent clarifies our actions and increases the effectiveness of monetary policy. And this is the point of the talk where I should stress that my remarks represent my own views and not necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System. With that introduction, let me review the state of the economy. Since the recovery began in mid-2009, output growth has been discouragingly slow, with real GDP growth averaging an anemic 2.1 percent. Indeed, on a per capita basis, real GDP is still 1.6 percent lower than it was five years ago, before the recession started. The last time it took more than five years for per capita real GDP to regain its pre-recession level was after the downturn that followed the end of World War II. Progress has been halting in the job market as well. The good news is that we’ve gained about 5½ million jobs from the low point reached three years ago. But, even so, over the past 12 months, we’ve been adding only about 170,000 jobs per month on average. With job growth so lackluster, the unemployment rate has edged down by less than half a percentage point over the past year. And, for the past five months, it’s been stuck close to its current level of 7.9 percent. So, why has the recovery been so tepid? What does this mean for the future? And, what does this tell us about the mix of supply and demand shocks holding back the economy? In answering the first question, it’s important to recognize that a variety of factors are at work. First, the economy still bears the scars of the housing bubble and crash. In addition to its direct depressing effect on home construction, the housing crash has been a powerful restraint on 3 consumer spending.2 Families buried in debt accumulated during the housing boom are still trying to dig their way out. Homeowners without sufficient equity find themselves unable to refinance their mortgages or sell their homes. More generally, loans remain hard to get for many consumers and small businesses, despite significant improvements in overall credit conditions. Second, austerity at various levels of government has reduced aggregate demand to an unusual extent during this recovery, and this has directly impinged on growth. In the short run, higher taxes and lower government spending mean less disposable income for consumers, smaller government payrolls, and less work for government contractors. Over the past few years, we saw this mostly at the state and local government levels, where spending was slashed and taxes were increased. But the federal budget has also been shifting toward greater austerity, with the payroll tax cut expiring at the start of this year and spending reductions under way. Further deep cutbacks are likely. Indeed, if the full sequestration cuts occur, they’re likely to reduce growth this year by roughly two-thirds of a percentage point.3 Third, many advanced economies have been weak, especially in Europe, where austerity measures have been widespread. This has eroded demand for our exports. Finally, an important legacy of the crisis and the events that followed has been unusually high levels of uncertainty. The effect has been to sap confidence and undermine the willingness of consumers and businesses to spend and invest. Initially, that uncertainty reflected the brute force of the crisis and recession, which gave us all a sense of living in dangerous and uncharted territory. Since then, uncertainty has been fueled by the crisis in Europe, repeated clashes over tax and spending policy at home, and the sputtering progress of the recovery itself. 2 Mian, Rao, and Sufi (2012). 3 See, for example, Congressional Budget Office (2013) for discussion of the impact of federal fiscal austerity on economic growth. 4 The economic effects of increased uncertainty are sizable. You might think that because uncertainty and confidence are psychological in nature, they would be hard for economists to pin down. In fact, researchers have made great strides in studying the determinants and economic effects of uncertainty.4 In recent research, economists at the San Francisco Fed examined the effects of broad measures of uncertainty on the economy. They found that heightened uncertainty slows economic growth and raises unemployment.5 Specifically, their estimates suggest that uncertainty boosted the unemployment rate by 1 to 2 percentage points since the start of the financial crisis in 2008. These are four key factors holding back growth during the recovery. Let me now turn to the question of whether they primarily affect supply or demand. This is a critical issue for monetary policy. Indeed, in my own research with Athanasios Orphanides, we found that the Fed had an overly optimistic assessment of the supply side of the economy during the latter part of the 1960s and the 1970s. Specifically, Fed policymakers believed that the sustainable level of unemployment was lower than it actually was. This misperception implied that the economy was performing under its potential, which contributed to policy decisions that led to sustained high inflation back then.6 We don’t want to make that kind of mistake again. So, is the problem today inadequate supply, or demand, or both? A useful way to think about this question is to compare the unemployment rate with the natural rate of unemployment. By the natural rate, I mean the unemployment rate that minimizes labor market imbalances and pressures—either upward or downward—on inflation. The unemployment gap—the difference between the unemployment rate and its natural rate—measures the degree to which labor 4 See, for example, Bloom (2009) and Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2013). 5 See Leduc and Liu (2012, 2013) for estimates of the effects of uncertainty and references to the literature. 6 Orphanides and Williams (2005, 2013). 5 demand is unequal to supply. Movements in the natural rate itself reflect changes in supply. Of course, we can’t directly measure the natural rate of unemployment. Rather, we must estimate it. This topic has appropriately garnered a great deal of attention among economists at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere in recent years. Extensive analysis of the labor market comes to a clear conclusion: Supply-side considerations explain only some of the rise in unemployment. Most of that rise is explained by a lack of labor demand. Let’s look at this more closely. Prior to the recession, a typical estimate of the natural rate of unemployment was between 4¾ and 5 percent.7 The empirical evidence suggests that the recession and policy responses to it, such as extended unemployment insurance benefits, contributed to dislocations in the labor market. These have pushed the natural rate above its pre-recession level by about 1 percentage point.8 Consistent with these findings, my estimate of the current natural rate of unemployment is about 6 percent, roughly 2 percentage points below the current unemployment rate. This 6 percent figure is consistent with many other estimates, including the most recent median estimate of the Survey of Professional Forecasters.9 Fortunately, many of the influences that have elevated the natural rate of unemployment since the crisis and recession should fade over time. In fact, this process is already under way. The extended unemployment insurance programs have been scaled back and are affecting fewer and fewer people. Eventually these programs will be phased out. In addition, measures of mismatch between workers and available jobs are receding.10 And, at least so far, we are not 7 Williams (2013). 8 See Congressional Budget Office (2013) and Daly et al. (2012b). 9 Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia (2012). 10 Lazear and Spletzer (2012) and Șahin et al. (2012). 6 seeing permanent scarring effects of long-term unemployment.11 I expect that, in coming years, the natural rate will return to a more historically typical level of about 5½ percent. I should note that the fact that economists are busily studying, debating, and revising their assessments of the supply side of the economy is encouraging. It makes a repetition of the mistakes of the late 1960s and 1970s much less likely. In our research, Orphanides and I found that, if economists and policymakers had similarly reevaluated their views back in the 1960s and 1970s, the stagflation of that period could have been avoided.12 The conclusion that the economy is suffering primarily from weak demand rather than a shortage of supply receives additional support when the factors weighing on recovery are analyzed. The finding of the research that I mentioned on the economic effects of uncertainty— that heightened uncertainty raises unemployment and depresses inflation—is evidence that uncertainty primarily acts as a barrier to demand, not supply. Other research supports that view. In recent work published by the San Francisco Fed, Atif Mian and Amir Sufi compare state-level employment performance during the recession and recovery with state-level survey data from the National Federation of Independent Business.13 The NFIB survey asks small business owners to identify the single most important problem they face. Answers include taxes, poor sales, labor costs, government regulation, insurance costs, et cetera. Mian and Sufi find that declines in state employment were highly correlated with the percentage of respondents in each state citing lack of demand as their most important business problem. So far, I’ve painted what might seem like a bleak picture, highlighting a slew of reasons—including fiscal aust erity, the global slowdown, and uncertainty—why the recovery 11 Valletta (2013). 12 Orphanides and Williams (2013). 13 Mian and Sufi (2013). 7 remains in check. Despite all this, I expect the economic expansion to gain momentum this year and over the next few years. In fact, I am cautiously hopeful that we could be at a point where the economy really starts to shake off its doldrums. The improvement partly reflects the effects of Fed monetary policy, which has kept interest rates extraordinarily low across the board. The positive effects of monetary policy can be seen in two rate-sensitive sectors, autos and housing, that are now contributing to the recovery in big ways. Vehicle sales have rebounded to a rate of above 15 million vehicles a year from their recession low of around 9 million. Attractive auto loan rates have contributed to the strength in this sector. Meanwhile, the housing market finally bottomed out about a year ago and has been on an upswing since, thanks in part to a drop in conventional mortgage rates to historically low levels. Homebuilding has risen significantly from the lows that followed the housing crash, though the pace of construction is still well below long-term trend levels. After subtracting a cumulative 3½ percentage points from real GDP from 2006 to 2010, real residential investment contributed a positive 0.3 percentage point to growth in 2012. It stands to make an even larger contribution in 2013. Importantly, a virtuous cycle appears to be setting in, with sales volumes growing, home prices increasing, and foreclosures coming down. This should help restore confidence in housing and lure buyers scared off by the events of the past decade back into the market. After a disappointing 2012, my forecast calls for GDP growth to pick up to 2¾ percent this year and about 3¼ percent in 2014. Unfortunately, such growth won’t be enough to push the unemployment rate down quickly. I expect the rate to stay at or above 7 percent at least through the end of 2014 and not drop below 6½ percent until the second half of 2015. 8 One reason I expect such a gradual decline in the unemployment rate is that I anticipate that some of those who have dropped out of the labor force in recent years will jump back in as jobs become more plentiful. Labor force participation plunged during the recession and recovery. Retirement of baby boomers and other demographic factors contributed to this drop. But much of it appears to have been cyclical. Widespread job losses kept many people ordinarily in the labor force from looking for work.14 A cross-state comparison supports the view that the drop in participation included an important cyclical component. The states that saw the largest increases in unemployment during the recession generally experienced the largest declines in participation rates as well.15 These dynamics are also important for inflation. I expect the unemployment rate will remain well above the natural rate for some time, and wage and other cost pressures will remain subdued. As a result, I anticipate that inflation as measured by the personal consumption expenditures price index will run at about a 1½ percent rate over the next few years, about the same as last year. This is below the Fed’s 2 percent longer-run inflation target.16 This brings me to monetary policy. The Fed’s dual mandate from Congress is to pursue maximum employment and price stability. We are missing on both of these goals, with severe consequences for American households and businesses. Unemployment is far too high and inflation is too low. Sometimes our maximum employment and price stability goals can conflict. But that’s not the situation today. Moreover, an aggregate demand shortfall is exactly the kind of 14 See Daly et al. (2012a). 15 Based on data for the 50 states plus the District of Columbia, the correlation between the change in a state’s unemployment rate and the change in its labor force participation rate, weighted by the size of the state’s labor force, is –0.46 measured from the low point in the U.S. unemployment rate in May 2007 to the high point in October 2009. The correlation between the decline in log total nonfarm payroll employment and in labor force participation, calculated in the same manner, is of similar magnitude, but has the expected positive rather than negative sign. 16 For more information, see the statement of longer-term goals and policy strategy released by the FOMC in January 2012 (Board of Governors 2012a). 9 problem monetary policy can—and should—address. We need powerful and continuing monetary accommodation to move toward our mandated goals. In normal times, monetary policy relies on changes in our short-term interest rate benchmark, the federal funds rate. But we pushed that rate close to zero late in 2008. Since then, to provide additional support to the economy, we’ve put in place a series of unconventional stimulus measures. We’ve relied on two primary tools. The first is forward policy guidance, that is, public communications aimed at guiding expectations about the future path of the federal funds rate. The second is large-scale asset purchases, which also go by the name quantitative easing. As I’ll explain, both of these tools stimulate the economy by lowering longer-term interest rates. Our forward guidance appears in the official statements released after each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee. It’s interesting to trace the recent evolution of these statements. Beginning in August 2011, we specified the length of time we expected to keep the federal funds rate exceptionally low. Initially, we said we expected the rate to stay exceptionally low “at least through mid-2013.” By late 2012, that period had stretched to “mid-2015.” Then, at our December 2012 meeting, we shifted gears. Instead of identifying a calendar date for beginning to raise the federal funds rate, we laid out economic guideposts for our decisions. We said we expected to keep the rate exceptionally low at least as long as, one, “the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent”; two, “inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer- run goal”; and three, longer-term inflation expectations remain in check.17 17 See Board of Governors (2012b). 10 Forward guidance works by influencing the public’s expected path of short-term interest rates. Expectations of low yields on short-term assets for a prolonged period make investors more willing to purchase and hold longer-term securities. That, of course, increases their prices and reduces their yields. To give you a sense of the impact of this tool, the unexpected extension of our forward guidance in August 2011 lowered yields on longer-term Treasury securities by about 0.2 percentage point.18 That’s comparable to a cut in the funds rate of ¾ to 1 percentage point.19 When we cut the funds rate that much, financial markets sit up and take notice. Forward guidance works best when the intention to hold interest rates low is both clear and credible.20 In this regard, our evolution from calendar-based guidance to readily observable economic guideposts, such as the unemployment rate, makes this tool more effective. Our new way of communicating our expectations continues our long-standing effort to make the Fed a more open and transparent institution. Since the early 1990s, we’ve steadily increased the quantity and clarity of information we provide the public about monetary policy. The current language cuts to the chase by spelling out the economic conditions we’ll be looking for before we start to raise rates. Moreover, with the calendar approach, we had to shift expected dates as our economic projections changed. Most importantly, the new language acts as an automatic stabilizer, allowing financial markets to react to new information in a way that reinforces monetary policy. For example, as economic developments alter the projection for unemployment, projections will also change for the federal funds liftoff date. Market interest rates will adjust accordingly, helping us accomplish our monetary policy goals. 18 Swanson and Williams (2013). 19 See Chung et al. (2012) and Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005). 20 See, for example, Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003, 2006), Reifschneider and Roberts (2006), and Williams (2006). 11 Admittedly, this guidance focuses attention on the unemployment rate. But, the unemployment rate is only one measure of the health of the economy, and it’s vital that we don’t view it in isolation. Instead, we should consider it in the context of other measures of the job market’s health. The Fed’s unemployment-rate threshold can best be understood as a key signal that will help us determine how well we’re moving toward maximum employment. But when we consider when to start raising the federal funds rate, we’ll examine the full range of information about the labor market and broader economic conditions. Asset purchases are another unconventional policy tool. Since 2008, we’ve purchased more than $3.2 trillion in longer-term Treasury and mortgage-backed securities. 21 We’ve done this through three distinct programs, nicknamed QE1, QE2, and QE3, and a related program, Operation Twist. Asset purchases work by increasing demand for longer-term Treasury and mortgage- related securities. Our purchases bid up Treasury and mortgage security prices and push down their yields. What’s more, lower Treasury and mortgage yields spill over into other markets and help make general financial conditions more favorable for economic growth.22 Lower interest rates produced by forward guidance and asset purchases are providing a much-needed boost to the economy. Lower financing costs encourage businesses to expand and consumers to buy homes, autos, and other durable goods. At our January FOMC meeting, we announced we will continue buying longer-term Treasury and mortgage-backed securities at a pace of $85 billion per month.23 Critically, we indicated we will continue these purchases until the outlook for the job market improves substantially, in the context of stable prices. I anticipate 21 Swanson and Williams (2013) 22 See Williams (2011, 2012). 23 See Board of Governors (2013). 12 that purchases of mortgage-backed securities and longer-term Treasury securities will be needed well into the second half of this year. Some analysts have argued that our policy initiatives have increased the risk of an undesirable rise in inflation. I want to assure you that in no way have we relaxed our commitment to our price stability mandate. We constantly monitor inflation trends and inflation expectations. And we will not hesitate to act if necessary. In this regard, I want to emphasize that we remain committed to our 2 percent inflation target. The 2½ percent inflation threshold in our forward guidance is not a weakening of that commitment. As I noted earlier, both the employment and the inflation signals are flashing the same message, and that is that strong monetary stimulus is essential. I am convinced we are charting the best course to lead us toward maximum employment and price stability. Thank you very much. 13 References Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis. 2013. “Measuring Economic Policy Uncertainty.” January. http://www.policyuncertainty.com/media/BakerBloomDavis.pdf Bloom, Nicholas. 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks.” Econometrica 77(3, May), pp. 623–685. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012a. “Press Release.” January 25. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120125c.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012b. “Press Release.” December 12. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20121212a.htm Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2013. “Press Release.” January 30. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20130130a.htm Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John C. Williams. 2012. “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44(s1), pp. 47–82. Congressional Budget Office. 2013. “The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2013 to 2023.” February 5. http://www.cbo.gov/publication/43907 Daly, Mary C., Early Elias, Bart Hobijn, and Òscar Jordà. 2012a. “Will the Jobless Rate Drop Take a Break?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-37 (December 17). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012-37.html Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert Valletta. 2012b. “A Search and Matching Approach to Labor Markets: Did the Natural Rate of Unemployment Rise?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(3, Summer), pp. 3–26. http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.26.3.3 Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford. 2003. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2003-1, pp. 139–211. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Files/Programs/ES/BPEA/2003_1_bpea_papers/2003a_bpea_egg ertsson.pdf Eggertsson, Gauti, and Michael Woodford. 2006. “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a Liquidity Trap.” In NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2004, eds. R. Clarida, J. Frankel, F. Giavazzi, and K. West. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. http://www.nber.org/chapters/c0076.pdf Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. 2012. “Survey of Professional Forecasters, Third Quarter 2012.” August 10. http://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and-data/real-time-center/survey-of- professional-forecasters/index.cfm Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Eric T. Swanson. 2005. “Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements.” International Journal of Central Banking 1(1), pp. 55–93. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb05q2a2.htm Lazear, Edward P., and James R. Spletzer. 2012. “The United States Labor Market: Status Quo or a New Normal?” Presented at “The Changing Policy Landscape,” 2012 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, WY. http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2012/el-js.pdf Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu. 2012. “Uncertainty, Unemployment, and Inflation.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-28 (September 17). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012- 28.html 14 Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu. 2013. “Uncertainty Shocks Are Aggregate Demand Shocks.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-10 (January). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2012/wp12-10bk.pdf Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. 2012. “Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump.” Working paper, Princeton University and University of Chicago. http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1961211 Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2013. “Aggregate Demand and State-Level Employment.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-04 (February 11). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2013/el2013- 04.html Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2005. “The Decline of Activist Monetary Policy: Natural Rate Misperceptions, Learning, and Expectations.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 29(11, November), pp. 1,927–1,950. Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams. 2013. “Monetary Policy Mistakes and the Evolution of Inflation Expectations.” Forthcoming in The Great Inflation, eds. Michael D. Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Reifschneider, David, and John Roberts. 2006. “Expectations Formation and the Effectiveness of Strategies for Limiting the Consequences of the Zero Bound.” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies 20(3, September), pp. 314–337. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams. 2000. “Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low- Inflation Era.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 32(4, November), pp. 936–966. Șahin, Ayşegül, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante. 2012. “Mismatch Unemployment.” NBER Working Paper 18265 (revised September). Available at http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/economists/sahin/papers.html Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams. 2013. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-02 (January). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2012/wp12-02bk.pdf Valletta, Rob. 2013. “Long-term Unemployment: What Do We Know?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013- 03 (February 4). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2013/el2013-03.html Williams, John C. 2006. “Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Economy with Learning.” In Monetary Policy in an Environment of Low Inflation, proceedings of the Bank of Korea International Conference. Seoul: Bank of Korea. Williams, John C. 2011. “Unconventional Monetary Policy: Lessons from the Past Three Years.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-31 (October 3). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-31.html Williams, John C. 2012. “The Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Policies.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-34 (November 13). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012-34.html Williams, John C. 2013. “Update of ‘What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate?’” February 16 update to FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-05. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011-05-update.pdf
