September 23, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the 2019 U.S. Treasury Market Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Good morning everyone and welcome to the New York Fed. It’s a pleasure to be speaking at the fifth annual U.S. Treasury Market Conference. This conference is particularly valuable because it brings together market participants and five public sector bodies—the New York Fed, the Board of Governors, the Treasury, the SEC, and the CFTC—to discuss the U.S. Treasury market. The Treasury market is arguably the most important market in the world, and today is a unique opportunity to discuss some of the big topics in front of us. Increasing transparency, preparing for future risks, and taking advantage of innovation in this market are vital areas of discussion. This morning, I’ll begin with some observations on recent volatility in money markets and the Fed’s approach to support stability in this critical part of the financial system as we carry out the FOMC’s monetary policy decisions. I’ll then pivot to a different but related topic: the transition away from LIBOR. I think I can get away with it because this conference’s five sponsoring agencies, which first came together following the “flash rally” in 2014, also all play a vital role in facilitating the industry’s move to more robust reference rates. Crucially, they are ex officio members of the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC), the private sector group convened to guide the transition away from LIBOR. And of course the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), the ARRC’s selected replacement for U.S. dollar LIBOR, reflects transactions that finance U.S. Treasury securities. Before I go any further, I need to give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. Market Conditions I’ll start with recent developments in money markets. Conditions in funding markets became highly volatile early last week, with secured lending rates moving higher on Monday and rising sharply on Tuesday. We had expected a number of factors—including quarterly corporate tax payments and the settlement of Treasury auctions—to put upward pressure on funding rates. However, the size of the reaction in repo rates, the spillover to unsecured markets such as federal funds, and the emergence of strains in market functioning were outside of recent experience. For example, in April and June of this year, sizable payment flows led to relatively muted movements in secured lending rates and small movements in unsecured rates. As had been done ahead of prior dates with anticipated significant funding pressures, on Friday, September 13, the Markets team at the New York Fed, and others in the Federal Reserve System put in place a plan for increased monitoring of money markets. This included more frequent reporting on transactions, data, and information from market participants on Monday. Although conditions remained calm on that Friday, the simultaneous increase and widening dispersion in repo rates and, importantly, federal funds rates on Monday indicated that markets were not effectively distributing liquidity across the system. The New York Fed’s Markets team built a timeline and implementation plan in case the Open Market Desk at the New York Fed (Desk) would need to operate on Tuesday. Early Tuesday morning, it became clear that this situation had persisted and had the potential to become more acute. In response to these developments, and in keeping with the FOMC’s standing directive to the Desk to conduct open market operations as necessary to keep the federal funds rate within the target range, on Tuesday morning the Desk announced and conducted a repo operation. Although such operations were common before the financial crisis, this was the first non-test repo operation in many years. This was followed by repo operations each day since. These actions had the desired effect of reducing strains in markets, narrowing the dispersion of rates, and lowering secured and unsecured rates to more normal levels relative to other benchmarks. The experience of the past week drew attention to the possibility of the development of strains in funding markets around the upcoming end of the quarter. This past Friday we announced a plan of continued daily overnight repo operations through October 10, accompanied by three two-week term repo operations that span the month end. 1 The goal of these actions is the same as for recent open market operations: foster conditions in money markets to keep the federal funds rate within the target range. This episode reminds us all of the importance of having well- functioning markets and the vital role that the Federal Reserve plays in supplying liquidity to the system when markets are under stress. We were prepared for such an event, acted quickly and appropriately, and our actions were successful. Friday’s announcement on open market operations to address potential quarter-end funding pressures on interest rates followed this same approach: quickly diagnose the problem, develop the right action plan, and execute that plan. At the same time, it is equally important that we examine these recent market dynamics and their implications for the liquidity needs in relation to the overall amount of reserves held at the Federal Reserve. We will continue to monitor and analyze developments closely. As Federal Reserve Chair Powell stated in his most recent press conference, the FOMC will assess the implications for the appropriate level of reserves and time to resume organic growth of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet consistent with the successful execution of the FOMC’s ample reserves framework. 2 That’s enough on recent events for now. I’ll turn to another very important issue, reference rate reform. LIBOR Won’t Last Forever Some say only two things in life are guaranteed: death and taxes. But I say there are actually three: death, taxes, and the end of LIBOR. Everyone in the financial services industry needs to be aware that the date when the existence of LIBOR can no longer be guaranteed is fast approaching. I titled remarks I gave on this subject earlier in the year “901 Days” to remind everyone just how little time both the public sector and market participants have to prepare for a world without LIBOR. 3 We are now 831 days away from that world, and while some institutions are making good progress, others are sticking their metaphorical heads in the sand, hoping the issue will go away. Even more concerning are those wearing rose-tinted glasses, getting nostalgic about LIBOR and hoping for an extension to the deadline or a reincarnation of the rate. I cannot emphasize enough that the clock is ticking and everyone needs to get their firms ready for January 1, 2022. A look at the numbers, and recent history, reveals the need for urgency. There are $200 trillion of financial contracts referencing U.S. dollar LIBOR. 4 But the volume of actual transactions that term LIBOR is based on is very small. When individual banks make LIBOR submissions they are largely based on judgment, not real transactions. This makes the rate vulnerable to manipulation, and banks are increasingly reluctant to provide submissions, adding yet further risk around using the rate. The U.K. Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) has reached an agreement with banks to keep submitting rates until the end of 2021, but beyond that date the existence of LIBOR is not guaranteed. 5 The FCA has made it clear that it expects at least some banks to leave the LIBOR panels soon after 2021, making LIBOR even less representative than it is now, and that it would need to judge whether LIBOR was still representative at that stage. 6 Headway Is Being Made While the clock is inevitably ticking, progress is being made. In 2017, the ARRC selected SOFR as its preferred alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR. 7 Since April 2018, the New York Fed has produced SOFR every business day. It’s based on an important underlying market with much higher volumes than LIBOR, and is compliant with the Principles for Financial Benchmarks set forth by the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). 8 The International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) has led really important work on the development of contingencies for some derivatives products for the scenario where LIBOR ceases to exist. 9 A key question is what will happen if the FCA finds LIBOR to no longer be representative. Two large central counterparties have already indicated that they would expect to move the LIBOR trades they clear to SOFR if this occurred. The Financial Stability Board’s Official Sector Steering Group (OSSG) has indicated its support for ISDA to include such a trigger to avoid fragmentation between cleared and uncleared derivatives. 10 Derivatives contracts account for 95 percent of the exposure to U.S. dollar LIBOR, so universal changes to these contracts would be a significant leap forward. If the market signs up to the ISDA protocol when it’s published, it will be a considerable milestone and will go a long way toward reducing risks to firms, markets, and the financial system. In addition, the ARRC has released four sets of recommended fallback language for different types of cash products and has published potential paths forward for adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs). 11 While mortgages are a small part of the overall exposure, it’s vitally important that consumers understand what the changes being made mean in real terms. Last week, the Federal Reserve Board, the FDIC, the OCC, and other agencies released a proposal on adjusting margin requirements for covered swap entities that, among other things, are meant to remove unintended hurdles to signing the ISDA protocol and moving away from LIBOR. 12 The Financial Accounting Standards Board has similarly released an exposure draft with proposals to smooth the transition from an accounting perspective. 13 Finally, earlier this year, the SEC staff issued a statement highlighting risks and disclosures for market participants to evaluate proactively as they transition away from LIBOR. 14 The Challenges Ahead Progress has been made, but there’s still much to do. SOFR is sometimes criticized for the lack of a term rate, but my message is don’t wait for a term rate to get your house in order. Don’t use that as an excuse to halt the vital work of understanding where your exposure to LIBOR lies and how to prepare your business. The OSSG has produced a document explaining how market participants can use overnight risk-free rates, as opposed to waiting for term rates. 15 In addition, the New York Fed is preparing average SOFR rates and a SOFR index, with the goal of publishing them daily by the middle of next year. Contracts that reference U.S. dollar LIBOR continue to be written, which only serves to increase the level of systemic risk. In rare cases where for some reason LIBOR must be referenced, robust fallback language that accounts for a future without LIBOR needs to be included. I also strongly encourage market participants to address legacy LIBOR-linked contracts. There’s no one-size-fits-all approach for closing out or converting existing LIBOR positions so market participants need to get ahead of this issue. We know this is difficult and complex work. At the New York Fed, we’re working to identify where we have potential exposure to LIBOR and other non-IOSCO-compliant reference rates. We have teams examining monetary policy operations, foreign reserve management activities, and trading agreements with counterparties. We want to hear your voice so we can incorporate your feedback and facilitate the development of the tools you need to ensure an orderly transition. Engage with the official sector about how LIBOR affects your firm and your challenges in this transition. And note that just last week, the ARRC published a checklist designed to support market participants with the adoption of SOFR. 16 Implementation will be complex: financial contracts need to be scrutinized, operations need to be evaluated, and technology needs to be updated. The work involves numerous jurisdictions and multiple asset classes, and will require changes from how business is conducted to how systems are built. These things take time, and time is running out. Conclusion The LIBOR transition is a serious issue the industry needs to address. Both the official sector and market participants have made enormous progress, but we need to see much broader and consistent preparation for the transition. If your firm is one of those hoping the problem will go away, or feeling nostalgic and counting on an extension to the deadline, take this message back: The clock is ticking, LIBOR’s days are numbered, and we all need to play our part in preparing the industry for January 1, 2022. Thank you, and I hope you enjoy today’s conference. 1 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Repurchase Operations , September 20, 2019 2 For recent statements regarding the FOMC’s longer-run monetary policy implementation framework and balance sheet normalization, see FOMC Communications Related to Policy Normalization . 3 John C. Williams, 901 Days , Remarks at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York, July 15, 2019. 4 Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Second Report , March 2018. 5 Financial Conduct Authority, FCA Statement on LIBOR Panels , November 24, 2017. 6 Andrew Bailey, LIBOR: Preparing for the End . Speech at Securities Industry and Financial Market Association LIBOR Transition Briefing, July 15, 2019. 7 Alternative Reference Rate Committee, The ARRC Selects a Broad Repo Rate as its Preferred Alternative Reference Rate , June 22, 2017. 8 International Organization of Securities Commissions, Principles for Financial Benchmarks, Final Report , July 2013. 9 International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Interbank Offered Rate (IBOR) Fallbacks for 2006 ISDA Definitions , May 16, 2019. 10 See the letter from the OSSG to the ISDA dated March 12, 2019. 11 See Alternative Reference Rate Committee, Fallback Contract Language . 12 See Margin and Capital Requirements for Covered Swap Entities . 13 See FASB Proposes Guidance to Assist in Transition Away from Interbank Offered Rates to New Reference Rates , Financial Accounting Standards Board news release, September 5, 2019. 14 U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, Staff Statement on LIBOR Transition , July 12, 2019. 15 Financial Stability Board, Overnight Risk-Free Rates: A User's Guide , June 4, 2019. 16 Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Practical Implementation Checklist for SOFR Adoption , September 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

October 17, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the MFA Outlook 2019, New York City As prepared for delivery Good afternoon, everyone. When I give a closing keynote I try to bear in mind that you’ve been listening for hours to complex and technical material. I wish I could say that I’m here to offer some light relief, but, alas, no. The topic I’m going to address this afternoon is both complex and technical. It’s the recent turmoil in the repo markets and the Fed’s actions to address it. I’m going to start by laying out the Fed’s operating framework for carrying out monetary policy. This will take me into aspects of the “plumbing” of the financial system, which may seem like an esoteric topic to many, but it’s one of critical importance, so please bear with me. I will then go over the money market turmoil from a month ago that led the New York Fed to conduct open market operations to stabilize short-term interest rates. I’ll conclude by describing the path forward as laid out in the Fed announcements this past Friday. 1 Before I go any further, I should give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. Monetary Policy, Interest Rates, and Ample Reserves As a prelude, it’s worthwhile to step back and remember how this all connects to the Fed’s overarching monetary policy goals. The Federal Reserve has two goals set by Congress: maximum employment and price stability. The main way we achieve these goals is by controlling the federal funds rate, the rate at which banks lend each other money overnight in the form of unsecured loans. This rate in turn affects overall financial conditions and thereby the wider economy. At each of its meetings, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decides on the target range for the federal funds rate, which currently stands at 1-3/4 to 2 percent. 2 But how does this work—that is, what keeps the federal funds rate within the target range? The Fed has an operational framework in place designed to keep interest rates where the FOMC wants them. We call this an “ample reserves” regime. Back in January of this year, the FOMC communicated its intention to continue to implement policy according to this regime. 3 The key benefit of this approach is that it’s a simple, effective way of controlling the federal funds rate and thereby influencing other short-term interest rates. The ample reserves framework has three elements designed to maintain the federal funds rate within the target range. The first, not surprisingly, is supplying an amount of reserves that banks hold at the Federal Reserve that is “ample.” By that, we mean that the supply of reserves is adequate to efficiently and effectively implement monetary policy. Here, “efficient” means that the level of reserves is not excessive, relative to what’s needed to be effective. And “effective” means that typical temporary movements in the demand or supply of reserves don’t cause large changes in the federal funds rate without active management of reserves. I’ll come back to the challenge of knowing what constitutes “ample” later. The second element consists of the interest rates that the Fed itself sets and that influence the federal funds rate. These “administered” rates, as they are known, include the interest rate paid to banks on their reserve balances and the overnight reverse repo rate that the Fed pays to a wider set of money market participants on a similar, risk-free overnight investment. These first two elements—an ample quantity of reserves and administered interest rates—are meant to do the lion’s share of work to keep the federal funds rate within the target range. But there may be relatively infrequent situations when these two elements are not enough to keep the federal funds rate within the target range. Therefore, the third element is the directive from the FOMC for the New York Fed’s Open Market Trading Desk (the Desk) to conduct open market operations as needed to keep the federal funds rate within the target range. For example, through repurchase agreements of Treasury and agency securities, the Fed can temporarily increase the amount of reserves in the system. To support the economy in the aftermath of the financial crisis, the FOMC increased its long-term securities holdings dramatically. This led to a similarly large increase in reserves, which peaked at about $2.8 trillion in 2014. Subsequently, growth in non-reserve liabilities such as currency and reductions in the Fed’s securities holdings caused reserve levels to decline. As the level of reserves has come down, we stepped up our monitoring of the effect of reserve levels on interest rates. The level of reserves consistent with “ample” is inherently highly uncertain, so we have been actively looking for signs that reserves might be growing scarce. Along with in-depth analysis of conditions in money markets, we conduct surveys of banks and other outreach to market participants to understand the factors that influence the demand for reserves. 4 To smooth the transition to a level of reserves consistent with the framework, the FOMC announced a slowing of the pace of the reduction in securities holdings at its March meeting this year and stopped it outright at the July meeting. 5 Based on a variety of metrics and information, the supply of reserves appeared ample during the summer and into early September. The funds rate traded well within the target range and money markets functioned well. Recent Developments in Money Markets With the stage set, I’ll turn to market conditions over the past month and the Fed’s actions. Conditions in money markets became highly volatile about a month ago. Secured and unsecured rates moved higher and became more disparate on Monday, September 16, and this intensified the following day. We had expected a number of factors—including corporate tax payments and the settlement of newly issued Treasury securities—to put some upward pressure on short-term rates. However, the size of the reaction in repo rates, the spillover to the federal funds market, and the emergence of strains in market functioning were outside of recent experience. In response to the simultaneous increase and widening dispersion in repo rates and the federal funds rate, on the morning of Tuesday, September 17, the Fed conducted the first non-test repo operations in many years, followed by daily operations. These actions had the desired effect of reducing strains in markets, narrowing the dispersion of rates, and fostering conditions in money markets to keep the federal funds rate within the target range. To ensure that the federal funds rate remained within the target range going forward, we announced daily overnight and regular term repo operations, which continue to this day. 6 The Path Forward Our open market operations have succeeded at keeping the federal funds rate within the target range and have stabilized conditions in short-term funding markets. At the same time, recent experience has provided important lessons for the successful operation of the ample reserves framework. A confluence of events contributed to the volatility in money markets a month ago. But one telling observation is that when increases in the Fed’s non-reserve liabilities caused the level of reserves to fall well below those prevailing during summer and early September, strains in money markets emerged. And when the prior level of reserves was quickly restored through temporary open market operations, normal interest rates and market functioning returned. In light of these events, we have learned that the ample reserves framework has worked smoothly with a level of reserves at least as large as we saw during summer and into early September. Although temporary open market operations are doing the trick for the time being, anticipated increases in non-reserve liabilities would cause reserves to decline in coming months without further actions. Based on these considerations, last Friday the FOMC announced that the Fed will be purchasing U.S. Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of next year. 7 Specifically, the Desk announced an initial monthly pace of purchases of $60 billion. These permanent purchases will, over time, bring the underlying level of reserves—by which I mean absent temporary open market operations—to a level consistent with the ample reserves framework on a sustained basis. In concert with these purchases, the FOMC announced that the Desk will continue temporary overnight and term open market operations at least through January of next year. 8 This combination of permanent Treasury bill purchases and ongoing temporary open market operations is designed to provide effective control of the federal funds rate over the next several months. I should emphasize that all of these actions are aimed at the implementation of monetary policy and do not in any way represent a change in the stance of monetary policy. The goal is to make sure that the federal funds rate stays within the target range set by the FOMC. As we move forward, we will continue to learn about demand for reserves and other Federal Reserve liabilities and market functioning, and may adjust the specifics of the plan as appropriate. What Does All of This Mean for SOFR? That’s a lot on monetary policy, interest rates, reserves, and repos. But before I close, I’d like to emphasize an important point about a particularly important repo benchmark rate, and that’s the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR. SOFR is the reference rate that the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) has selected as the preferred replacement for LIBOR. At the same time that we saw turmoil in the repo market, we saw a temporary spike in SOFR. As market participants make preparations to transition away from LIBOR, they’re understandably watching SOFR very closely. There are a few things I’d like to highlight with respect to SOFR. First, a temporary spike is not surprising, given that SOFR reflects rates on real-world transactions. Second, the very fact that we saw a spike in SOFR is an indication of how representative of its underlying market it is. It’s based on actual transactions, rather than judgment (like LIBOR), which is part of what makes SOFR so robust. Third and final, is that in the vast majority of use cases, the relevant metric for SOFR is an average over time. Focusing on overnight SOFR isn’t particularly useful in this context, as financial contracts will generally refer to an average of SOFR over many weeks or months. My message to you is: Don’t let last month’s temporary spike in SOFR, or hope for the creation of some other replacement reference rate, become an excuse for delaying your transition away from LIBOR. I’ve said it before and I’ll say it again: like death and taxes, the end of LIBOR is unavoidable, and we must do all that it takes to prepare for a LIBOR-less future. 9 And the existence of LIBOR is only guaranteed for another 807 days. 10 Conclusion I’ve talked through a lot of important issues this afternoon, and I greatly appreciate your attention. The events I’ve described are an apt reminder of the importance of well-functioning financial markets and the vital role the Federal Reserve plays in providing liquidity. They are also a demonstration of our ability to act swiftly and effectively to execute our monetary policy implementation goals and keep the federal funds rate within in the target range. Thank you. 1 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation , October 11, 2019; Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Treasury Bill Purchases and Repurchase Operations , October 11, 2019. 2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation , October 11, 2019. 3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization , January 30, 2019. Further details were announced in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans , March 20, 2019. 4 For an example of such a survey of banks, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 2019 Senior Financial Officer Survey . 5 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans , March 20, 2019; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FOMC Statement , July 31, 2019. 6 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Repurchase Operations , September 20, 2019. 7 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation , October 11, 2019. 8 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation , October 11, 2019. 9 John C. Williams, LIBOR: The Clock Is Ticking , Remarks at the 2019 U.S. Treasury Market Conference, New York (September 23, 2019). 10 John C. Williams, 901 Days , Remarks at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York (July 15, 2019). By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Money Market Developments: Views from the Desk - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Money Market Developments: Views from the Desk November 04, 2019 Lorie K. Logan , Senior Vice President Remarks at the Annual Primary Dealer Meeting, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Welcome to the 2019 Annual Primary Dealer Meeting. Each of your firms plays an important role as a trading counterparty in the implementation of monetary policy—a core responsibility of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as the operating arm for the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). This is an area that has generated increased operational activity over the past year. These annual meetings provide us an opportunity to strengthen our relationship and communicate the New York Fed’s expectations of its counterparties. Over the course of the year, there have been important developments in the Federal Reserve’s framework for implementing monetary policy, and the markets in which we operate have continued to evolve. I’d like to focus today on what the New York Fed’s Open Market Trading Desk (the Desk) is currently doing to implement the FOMC’s ample reserves regime, particularly over the next several months. In mid-October, the FOMC directed the Desk to maintain over time ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September, and we recently began Treasury bill purchases to achieve that objective. Since it will take some time to accumulate securities holdings, we also continue to conduct temporary repurchase agreement (repo) operations in order to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample and to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation. Although money market conditions have calmed since the mid-September volatility, the Federal Reserve is carefully monitoring reserves conditions and money market developments, and the Desk will continue to use its tools and adjust operational plans as needed to maintain the federal funds rate in the FOMC’s target range. In addition to discussing open market operations today, I would also like to focus briefly on another key development in money markets—the transition away from LIBOR. I will highlight today’s announcement about the New York Fed’s proposal to produce averages for the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (commonly known as the SOFR). Before I begin, I will remind you that the views presented here are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the New York Fed or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Open Market Operations in an Ample Reserves Regime I’d like to start with some context about how the FOMC planned its transition to an ample reserves operating regime for monetary policy implementation. In January, the FOMC announced its intention to continue implementing monetary policy using an ample reserves operating regime. This means that the supply of reserves is sufficient to ensure that control over the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the Federal Reserve’s administered rates, and active management of the supply of reserves is not required. 2 This last clause is an important feature of the framework and means that, over time, the level of reserves will be large enough to absorb short-term changes in factors affecting the supply of reserves without the need for frequent, sizeable interventions to offset these changes ( Figure 1 ). In March, the FOMC indicated that the longer-run level of reserves will be a level consistent with “efficient and effective” implementation of monetary policy. 3 To support a smooth transition to the longer-run level of reserves, the FOMC also stated its intention to slow the pace of the decline in reserves—which had been coming down as a result of normalizing the balance sheet—over subsequent quarters, first by slowing and then by stopping the reduction in the Federal Reserve’s aggregate securities holdings. The end of balance sheet runoff occurred in August, and the FOMC continued to monitor a wide range of information to reach a judgement about the level of reserves most consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation in an ample reserves regime. 4 In mid-September, upward pressure emerged in funding markets as corporate tax payments and the settlement of Treasury securities increased demand for securities financing and sharply reduced reserves in the system. Consistent with the directive from the FOMC, the Desk responded with temporary open market operations to foster conditions that would maintain the federal funds rate within the target range. In mid-October, the FOMC directed the Desk to maintain over time reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September in order to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample. 5 The FOMC judged this level more supportive of smooth market functioning and effective control over the federal funds rate, and we have seen money market pressures stabilize. It’s worth noting that the quantity of reserves needed to maintain an ample reserves framework is subject to uncertainty and may change over time. Banks’ demand for reserves is not static. It shifts in response to changing financial conditions and will evolve through time as banks adjust their business models and respond to changes in the economic and regulatory environment. In addition, the level of reserves needed to maintain an ample reserves regime is more than the sum of individual banks’ reserves demand, particularly when there are frictions that result in inefficient redistribution of reserves. The measurement of these factors is complex, and the FOMC will continue to monitor a broad range of information to assess the level of reserves consistent with efficient and effective implementation of policy. I’d like to turn now to how the Desk will supply reserves to carry out the FOMC’s directive to maintain reserves over time “ at or above ” the level that prevailed in early September. This directive requires provision of a supply of reserves that can sufficiently absorb normal fluctuations in non-reserve liabilities, so shifts in these balances do not bring reserves below desired levels and potentially compromise effective interest rate control. The Desk has been directed to purchase Treasury bills at least into the second quarter of next year to achieve the FOMC’s objective, and we are currently executing those reserve management purchases at the initial pace of $60 billion per month. 6, 7 I’d like to share some thoughts on the composition and sizing of those purchases. First, why Treasury bills? As I noted earlier, the goal of the reserve management purchases is to maintain an ample supply of reserves to support effective and efficient monetary policy implementation. Because Treasury bills are short-dated instruments, purchases of these securities can help maintain the supply of reserves while limiting the impact on financial conditions. Moreover, bills are liquid instruments with deep markets, and the Federal Reserve doesn’t currently hold many of them. The Federal Reserve traditionally held a relatively large portfolio of Treasury bills (in addition to holdings across the coupon curve) in its System Open Market Account (SOMA), but sold or redeemed that bill portfolio during the Global Financial Crisis and in the Maturity Extension Program. While the FOMC has not yet made decisions about the long-run composition of its domestic securities portfolio, current bill holdings in the SOMA are low by any measure. 8 Treasury bills represent less than 3 percent of the SOMA’s Treasury portfolio, compared to 15 percent of the outstanding Treasury universe ( Figure 2 ). From a portfolio composition perspective, these purchases will incrementally add bills back to the portfolio as the FOMC continues to consider its desired long-run maturity composition. Second, how do we approach the design of our purchases? At present, three elements are driving the overall size of the reserve management purchases: First, reserve management purchases will replace over time the reserves that repo operations are currently supplying. In October, overnight and term repo operations together resulted in a daily average of around $190 billion in total repos outstanding ( Figure 3 ). In the near term, these operations have boosted the supply of reserves and helped to mitigate the risk of money market pressures adversely affecting monetary policy implementation ( Figure 4 ). Second, reserve management purchases will support expected gradual increases in demand for the Federal Reserve’s non-reserve liabilities, like currency in circulation, the Treasury General Account, the foreign repo pool, and other deposits. All else equal, growth of non-reserve liabilities will reduce reserves over time. Therefore, to maintain steady reserve levels, the Desk will offset the reserve-draining effects of growth in these liabilities through securities purchases—the same way Treasury purchases supported trend balance sheet growth before the crisis. 9 Taken together, non-reserve liabilities currently add up to around $2.5 trillion. Currency in circulation is the largest and fastest growing of these—accounting for more than $1.7 trillion (or about seven-tenths) of the total, and growing at an average annual pace of over 6 percent in recent years ( Figure 5 ). Offsetting currency growth alone will result in over $100 billion in purchases per year. However, other non-reserve liabilities have also exhibited trend growth over time, and additional purchases will account for this as well. Third, reserve management purchases will provide reserves to absorb normal variability or unexpected changes in the Federal Reserve’s non-reserve liabilities so reserves don’t fall below the level needed to operate the ample reserves framework. Figure 6 shows how variability in our non-reserve liabilities has grown in recent years. Balances in the Treasury’s General Account (TGA), in particular, fluctuate greatly from day to day. We saw that in September, when tax payment and Treasury settlement-related flows into the TGA reduced reserves by over $115 billion in the course of two days. In order to maintain reserve levels at or above those that prevailed in early September, reserves will be increased to a level that can absorb such variation when it occurs. Absent a sufficient supply, reserve balances could become too scarce, requiring large temporary open market operations to address funding pressures on days when there are large swings in reserves, like tax payment dates. In practice, this will mean looking out over several months and sizing reserve management purchases to offset expected reserve declines. For example, reserve balances tend to decline notably in late April as the TGA grows with the collection of individual taxes, and the Desk’s planned purchases over the next several months will help to offset the anticipated decline in reserves associated with those flows. Besides estimating the total amount of purchases, the Desk also needs to determine the pace at which it will execute those purchases. The amount and timing of the operations take into account market functioning considerations and allow for some adjustments around periods with sharp expected declines in reserves or liquidity conditions. So far, reserve management purchase operations have proceeded smoothly. The Desk has purchased $52.5 billion of the initial $60 billion in monthly purchases, through seven purchase operations of roughly $7.5 billion each. To date, those operations have generated strong offer-to-cover ratios, pricing that has been favorable relative to market and theoretical prices, and broad participation and awards from your firms. Moreover, the Treasury bill market is accustomed to shifting amounts of securities available for purchase due to seasonal dynamics related to TGA inflows and outflows and the debt ceiling, and we’ve seen market prices adjust as we expected given the flow of our planned purchases. With roughly $2.4 trillion of Treasury bills outstanding and daily turnover of around $95 billion, the bill market has substantial capacity to support our activity, and we expect to be able to maintain the current pace of Treasury bill purchases for some time. 10 That said, the Desk is prepared to adjust the pace and other parameters of the reserve management purchases as necessary to maintain an ample supply of reserves and based on money market conditions. We’ll be closely monitoring the attractiveness of propositions and indicators of market functioning to assess whether operational adjustments are appropriate. In the meantime, because it will take some time for the bill purchases to sustain the supply of reserves at or above levels prevailing in early September, the FOMC has also instructed the Desk to continue offering term and overnight repo operations at least through January. Repo operations foster conditions to maintain the federal funds rate within the target range through two channels. First, they supply reserves in support of the FOMC’s operating regime, helping to ensure that reserves are maintained over time in amounts at or above the early September levels, even in the face of sharp increases in non-reserve liabilities. 11 Second, they provide funding in repo markets to damp repo market pressure that could otherwise pass-through to the federal funds market and adversely affect policy implementation. The repo operations have successfully offset supply changes and money market pressures associated with big anticipated drops in reserves, such as around mid-month and month-end settlements. In doing so, they have been effective at restoring calm in money markets and maintaining control over the federal funds rate. Overnight and term money market rates have moderated, on average, relative to IOER, and the effective federal funds rate has stayed well within the FOMC’s target range. Participation in the repo operations has been robust and the transmission to broader money markets has been good. On October 23, the Desk announced an increase in the amount offered in overnight repo operations from at least $75 billion to at least $120 billion. We also increased the amount offered in the remaining term repo operations spanning the October month-end from at least $35 billion per operation to $45 billion, raising the total amount of term repos offered over this period to up to $180 billion. This increased capacity was supportive to money markets, and the federal funds rate was stable over October's month-end. As we head into year-end, the Desk will continue to make adjustments as needed to mitigate the risk of money market pressures that could adversely affect policy implementation. It is good to see firms starting to address year-end funding needs, and we understand that, as firms manage their balance sheets more carefully in December, rates can be somewhat more variable and dealers may adjust their approach to our operations. We will monitor conditions closely and will be prepared to adapt open market operations as needed to meet the directives from the FOMC. Averages of SOFR Rates and the Transition from LIBOR Before I wrap up, I’d like to say a few words about reference rates. As I noted to this group last year, the New York Fed is committed to producing robust and resilient reference rates and to supporting the transition away from LIBOR. 12 New York Fed President John Williams has emphasized this issue, noting that while progress has been made, there is still much work to do, and with no guarantee of LIBOR’s existence beyond the end of 2021, the clock is ticking. 13 The New York Fed helps advance these objectives as the administrator and producer of the SOFR, which was selected by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) as its preferred alternative to U.S. dollar LIBOR, and also, in coordination with the Federal Reserve Board, through support of the ARRC. The SOFR, which launched in April 2018, is a measure of the general cost of borrowing cash overnight collateralized by Treasury securities in the repo market—a rate that broadly reflects how financial institutions fund themselves. Importantly, it reflects underlying transaction volumes averaging more than $1 trillion per day over the past year, and its production is compliant with IOSCO’s Principles for Financial Benchmarks. Over the past year-and-a-half, SOFR futures markets have demonstrated promising growth in notional volumes traded and liquidity, even if volumes remain low compared to both federal funds and Eurodollar futures. Additionally, there has been meaningful issuance of SOFR-linked cash products like floating rate notes. A next step in supporting broader adoption of the SOFR as a LIBOR alternative will be to meet the need expressed by market participants—particularly financial and corporate issuers of securities and loans—for a set of SOFR averages that can be used in a wide range of financial products. 14 To this end, today, the New York Fed released a solicitation for public comment on a plan to publish daily, starting in the first half of 2020, a set of three compounded averages of the SOFR, as well as a daily SOFR index that would allow users to calculate compounded averages over custom time periods. 15 An expansion to the suite of reference rates we produce is an important next step that further demonstrates the Federal Reserve’s commitment to support the usefulness of adopting the SOFR. I also urge you to commit to this critical endeavor. The comment period for the public solicitation will close on December 4, and I encourage you to review the proposal and provide feedback, including about the tenors and compounding methodology for the new products. While the response to preliminary socialization of the program parameters has been positive, we recognize the importance of getting these averages right. Market participant feedback was critical as the New York Fed began producing Treasury repo reference rates to support the transition, and your continued input will help ensure that the rates we produce best meet the needs of the financial system. More generally, every market participant needs to understand their LIBOR exposures and use all available tools to transition to robust alternative rates, such as the SOFR, as they prepare for a world without LIBOR. Conclusion In sum, the Desk continues to operationalize the FOMC’s ample reserves regime. We are doing this by conducting Treasury bill purchases to maintain a supply of reserves consistent with the FOMC’s directive to maintain reserves at or above early-September levels. Also, since it will take some time to accumulate securities holdings to achieve that objective, the Desk is continuing to provide reserves temporarily through overnight and term repo operations. We are monitoring market conditions closely, have tools to effectively and efficiently support monetary policy implementation, and will make adjustments as needed. Both in the execution of open market operations and support for the transition from LIBOR, it is a very active time on the Desk, and our partnership with each of your institutions remains important to the smooth implementation of this work. Figures 1 I would like to thank Deborah Leonard for her assistance in preparing these remarks, and colleagues in the Federal Reserve System for valuable comments and suggestions. 2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization , January 30, 2019. 3 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans , March 20, 2019. 4 In its March update, the FOMC further explained that once it judged that reserves had reached a level consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation, it would begin increasing securities holdings once again to keep pace with trend growth of the Federal Reserve’s non-reserve liabilities and maintain an appropriate level of reserves in the system. 5 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation , October 11, 2019. 6 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Regarding Treasury Bill Purchases and Repurchase Operations , October 11, 2019. 7 We also continue to purchase Treasury securities across maturities (including bills) and security types to execute the FOMC’s directive to reinvest principal payments from agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities up to $20 billion per month in Treasury securities. 8 Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, April 30-May 1, 2019 , summarize the FOMC’s continued discussion of issues related to balance sheet normalization, including the maturity composition of its portfolio. Participants considered two illustrative portfolio scenarios—one in which the maturity composition of the Fed’s U.S. Treasury holdings were proportional to the universe currently outstanding, and another in which holdings contained only shorter-term securities. 9 All else equal, an increase in a non-reserve liability means a decrease in reserves. Mechanically, the claim against the Federal Reserve shifts from banks (who hold reserve balances) to other economic actors such as the public (who holds currency), the Treasury Department (who holds balances in its General Account), foreign official institutions (who invest their dollar-denominated foreign currency reserves in reverse repos with the Federal Reserve), or certain other financial entities, including government-sponsored enterprises and designated financial market utilities (who hold deposit accounts at the Federal Reserve). See Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Open Market Operations during 2018 , April 2019, for further information about the Federal Reserve’s liabilities and an illustration of this dynamic. 10 Justin Muzinich, remarks at the 2019 U.S. Treasury Market Structure Conference , New York City, September 23, 2019. 11 The Desk conducts repo operations with its primary dealer counterparties in the secured financing market for general collateral repurchase agreements. Although most primary dealers are government securities dealers and not depository institutions, the Desk’s purchases of securities under repurchase agreements supply reserves to the banking system because primary dealers have accounts at the tri-party clearing bank, which is a depository institution. Thus, by crediting funds to the dealers’ clearing accounts, the Desk creates reserve balances in the banking system. 12 Lorie Logan, The Role of the New York Fed as Administrator and Producer of Reference Rates , remarks at the Annual Primary Dealer Meeting, New York City, January 9, 2018. 13 John C. Williams, 901 Days , remarks at the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York City, July 15, 2019; LIBOR: The Clock is Ticking , remarks at the 2019 Treasury Market Conference, New York City, September 23, 2019; Money Markets and the Federal Funds Rate: The Path Forward , remarks at the MFA Outlook 2019, New York City, October 17, 2019. 14 The ARRC recently issued A User’s Guide to SOFR , which explains how SOFR can be used in cash markets, and that a forward-looking term SOFR rate likely is not necessary for many contracts currently referencing term USD LIBOR. 15 Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Statement Requesting Public Comment on a Proposed Publication of SOFR Averages and a SOFR Index , November 4, 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

November 06, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the GARP Global Risk Forum, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery When plans for the New York Fed’s headquarters here at 33 Liberty Street were developed in 1921, the building committee compiled 33 pages of requirements for potential architects. 1 I can assure you that our appreciation for bureaucracy has endured the test of time! Joking aside, the focus of many of those requirements was specifications for the building’s gold vault. Beneath our feet lies a triple-tiered vault system with 122 separate compartments for storing gold bars. For those of you who are Harry Potter fans, it’s as close to Gringotts Bank as you’ll find anywhere in the world—although for security reasons I am not allowed to confirm or deny that we have a dragon down there. The whole building was constructed around the vault. Engineers had to excavate 117 feet down to the bedrock for a foundation that could support the weight of the construction. Why am going into so much depth about the gold? There is a reason! But before I explain, I should give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. When the building was planned and constructed during the early part of the twentieth century, the gold was seen as a real vulnerability. It was conceivable that someone would try to rob the Bank and steal the gold. The only time that’s happened was in the Bruce Willis movie Die Hard 3, which, to be clear, was only a movie! A lot of that owes to the skill of the architects of the building, and the law enforcement who protect it. But the other reason is that the risks we face today in 2019 look very different to the ones we were planning for in 1921. For a thief today, it’s easier to use a laptop to buy some stolen credit card details online and commit fraud than it is to plan a Hollywood-style bank heist. And that’s what I’m going to say a few words about—the changing nature of risk—before handing over to this evening’s keynote speaker, John Dugan, Chair of Citigroup. In previous decades it was easier to identify risk and what to do about it. You could see it, measure it, and fortify against it. But, as the world has changed, so have the risks that demand our attention and our resources. The new risks are harder to predict and inherently ambiguous: Steel and concrete can do little to protect us. Our reliance on technology means we need to think differently about cyber risk. The importance of innovation and intellectual property means we need to look for new approaches to talent and culture. And the threat posed by climate change means we need to give serious consideration to the resilience of our physical and digital infrastructure. The New York Fed has the appearance of an historic institution, but behind the stone façade we’re grappling with these issues in the same way that you are. In our economic research, our supervision of financial institutions, the payments systems we operate, in short – in all that we do. Talent, technology, and innovation challenge us every day. They create incredible opportunity, but they also test us by exposing new vulnerabilities. I know that over the next couple of days there will be lots of valuable insights shared by experts about how to handle the challenges posed by big data, cryptocurrency, and climate change. But first, to kick off the conference, it’s my pleasure to introduce John Dugan, Chair of Citigroup. Citigroup has operations in over 150 countries, with about 200 million customer accounts worldwide. 2 As head of a global employer with complex, international operations, John is no stranger to the changing nature of risk. John became Chair of Citigroup at the start of this year. Prior to that he was chair of the Financial Institutions Group at the law firm Covington & Burling LLP, where he spent much of his career. He has also held a number of public sector roles, including Comptroller of the Currency during a critical time for our financial system and economy, from 2005-2010. I’m looking forward to his insights and I know they will be the catalyst for some rich discussion. Please join me in welcoming John Dugan. 1 The information in this speech on the history of the New York Fed’s headquarters building comes from About the Building on the New York Fed’s website. 2 Citigroup, Third Quarter 2019 Results and Key Metrics , October 15, 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

No Man Is an Island - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech No Man Is an Island November 14, 2019 John C. Williams , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at 2019 Asia Economic Policy Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California As prepared for delivery “No man is an island entire of itself,” wrote the poet John Donne in 1624. Almost four centuries later, his words still ring true. And they are particularly salient when it comes to the financial fortunes of the global economy. Today I’m going to explore the commonalities and interconnectedness of the global economy, and what that means for the outlook in the United States. But before I delve into these ideas, I want to say what a pleasure it is to be back at the San Francisco Fed, among so many friendly faces. The Asia Economic Policy Conference is always a fascinating day, and I’d like to thank Mary Daly for the invitation to speak, and Zheng Liu and Mark Spiegel for putting together an outstanding program. I knew I was back in San Francisco when this morning I spent 20 minutes in line, waiting to spend five dollars on a cup of coffee. This is one thing for which inflation appears to be alive and well. Before I explore issues like inflation in any greater depth, I should give the standard Fed disclaimer that the views I express today are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or others in the Federal Reserve System. The U.S. Economy If monetary policy represents a set of scales, on one side we have a strong U.S. economy with unemployment near a 50-year low, and on the other, a more challenging and uncertain landscape. GDP looks to grow around 2 percent this year, and unemployment has stayed at or near historically low levels, boosted by solid job growth. At the same time, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has moved to cut rates three times. What’s going on? There are three trends I’ll explore today, which all demonstrate the commonalities and the interconnectedness of the global economy. The first is the low neutral rate of interest, or r-star, the second is slowing global growth, and the third is rising geopolitical tensions. All are critically important to the long-term prospects of the U.S. economy, and each tells an important story about the conditions we’re experiencing today. Low R-star Those of you who know me won’t be surprised that I’m starting with low r-star! The neutral rate of interest—the rate that prevails when monetary policy is neither restrictive nor accommodative—has been an area of study, and a personal passion, for the past two decades. I could talk about r-star at great length, but you may be relieved to hear that for the purpose of this speech, there’s just one point I want to make: r-star has fallen, not only in the U.S., but around the world. Fundamental shifts have been occurring in the two main drivers of r-star over the past two decades: demographics and productivity growth. Lower fertility rates and aging populations, as well as slower productivity growth, have pushed down r-star by as much as two percentage points in a number of developed nations. These structural shifts are having fundamental effects on real interest rates, growth, and inflation. A number of advanced economies have inflation below desired levels and longer-term interest rates that are well below where they were a decade ago. There are, of course, a few outliers, but the commonalities between the world’s developed economies are becoming more and more apparent. There’s no doubt that the U.S. is experiencing first-hand the effects of the structural shifts in demographics and productivity growth. But the fact that these changes are a common experience for so many developed economies creates challenges to our economic prospects at home. Slowing Global Growth Which brings me to the second trend I highlighted: slowing global growth. This story—of low interest rates, low inflation, and slow growth—is showing up in the data. The latest numbers from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) follow the recent trend of steady downward revisions of growth estimates. Their forecast for global growth for 2019 is now 3 percent, which is the lowest since 2008–09, and it’s not hard to think of scenarios in which growth slows even further. 1 In the old days, central bankers used to worry about inflationary pressures being too great. Old habits die hard, and I’m always on the lookout for signs that inflation is rising too fast. But in the current climate it’s inflation that’s too low that’s of greater concern. You see, my five-dollar cup of coffee masks an inconvenient truth: inflation in the United States is below target and has been for some time. Beyond sluggish inflation, we’re starting to see signs of slower global growth playing out in the U.S. data. While consumer spending is holding up, other parts of the economy—including manufacturing, exports, and business investment—have seen growth stall or experienced outright declines. Geopolitical Tensions The third and final issue I want to discuss—the rising geopolitical tensions around the globe—further complicates an already complex picture. When it comes to the economic outlook, the word of the day—and probably the year—is “uncertainty.” Trade negotiations, civil unrest, and tensions in a number of corners of the world are driving many businesses to take a wait-and-see approach to investment, thus putting a further dampener on growth prospects. It’s notable that later in the same poem I used to open my speech, John Donne writes, “if a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less.” The ongoing uncertainty around Brexit and its eventual outcome is a cause of concern not just for the UK economy, but many of its European trading partners. It’s impossible to predict what the spillover effects will be when Brexit finally reaches a conclusion. We face similar uncertainty on our own shores regarding trade tensions. I frequently hear from my business contacts that they’re holding off on making investments until the landscape is clearer. And the ongoing uncertainty in both of these situations, rather than the day to day ups and downs, has become a key driver of business decisions. Trade negotiations and Brexit are top of mind when it comes to uncertainty. But geopolitical risks and political upheaval are affecting regions across the globe. It’s striking that in almost every corner of the world geopolitical tensions are threatening to put the brakes on growth. Even if the outcomes of current negotiations are ultimately positive—be they between the U.S. and China, or the UK and the European Union (EU)—the uncertainty created by current events is no doubt having a lasting effect on the economic conditions we’re experiencing today. Furthermore, the interconnectedness of our economies means that literally, no man is an island. If one economy starts to struggle, the spillover effects onto others can take hold rapidly. The common thread of geopolitical tensions is that while they’re difficult to predict, they’re also impossible to ignore. On a backdrop of low r-star and slowing global growth, they drive businesses to be more cautious, more vigilant, and more conservative in their approach. Data Dependent, Not Data-Point Dependent The long-term factors driving low r-star and slowing global growth, as well as the more near-term geopolitical tensions, are afflictions from which we all suffer. So what’s the solution? Where do we as policymakers, researchers, and regulators go from here? At press conferences I’m often asked: if growth slows by X percent, or unemployment increases by Y percent, will that mean that the FOMC is going to do Z at its next meeting? If the Fed had a motto, it would probably be “data dependent.” When asked about this, it’s important to clarify that while I’m data dependent, I’m not data- point dependent. It’s not about being guided by one single data point—GDP or job growth—but by all of the data and information that tell us where the economy is, and where the economy is heading. Importantly, it’s not about looking at things merely as they are—it’s about trying to read how the economy is likely to evolve over the next couple of years, and what risks lie ahead, based on a broad range of evidence. Monetary policy is a long game. The policy decisions we’ve made this year will continue to have a ripple effect years into the future. As policymakers, we need to take in how far-reaching those ripples are going to be. Monetary Policy The adjustments to monetary policy we made this year were designed to balance maintaining a strong U.S. economy with slowing global growth, and provide insurance against ongoing and potential future risks. And that’s what they’ve done. The economy is in a good place, and monetary policy is as well. My forecast is for moderate GDP growth, the labor market remaining strong, and inflation moving back to our symmetric 2 percent target. Of course, things can change. Data dependency remains our motto, and if there were a material change to this outlook, we would adjust monetary policy in support of our goals of maximum employment and price stability. Conclusion I’ll conclude with this. John Donne’s words are perhaps more relevant in 2019 than they were in 1624. No man is an island, and no economy can insulate itself—for better or worse—from the fortunes of its neighbors. At the same time, all economies are having a common experience as a result of longer-term structural changes. Shifts in demographics and productivity growth point clearly in the direction of low neutral interest rates and slowing growth. We’re seeing the reality of these changes in the form of sluggish inflation and interest rates much lower than in previous decades. Central banks and policymakers around the world need to prepare for economies that are more connected than ever before. I’ll now take your questions. Addendum 'No Man is an Island' No man is an island entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main; if a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory were, as well as any manner of thy friends or of thine own were; any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind. And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee. John Donne 1 International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, Rising Trade Barriers , Washington, D.C., October 2019. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
