Vice Chairman Richard H. Clarida At the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, New York Share Happy New Year. I am very glad to be speaking to you here in New York, a city I lived and worked in for 30 years before joining the Federal Reserve Board in September. The new year is often a time when people make resolutions--resolutions to exercise more, learn a new skill, or spend more quality time with family and friends. My resolution, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), is to work with my colleagues to implement a monetary policy that will sustain economic growth and maximum employment at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective. 1 Initial Conditions and What I Am Looking for in 2019 As we begin 2019, the initial conditions for the real economy are favorable. Through the first three quarters of last year, gross domestic product growth averaged 3.2 percent. Private-sector forecasts as well as our Summary of Economic Projections indicate that, when the data for the fourth quarter are released, they will show the economy likely grew at 3 percent or perhaps a little faster in 2018 for the year as a whole. If so, economic growth in 2018 would be the fastest annual growth rate recorded in 13 years. In terms of the economic outlook, ongoing momentum heading into this year indicates that that above-trend growth is likely to continue in 2019. If the economy continues to grow in 2019 along the lines that I expect, in July the current expansion will become the longest in recorded U.S. history. The labor market remains healthy, with an unemployment rate near the lowest level recorded in 50 years and with average monthly job gains continuing to outpace the increases needed over the longer run to provide employment for new entrants to the labor force. Moreover, the declines in the unemployment rate have been widespread across racial and ethnic minority groups, though gaps for African Americans and Hispanics relative to whites remain sizable. At 3.9 percent, the overall unemployment rate is below the median of FOMC participants' estimates of its full employment level, u*, of 4.4 percent. That said, the participants' median estimate of u* has been falling for several years as strong employment gains have not triggered a worrying rise in price inflation. In a welcome development, nominal wage growth is picking up, with most measures now running around 3 percent on an annual basis. And, for the past couple of years, wage gains have been notably faster for lower-income workers. 2 Aggregate wage gains are broadly in line with productivity growth and our 2 percent inflation objective, and they are consistent with a labor market that is operating in the vicinity of full employment. They are not, at present, a source of upward, cost-push pressure on price inflation. With regard to labor supply, we have had a pickup in labor force participation among prime-age workers (those 25 to 54 years old) that is, at least for now, boosting the supply side of the economy. The participation rate of prime-age workers has risen about 1-1/2 percentage points over the past few years. And participation in the job market may still have some further room to rise, as the prime-age participation rate is still a couple of percentage points below the levels that prevailed in the late 1990s, when the labor market was last this strong. Price stability, of course, is the other leg of our dual mandate, and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation over the past 12 months has been running close to our 2 percent objective. That said, and notwithstanding strong economic growth and a low unemployment rate, inflation has surprised to the downside recently, and it is not yet clear that inflation has moved back to 2 percent on a sustainable basis. Because expectations of future inflation are such an important determinant of actual inflation, central banks are as much in the business of anchoring inflation expectations as they are of managing actual inflation. Longer-run inflation expectations, based on straight readings of inflation compensation from TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities), have drifted downward, although, when adjusted for term premiums and liquidity, they remain near 2 percent. The University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers' measure of expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years has been broadly stable but has edged down over the past few years and is now at the very lower end of the range that has prevailed historically. Inflation expectations of professional forecasters have remained stable and consistent with our 2 percent objective. At each future FOMC meeting, as I consider what, if any, adjustment to our policy stance is warranted to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives, I will closely monitor the incoming data on inflation expectations as well as actual inflation, among the broad range of real and financial indicators that I consult. To me, it is important that any future policy decisions we may consider in 2019 be consistent with both pillars of our dual mandate. I will also be monitoring closely the incoming data on labor supply and productivity. 3 Not only has aggregate demand growth been robust, but so, too, has been the growth in realized aggregate supply. Over the first three quarters of 2018, hours worked in the nonfarm business sector were up 2.0 percent (at an annual rate), and productivity was up 1.8 percent. Realized productivity growth over the past eight quarters has averaged 1.3 percent, which is up from the 0.7 percent average recorded between 2011 and 2016. Strong growth supported by supply-side gains in hours worked and productivity is not inflationary, as the experience of 2018 confirms. With labor supply and productivity growth in 2018 having surprised on the upside, some mean reversion in 2019 is not unreasonable to forecast. But right now, that is just a forecast, and if the positive developments on the supply side of the economy continue in 2019, they would need to be factored into the inflation outlook and thus the appropriate settings for monetary policy. As I have indicated previously, I believe we may have seen the bottom on the productivity slowdown, but how much of the recent welcome uptick in productivity growth can be sustained or extended is hard to judge at this point. It will depend in part on how much business investment spending adds to the stock of capital in the economy. We saw a welcome pickup in investment in the first half of last year, but growth of capital spending slowed notably in the third quarter and the manufacturing indexes from the Institute for Supply Management have softened, though other data are consistent with a rebound in business spending in the fourth quarter. If a pickup in the growth of investment spending was realized and sustained, it would be expected to contribute to future productivity growth. The December Decision and the Outlook for Monetary Policy in 2019 With a robust labor market and inflation running close to our 2 percent inflation objective, the Committee decided at its December meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. 4 That said, growth and growth prospects in other economies around the world have moderated somewhat in recent months, and overall financial conditions have tightened materially. These recent developments in the global economy and financial markets represent crosswinds to the U.S. economy. If these crosswinds are sustained, appropriate forward-looking monetary policy should respond to keep the economy as close as possible to our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. 5 I will closely monitor the incoming data on these global economic and financial developments as, at each future FOMC meeting, I consider what adjustment to our monetary policy stance is warranted to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives. With our December decision, the 2.5 percent upper limit of our target range for the federal funds rate is now equal to the lower end of the range of Committee participants' estimates of its longer-run equilibrium level, r*. One defines r* as the level of the policy rate that, if sustained, would maintain full employment and price stability in the long run. As I have discussed in a previous speech, r* is both unobserved and time varying, so it must be inferred from macroeconomic and financial data. 6 It is for this reason that, at this stage of the business cycle and with the economy operating close to our dual-mandate objectives, it will be especially important for our policy decisions to continue to be data dependent. We need to be data dependent in two related but distinct ways. First, we need to base our policy decisions on what trends in the data tell us about where the economy is at the time of each meeting relative to our dual-mandate objectives for unemployment and inflation. Second, we need to be data dependent by looking at a wide range of real and financial data that can provide information on where the economy is heading under appropriate policy, including the ultimate destination for u* and r*. Over the past seven years, FOMC participants have continually revised down their estimates of long-run u* and r* as the unemployment rate fell and historically low policy rates did not trigger a surge in inflation and inflation expectations above target. This process of learning about u* and r* as new data arrive continues and reinforces that we are not on a preset course. With inflation muted, I believe that the Committee can afford to be patient as we see how the data evolve in 2019 and as we assess what monetary policy stance is warranted to sustain strong growth and our dual-mandate objectives. In terms of monetary policy implementation, the FOMC is assessing how the demand for our liabilities, especially reserve balances held at the Fed by depository institutions and U.S. currency holdings, is evolving in a world in which regulation and prudence boost holdings of liquid assets by financial institutions. Ultimately, these factors, along with the choice we make with regard to our operating framework, will be the primary determinants of the size of our balance sheet, which since October 2017 has been shrinking as we allow our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to roll off as they mature and prepay. There have been significant changes in financial regulation pertaining to high-quality liquid assets and liquidity coverage ratios, and the legacy of the Global Financial Crisis has likely led financial institutions to want to have higher liquidity even outside of regulation. And that means that we are going to be in a world in which financial institutions are likely either required or going to want to hold onto liquid assets, including reserves at the Fed. The FOMC is discussing the pros and cons of different longer-run approaches to monetary policy implementation and is still learning about the evolution of the demand for reserves in the banking system. As noted in the FOMC's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, the Committee intends to, in the longer run, hold "no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively." 7 In that vein, as indicated in the minutes from our recent meetings, the Committee has been weighing the costs and benefits of an implementation system with abundant reserves. The current system for policy implementation with abundant reserves has, to date, served us well. We have good control of short-term money market rates in a variety of market conditions, and these rates have been effectively transmitting to broader financial conditions in the economy. However, while the assessment of our operating framework is ongoing, let me be clear that any decisions we make on the ultimate size of the balance sheet and the implementation of policy will be taken so as to be consistent with our goals of sustaining strong growth, maximum employment, and price stability. If we find that the ongoing program of balance sheet normalization or any other aspect of normalization no longer promotes the achievement of our dual-mandate goals, we will not hesitate to make changes. Review of the Federal Reserve's Strategy, Tools, and Communication In November, the Federal Reserve announced that it will conduct a wide-ranging and public review in 2019 of how we go about achieving the twin goals of maximum employment and price stability assigned to us by the Congress. The review will cover the Fed's monetary policy strategy, policy tools, and communication practices and will include outreach to businesses, community groups, academics, and other interested parties. As Chairman Powell has indicated, with labor market conditions close to maximum employment and inflation near our 2 percent objective, now is a good time to take stock of how the Federal Reserve formulates, conducts, and communicates monetary policy. As part of this outreach effort, the Federal Reserve System will hold a research conference June 4-5, 2019, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and featuring outside speakers and panelists. The Federal Reserve Board and Reserve District Banks will also be holding outreach and public events as we seek views from a wide range of interested parties. Beginning in the summer of 2019, the FOMC will draw on what it has learned from the conference and the System outreach events as it assesses possible ways in which the Fed's strategy, tools, and communication practices might evolve to best achieve, on a sustained basis, the twin goals of maximum employment and price stability assigned to it by the Congress. We anticipate making our findings public after the FOMC concludes this review sometime in 2020. Concluding Thoughts The U.S. economy enters 2019 after a year of strong growth, with inflation near our 2 percent objective, and with the unemployment rate near 50-year lows. That said, growth and growth prospects in other economies around the world have moderated somewhat in recent months, and overall financial conditions have tightened materially. These recent developments in the global economy and financial markets represent crosswinds to the U.S. economy. If these crosswinds are sustained, appropriate forward‑looking monetary policy should seek to offset them to keep the economy as close as possible to our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability. As we have long said, monetary policy is not on a preset course. Going forward, we need, I believe, to be cognizant of the balance we must strike between (1) being forward looking and preemptive and (2) maximizing the odds of being right. For example, were models to predict a surge in inflation, a decision for preemptive hikes before the surge is evident in actual data would need to be balanced against the cost of the model being wrong. Speaking for myself, I believe we can afford to be patient about assessing how to adjust our policy stance to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives. We begin the year as close to our assigned objectives as we have in a very long time. In these circumstances, I believe patience is a virtue and is one we can today afford. Thank you. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or FOMC participants. I would like to thank Brian Doyle, David Lebow, and Ellen Meade for their assistance in preparing these remarks. Return to text 2. Wage gains for workers with different wage levels can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Economic Policy Institute provides convenient tabulations of these data. For data through 2017, see Economic Policy Institute (2018), State of Working America Data Library (Washington: EPI , March), table (" Wages by Percentile "). For an update through the first half of 2018, see Elise Gould and Heidi Shierholz (2018), " Average Wage Growth Continues to Flatline in 2018, While Low-Wage Workers and Those with Relatively Lower Levels of Educational Attainment See Stronger Gains ," Economic Policy Institute, Working Economics Blog, July 18. Return to text 3. For an analysis of the effect of a positive boost to productivity in the FRB/US model, see Jean-Philippe Laforte (2018), " Overview of the Changes to the FRB/US Model (2018) ," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 7), fig. 4. In the model, higher productivity lowers inflation, which calls for a flatter path for policy normalization than would otherwise be the case. Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, December 19. Return to text 5. In the model of optimal monetary policy discussed in a paper by Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, the central bank is able to offset fully exogenous declines in aggregate demand through adjustments in the expected path for the policy rate. See Richard H. Clarida, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999), "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 37 (December), pp. 1661-1707. A paper by Clarida shows that this result extends to the open economy facing, for example, a decline in exports. While monetary policy in practice must confront real-world complications that theoretical models ignore, the crucial point is that economic projections for growth and inflation under appropriate monetary policy may be much less affected by adverse or positive "demand" fluctuations than would be the case if policy did not respond appropriately to these developments. That is, under present circumstances and under appropriate monetary policy, one can be more optimistic about the economic outlook than would be a "pessimist" who focuses only on the crosswinds without factoring in the appropriate policy response to the crosswinds. See Richard H. Clarida (2017), "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination," NBER Working Paper Series 23562 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, June). Return to text 6. See Richard H. Clarida (2018), " Data Dependence and U.S. Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27. Return to text 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans ," press release, September 17, paragraph 9. Return to text Last Update: January 10, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At the 2019 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York Share I am pleased to participate in this year's U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, which, since its inception, has brought together policymakers, academics, and market participants to share ideas and perspectives on U.S. monetary policy. Today I would like to discuss the broad review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy framework that we are undertaking this year. We will examine the policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that we use to pursue our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. In my remarks, I will describe the motivation for and scope of this review and will preview some of the events we are planning as part of it. 1 The U.S. Monetary Policy Forum is an excellent venue for this presentation. For more than a decade, it has focused attention and timely analysis on critical issues confronting the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). Its programs have drawn on the latest economic research and considered a range of views. Similarly, the Federal Reserve's review of its monetary policy framework will be transparent, will be open minded, and will seek perspectives from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including academics, other specialists, and the public at large. Motivation for the Review The fact that the System is conducting this review does not suggest that we are dissatisfied with the existing policy framework. Indeed, we believe our existing framework has served us well, helping us effectively achieve our statutorily assigned dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. Nonetheless, in light of the unprecedented events of the past decade, we believe it is a good time to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we can refine our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain these goals as consistently and robustly as possible. 2 I note that central banks in other countries have conducted periodic reviews of their monetary policy frameworks, and their experience has informed the approach we are pursuing. As Chairman Powell has indicated, with the U.S. economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review. The unemployment rate is near a multidecade low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective. By conducting this review, we want to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years. In addition, the Federal Reserve used new policy tools and enhanced its communication practices in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession, and the review will evaluate these changes. Furthermore, U.S. and foreign economies have significantly evolved since the pre-crisis experience that informed much of the research that provided the foundation for our current approach. Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad. 3 Moreover, this global decline in r* is widely expected to persist for years. The decline in neutral policy rates likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth. These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important. All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns. That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support spending and employment, and keep inflation from falling too low. 4 Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack. That is, the short-run Phillips curve appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment. 5 A flatter Phillips curve is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword. It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns‑‑as was the case during and after the Great Recession--because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter. 6 However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations. Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective. 7 Scope of the Review In the Federal Reserve Act, the Congress assigned the Federal Reserve the responsibility to conduct monetary policy "so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates." 8 Our review this year will take this statutory mandate as given and will also take as given that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the longer run with the congressional mandate. Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. 9 First adopted in January 2012, the statement has been reaffirmed at the start of each subsequent year, including at the FOMC's meeting last month with unanimous support from all 17 FOMC participants. The statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level. In doing so, the FOMC recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. According to the Federal Reserve Act, the employment objective is on an equal footing with the inflation objective. As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known in the research literature as "flexible inflation targeting." 10 However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedent over the other. We believe this transparency about the balanced approach the FOMC takes has served us well over the past decade when high unemployment called for extraordinary policies that entailed some risk of inflation. The review of our current framework will be wide ranging, and we will not prejudge where it will take us, but events of the past decade highlight three broad questions. Three Questions The first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?" Under our current approach as well as that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks around the world, the persistent shortfalls of inflation from 2 percent that many advanced economies have experienced over most of the past decade are treated as "bygones." This means that policy today is not adjusted to offset past inflation shortfalls with future overshoots of the inflation target (nor do persistent overshoots of inflation trigger policies that aim to undershoot the inflation target). Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the effective lower bound on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more likely. Persistent inflation shortfalls carry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become poorly anchored or become anchored below the stated inflation goal. 11 In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo, in part or in whole, past inflation deviations from target. Such strategies include targeting average inflation over a multiyear period and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path. 12 These strategies could be implemented either permanently or as a temporary response to extraordinary circumstances. For example, the central bank could commit, at the time when the policy rate reaches the ELB, to maintain the policy rate at this level until inflation over the ELB period has, on average, run at the target rate. 13 Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case. 14 In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate and thereby, viewed over time, provide no conflict between the dual-mandate goals. 15 The benefits of the makeup strategies rest heavily on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes--for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent. As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not warrant doing so. Because of this time inconsistency, any makeup strategy, to be successful, would have to be understood by the public to represent a credible commitment. That important real-world consideration is often neglected in the academic literature, in which central bank "commitment devices" are simply assumed to exist and be instantly credible on decree. Thus, one of the most challenging questions is whether the Fed could, in practice, attain the benefits of makeup strategies that are possible in models. The next question the review will consider is, "Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary means of changing the stance of monetary policy is by adjusting its target range for the federal funds rate. In the fall of 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions. Because the U.S. economy required additional policy accommodation after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance regarding the likely path of the federal funds rate. 16 The FOMC altered the size and composition of the Fed's balance sheet through a sequence of three large-scale securities purchase programs, via a maturity extension program, and by adjusting the reinvestment of principal payments on maturing securities. With regard to forward guidance, the FOMC initially made "calendar based" statements, and, later on, it issued "outcome based" guidance. Overall, the empirical evidence suggests that these added tools helped stem the crisis and support economic recovery by strengthening the labor market and lifting inflation back toward 2 percent. That said, estimates of the effects of these unconventional policies range widely. 17 In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, we will consider additional tools to ease policy when the ELB is binding. For example, as is presently Bank of Japan policy, the FOMC could, when the ELB is binding, establish a temporary ceiling for Treasury yields at longer maturities by standing ready to purchase them at a preannounced floor price. 18 During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve reviewed but ultimately found this tool and some others deployed by foreign central banks wanting relative to the alternatives it did pursue. But the review will reassess the case for these and other tools in light of more recent experience in other countries. The third question the review will consider is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting. Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication practices to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions, as well as to foster democratic accountability. These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections. 19 As part of the review, we will assess the Committee's current and past communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful. For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability. Activities and Timeline for the Review The review will have several components. 20 The Board and the Reserve Banks will be conducting town hall-style "Fed Listens" events this year. We will hear from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development professionals, and academics. The first of these events will take place Monday in Dallas. Another is scheduled at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in early April, and other Reserve Banks will host events over the course of the year. In addition, we will sponsor a System research conference on June 4-5, 2019, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed. The sessions will include overviews by academic experts of themes that are central to the review, including the FOMC's monetary policy since the financial crisis, assessments of the maximum sustainable level of employment, alternative policy frameworks and strategies to achieve the dual mandate, policy tools, global considerations, financial stability considerations, and central bank communications. Other sessions will feature panels of community leaders who will share their perspectives on the labor market and the effects of interest rates on their constituencies. We expect to release summaries of the "Fed Listens" events and to livestream the Chicago conference. Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the FOMC will conduct its own assessment of its monetary policy framework, beginning around the middle of the year. We will share our conclusions with the public in the first half 2020. Concluding Thoughts The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges. So it makes sense for us to remain open minded as we assess current practices and consider ideas that could potentially enhance our ability to deliver on the goals the Congress has assigned us. For this reason, my colleagues and I do not want to preempt or to predict our ultimate finding. What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today. References Adam, Klaus, and Roberto M. Billi (2007). "Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54 (April), pp. 728-52. Bank for International Settlements (2017). 87th Annual Report (PDF) . Basel, Switzerland: BIS, June. Bauer, Michael D., and Glenn D. Rudebusch (2014). " The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases (PDF) ," International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 10 (September), pp. 233-89. Baumeister, Christiane, and Luca Benati (2013). " Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF) ," International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 9 (June), pp. 165-212. Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1999). "Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931-1937," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 43 (June), pp. 525-51. Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). " Federal Reserve Communications ," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14. -------- (2017). " Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy ," Ben Bernanke's Blog, October 12. Blanchard, Olivier, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015). " Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper WP/5/230. Washington: International Monetary Fund, November. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018). Monetary Policy Report . Washington: Board of Governors, July. Boivin, Jean, and Marc P. Giannoni (2006). "Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?" Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 88 (August), pp. 445-62. Boivin, Jean, Michael T. Kiley, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2010). "How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M. Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics , vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 369-422. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver (2018). " The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF) ," Occasional Paper Series 217. Frankfurt: European Central Bank, December. Bullard, James (2018). " The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF) ," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). " Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 1-80. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Jonas D.M. Fisher, Alejandro Justiniano, and Leonardo Melosi (2017). "Forward Guidance and Macroeconomic Outcomes since the Financial Crisis," in Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2016, vol. 31. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 283-357. Cecchetti, Stephen G., Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017). Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF) , report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. Chen, Han, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero (2012). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes," Economic Journal, vol. 122 (November), pp. F289-315. Chung, Hess, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019). "Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Clarida, Richard H. (2012). "What Has--and Has Not--Been Learned about Monetary Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 123-40. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 115 (February), pp. 147-80. Clinton, Kevin, Charles Freedman, Michel Juillard, Ondra Kamenik, Douglas Laxton, and Hou Wang (2015). " Inflation-Forecast Targeting: Applying the Principle of Transparency (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper WP/15/132. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David López‐Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects," Economic Journal, vol. 122 (November), pp. F415-46. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (2013). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large‐Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 108 (May), pp. 425-48. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). " The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, pp. 139-235. Engen, Eric M., Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015). " The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. English, William B., David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions," IMF Economic Review, vol. 63 (May), pp. 22-70. Erceg, Christopher, James Hebden, Michael Kiley, David López-Salido, and Robert Tetlow (2018). " Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Faust, Jon, and Jonathan H. Wright (2013). "Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, vol. 2A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 2-56. Fuhrer, Jeffrey, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018). “ Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF) ” paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13-14. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian P. Sack (2011). " Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF) " FRBNY Economic Policy Review, vol. 17 (May), pp. 41-59. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 44, s1 (February), pp. 3-46. Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018). " From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Hills, Timothy S., Taisuke Nakata, and Sebastian Schmidt (2016). " The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol. 108, Supplement 1 (May), pp. S59-75. Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011). " The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom (PDF) ," International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 7 (September), pp. 113-61. Joyce, Michael, David Miles, Andrew Scott, and Dimitri Vayanos (2012). "Quantitative Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy--An Introduction," Economic Journal, vol. 122 (November), pp. F271-88. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017). " Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 317-96. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). " Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF) ," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Mishkin, Frederic S. (2007). " Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate ," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10. Nakov, Anton (2008). " Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate (PDF) ," International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 4 (June), pp. 73-127. Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005). "Average Inflation Targeting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 37 (October), pp. 837-63. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017). " Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF) " International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 13 (September), pp. 1-42. Reifschneider, David L., and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Roberts, John M. (2006). "Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics," International Journal of Central Banking , vol. 2 (September), pp. 193-230. Romer, David (2010). "A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 42 (August), pp. 951-57. Ruge-Murcia, Francisco (2014). " Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level? (PDF) " International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 10 (June), pp. 301-26. Simon, John, Troy Matheson, and Damiano Sandri (2013). " The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping? (PDF) " in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks. Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 79-95. Swanson, Eric T. (2017). "Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 23311. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April (revised August 2018). -------- (2018). "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Woodford, Michael (2012). " Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF) ," paper presented at " The Changing Policy Landscape ," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Yellen, Janet (2015). " Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24. -------- (2017). " The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19. 1. I would like to thank Etienne Gagnon for his assistance in preparing these remarks. Return to text 2. Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework. They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework. Return to text 3. For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018). Return to text 4. For assessments of the risks that U.S. monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019). Return to text 5. For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017). Return to text 6. One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010). As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions. Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks. Return to text 7. See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment. Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation. Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation. In a paper discussed at this forum two years ago, Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s. These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations. Return to text 8. Even though the act lists three distinct goals, the Federal Reserve's mandate for monetary policy is commonly known as the "dual mandate." The reason is that an economy in which people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly and in which the price level (meaning a broad measure of the price of goods and services purchased by consumers) is stable creates the conditions needed for interest rates to settle at moderate levels. For a discussion, see Mishkin (2007). Return to text 9. The statement is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf . Return to text 10. For a discussion of this terminology and references, see English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) and Clinton and others (2015). Return to text 11. These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB. For related discussions, see Reifschneider and Williams (2000); Adam and Billi (2007); Nakov (2008); and Hills, Nakata, and Schmidt (2016). Return to text 12. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion. Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting. There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations. Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon--typically a couple years ahead or over the "medium run"--without regard to past inflation deviations. One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of "2-3 per cent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence. However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal. The only known historical example of price-level targeting occurred in Sweden from 1931 to 1933 when the country abandoned the gold standard and attempted instead to maintain its price level. The temporary adoption of price-level targeting is credited with helping Sweden avoid deflation, an outcome that contrasted with that in countries that stayed on the gold standard. See Berg and Jonung (1999). Return to text 13. See Bernanke (2017) for a discussion of such a strategy. See Hebden and López-Salido (2018) for a quantitative assessment of that and other strategies. See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns. Return to text 14. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise. The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018, pp. 37-41). Return to text 15. See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S. economy. Return to text 16. As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017). In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase households and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery. These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions. Return to text 17. On the transmission channels of balance sheet policies, see D'Amico and others (2012), Joyce and others (2012), Clarida (2012), Woodford (2012), and Bauer and Rudebusch (2014). On the financial market effects of balance sheet policies, see Gagnon and others (2011), Joyce and others (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), D'Amico and King (2013), and Swanson (2017). For discussions of the macroeconomic effects of these policy actions, see Chen, Cúrdia, and Ferrero (2012); Baumeister and Benati (2013); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Chung and others (2019), and the references therein. For related assessments of forward guidance, see Campbell and others (2012); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Campbell and others (2017); and Swanson (2017). Return to text 18. Compared with asset purchases during the financial crisis, this approach might give us greater rate control at medium to long maturities but carry a risk that the Federal Reserve's balance sheet could become unduly large. Japan arguably offers the most direct example of such an approach. In September 2016, the Bank of Japan announced a target for the yield on the Japanese 10-year government bond and stated its commitment to expand the monetary base until inflation exceeded its 2 percent objective and stayed above that level in a stable manner. Return to text 19. Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report. With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon. Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members. For a discussion and data, see Bernanke (2007) and Romer (2010). Return to text 20. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm . Return to text Last Update: February 22, 2019 Back to Top

Vice Chair Richard H. Clarida At "Promoting Global Growth and Domestic Economic Security," 35th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C. Share Thank you for the opportunity to participate in the 35th Annual Economic Policy Conference of the National Association for Business Economics. Before we begin our conversation, I want to share a few thoughts about the outlook for the economy and monetary policy. 1 Current Economic Situation and Outlook The U.S. economy expanded at a robust pace in 2018, and my baseline outlook for 2019 foresees somewhat slower but still-solid growth in the year ahead. In July, just about four months from now, the current economic expansion will become the longest on record. The Federal Reserve is charged by the Congress with achieving and sustaining a dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, and the economy is as close as it has been in many years to meeting these goals. The unemployment rate is near the lowest level recorded in 50 years, and average monthly job gains have continued to well outpace the increases needed over the longer run to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force. Most measures of nominal wage growth are running at or somewhat above the 3 percent pace, and recent wage gains have been strongest for lower-skilled workers. Moreover, the strength of the labor market appears to have encouraged people to join the labor force and others, who might have left it, to continue working. The labor force participation rate--the share of people who are either working or looking for work--has moved up 1/2 percentage point over the past year, and the participation rate of prime-age workers (those 25 to 54 years old) has risen about 1-1/2 percentage points over the past few years. Inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), is estimated to have been a little bit below 2 percent of late, largely because of recent declines in energy prices. However, core PCE inflation, which excludes food and energy prices and tends to be a better indicator of future inflation, is estimated to have been about 2 percent. Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved lower, on net, since last summer, though they have increased some recently, and some survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed. That said, taken together, the evidence suggests that measures of expected inflation are at the lower end of a range that I consider to be consistent with our price-stability goal of 2 percent PCE inflation. While my baseline outlook for growth, employment, and inflation is a positive one, a number of crosscurrents that are buffeting the economy bear careful scrutiny. Global growth is slowing, particularly in China and Europe. Global policy uncertainty remains elevated. And financial conditions have been volatile, making efforts to extract signal from noise more challenging. Monetary Policy As I have indicated in recent speeches, monetary policy at this juncture needs to be especially data dependent, with the federal funds rate now in the range of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' estimates of its longer-run neutral level. Moreover, with employment and inflation now at or close to our dual-mandate objectives, the FOMC in its January statement indicated it can afford to be patient as we assess the need for further adjustments in our policy stance. 2 Going forward, we need, I believe, to be cognizant of the balance we must strike between (1) being forward looking and (2) maximizing the odds of being right given the reality that the models that we consult are not infallible. For example, were a model to predict a surge in inflation, a decision for preemptive hikes before the surge is evident in actual data would need to be balanced against the considerable cost of the model being wrong. Given muted inflation and stable inflation expectations, I believe we can be patient and allow the data to flow in as we determine what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to strike this balance. We also decided at our January meeting to maintain our current operating regime‑‑a "floor" system--for implementing monetary policy. 3 The FOMC will continue to set the stance of policy by establishing the target range for the federal funds rate. The interest on excess reserves rate will be our primary tool to keep the federal funds rate in the target range. In this regime, we will provide an ample supply of reserves in the banking system to ensure that we remain on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve and that the federal funds rate is insulated from shocks to reserve demand and supply. With this decision on our operating regime made, the Committee can now decide on the appropriate timing and pace for concluding our balance sheet drawdown. In the longer run, the ultimate size of the balance sheet will be determined by the demand for Federal Reserve liabilities such as currency and reserve balances. Finally, in November, we announced a review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. In this review, we will listen carefully to a broad range of stakeholders offering a full range of perspectives from across the country, and we will draw on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability in the most robust fashion possible. Taking these viewpoints on board, the FOMC will begin its own discussions this summer on how we might refine our framework and will provide a public assessment after the review is completed. 4 Thank you for your attention, and I look forward to our conversation. 1. The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants. I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text. Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, January 30. Return to text 3. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), " Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization ," press release, January 30. Return to text 4. Information about the review and the events associated with it are available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm . Return to text Last Update: February 28, 2019 Back to Top
