March 26, 2018 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Washington, D.C. As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have this opportunity to speak to you. In my remarks today, I will discuss financial regulation and the ways in which proper incentives help ensure resiliency in the financial system. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 We have come a long way since the global financial crisis in building a more resilient financial system—one that can better support the provision of financial services to American households and businesses such as those represented here, both in good times and in bad. But, there is still unfinished business. On the regulatory side, for example, there is more work to be done to ensure that a systemically important bank can be resolved effectively on a cross-border basis in the event of failure. Additionally, the efficiency, transparency, and simplicity of the regulatory system could be improved without weakening the core reforms to capital, liquidity, and resolution that have made the financial system much stronger. Most importantly, we need to recognize that an effective regulatory regime and comprehensive supervision are not sufficient. We also need to focus on the incentives facing banks and their employees. After all, misaligned incentives contributed greatly to the financial crisis and continue to affect bank conduct and behavior. 2 Today, I will address this issue of incentives, with emphasis on the complementary roles of regulation, supervision, and bank culture. Each of these is necessary to ensure that we have a robust and resilient financial system not just today, but also in the future. Progress Since the Financial Crisis The financial crisis was a watershed event that exposed severe deficiencies in the financial system—including the inadequacy of bank capital and liquidity buffers, poor risk management and internal controls, and bad bank cultures. Many financial firms took on an excessive amount of risk and did not always act in ways consistent with the interests of their customers or the broader public. The crisis revealed woeful shortcomings in many of these elements, with terrible consequences for the economy and millions of people. Over the past decade, the official sector and the financial industry have made considerable progress in addressing these problems. The banking system is much sounder and more resilient as a result, in a number of ways. First, systemically important banks are much safer. 3 They have much bigger liquidity and capital buffers, and the quality of capital is much improved. Moreover, the capital regime now has a forward-looking element in which annual stress tests examine banks’ ability to withstand losses under severely adverse economic conditions and constrain the amount of capital that can be returned to shareholders via dividends and share repurchases. Strengthened liquidity standards have given the market greater confidence that banks possess adequate resources to weather temporary storms that arise. At the global level, Basel III has helped to level the competitive playing field in a number of ways—including, most recently, by imposing constraints on banks’ use of internal models to meet their capital requirements, and by introducing a leverage buffer for systemically important firms, similar to what we already have in place in the United States. New regulatory standards have been complemented by a supervisory framework for the largest banks that explicitly acknowledges the impact that distress at such firms could have on financial markets and the economy. 4 These efforts have led to considerable improvement in risk management at banks, which should help better sustain the flow of credit to the real economy throughout the business cycle. Second, considerable progress has been made in terms of resolution. Systemically important banks now have living wills that provide a roadmap for how these firms would be resolved in the event of imminent failure. Moreover, there is now a well-defined mechanism under Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act for recapitalization of a failed systemically important firm. The FDIC now has the authority to initiate a “single point of entry” resolution, which places the parent holding company into FDIC receivership and transfers its subsidiaries to a new parent company. Total loss-absorbing capacity, or TLAC, of the old parent company would be available to absorb losses and could be used to recapitalize the new parent company. But, the task of operationalizing resolution for large, global banks—including achieving full clarity on the roles of the home and host supervisors—is still not complete. It is key that work continues on this front to ensure that a systemically important firm can fail without threatening to topple the rest of the financial system—an important step toward ending “too big to fail.” Third, some of the obvious systemic vulnerabilities exposed by the financial crisis have been remedied. Important changes include mandatory clearing of standardized over-the-counter derivatives through central counterparties, or CCPs; more intensive supervision of systemically important CCPs; and reforms of the tri-party repo system and the money market mutual fund industry. But, even as we reduce or eliminate old vulnerabilities, we must not rest on our laurels, for new vulnerabilities will inevitably take their place. These accomplishments notwithstanding, I have no doubt that the current regulatory framework could be improved. Indeed, the official sector should assess the efficiency and effectiveness of regulations on an ongoing basis. I agree with Vice Chairman Quarles’ observation that there is more we can do to make the regulatory regime more efficient, transparent, and simple—including relief for small banks, greater tailoring based on a firm’s level of systemic importance, and simplifying the Volcker Rule. 5 Some of these changes have already been adopted or are in process. Greater Focus on Incentives Is Needed But, I also think we must take a broader view of what characterizes a resilient and robust financial system. To that end, we need to carefully monitor the incentives that influence the behavior of financial firms and their employees. Indeed, the record from the crisis and more recent years shows just how powerful incentives can be in driving firms and individuals to do things that are imprudent and/or unethical. Bad incentives can lead to conduct that not only generates large risk exposures and market excess, but also erodes trust and confidence in the financial system. For example, the pre-crisis housing boom would not have gone so far, for so long, without the widespread breakdown in mortgage underwriting practices that was driven by poor incentives. 6 Some examples of bad incentives that contributed to the financial boom and bust included: Compensation practices at financial firms that rewarded volume and short-term performance over longer-term, sustainable returns; The willingness of the credit rating agencies to designate tranches of subprime mortgages triple-A in exchange for fees paid by a small number of issuers of mortgage-backed securities; The willingness of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to use their implicit government support to take on large amounts of mortgage risk with very little capital backing; The willingness of AIG to use its triple-A rating to provide credit protection to banks and securities firms against complex mortgage obligations with little direct capital support or an adequate liquidity backstop; and, The pegging of money market mutual fund share prices at par, which led to investors running at the first sign of trouble. Since then, we have seen a number of other costly breakdowns that were driven, in part, by poor incentives. In the LIBOR scandal, a relatively small number of banks manipulated LIBOR to their benefit through rate-setting submissions that were not based on actual transactions. In contrast, a new U.S. Treasury repo reference rate will be based on actual transactions in a deep and liquid market, and is designed to be compliant with new principles set forth by the International Organization of Securities Commissions. 7 In the foreign-exchange market, bad incentives helped encourage rate rigging at particular rate-fixing times. Reforms were subsequently introduced, including recommendations from the Financial Stability Board’s Report on Foreign Exchange Benchmarks and the recent publication of the FX Global Code, developed by central banks and market participants. 8 The creation of millions of unauthorized accounts at Wells Fargo also reflected bad incentives. Bank employees were compensated on sales volume with aggressive cross-selling targets without customers actually receiving beneficial services. In response, the Federal Reserve Board entered into a consent cease-and-desist order with Wells Fargo that requires the firm to improve its governance and risk management processes. These recent cases were particularly disturbing in terms of their scale and flagrancy, and—in the case of the rate-rigging scandals—the collusion by employees across firms. I am particularly struck by the fact that manipulation of the foreign exchange market occurred even after the LIBOR scandal was well known. These episodes underscore the tremendous power that incentives have to influence and distort behavior, potentially leading to massive damage to bank cultures, reputations, and finances. Some lessons on incentives that stand out for me include: Guarding against technical design flaws that can be manipulated and exploited for profit; Ensuring that incentives are aligned and consistent with desired behaviors; Recognizing how rules, however well-intentioned, can be gamed; and, Having appropriate mechanisms in place to identify problems early and to ensure rapid escalation and amelioration. Many of these issues and risks likely also apply to your companies. But, I think they are particularly important for financial institutions—especially those that are systemically important. The scale of such firms magnifies the impact of bad incentives on the financial system and economy. At the same time, that scale also makes it more difficult for senior management to properly control a firm’s activities and monitor the conduct and behavior of its employees. For these reasons, we need strong internal and external checks on banks—an area to which I will now turn. The Complementary Roles of Regulation, Supervision, and Culture As I said earlier, a sound financial system is one that is safe and resilient, can support the provision of financial services at a reasonable price to the real economy in good times and in bad, and promotes confidence and trust among its customers and counterparties. Financial institutions should be prudently managed and subject to strong internal checks—including risk management policies and procedures, internal controls, compliance, and audit. Meanwhile, an effective financial regulatory and supervisory regime should be as efficient, transparent, and simple as possible. I think these goals are broadly shared by supervisors and banks alike, which suggests to me that the relationship between supervisors and banks does not always need to be adversarial. Indeed, a healthy dialogue helps this supervisory process to work well. For example, it is important that firms are proactive in revealing problems to their supervisors. And, individual institutions can certainly benefit from the horizontal perspective that supervisors bring to examinations. This perspective can highlight where the firm stands vis-à-vis best practices, or where there may be important vulnerabilities in its operations. Of course, there is an irreducible amount of tension built into this relationship, given that each party’s roles, interests, and responsibilities will not always coincide. Banks are naturally more sensitive to constraints on their profit opportunities or dividend policies and to the costs of regulation. They may also question how much protection is necessary—for example, how stringent the capital requirements or how severe stress testing assumptions should be. These are areas where I would expect perspectives to differ. Supervisors are principally focused on compliance with laws and regulations as well as issues of safety and soundness. They also bring to their work a perspective on financial stability that may not match the more narrow interests of the firm. For example, supervisors seek to address the externalities created by the failure of a systemically important firm by imposing higher capital and other requirements than the firm would likely select if left to its own devices. The financial crisis is a vivid reminder that there can be many risks to financial stability, and of the need for strong internal and external constraints on banks. Here, the “three pillars” of regulation, supervision, and bank culture must all play effective roles. Regulation establishes what is legally permissible for banks to do; supervision helps to reinforce those rules and evaluate whether the bank’s controls and other processes are conducive to safety and soundness; and bank culture sets the norms for what is appropriate behavior. 9 But, at the same time, these pillars are mutually reinforcing. Regulation and supervision, for example, attempt to address various market failures in banking that can contribute to excessive risk taking. 10 Bank culture, in turn, helps establish norms in areas where regulation may be silent. In this way, regulation, supervision, and bank culture are complements, and deficiencies in any of these pillars can be problematic. For example, as we have seen in cases of unsafe or unethical behavior in recent years, strong regulation and supervision cannot substitute for deficiencies in bank culture—especially not on a timely basis. It is the public sector’s job to establish and enforce rules, but rules are inherently limited in their ability to constrain conduct and behavior. Much of our regulatory regime has been developed in response to financial problems that have arisen over time. Because regulation is typically reactive in this way, it may not always keep pace with the evolution of the financial system or the broader economic environment. Also, we must recognize that, at times, actions will be taken that are clearly inconsistent with the spirit of the rules that are place, or the rules will simply be violated. Consider the use by Lehman Brothers of so-called Repo 105 transactions to window-dress its balance sheet. Beginning in late 2007, Lehman used Repo 105 transactions to temporarily remove securities from its balance sheet for a few days in order to mislead investors and counterparties about its financial condition. These transactions had the benefit of being recognized as “sales” even though they were nearly identical to standard repo transactions that stayed on the balance sheet. In another example, following the introduction of Basel III, some banks tried to reduce their capital requirements by transferring risk to other counterparties. In certain cases, this occurred even when those counterparties did not provide any additional resources to absorb potential losses—either because they were very thinly capitalized, or were affiliated with the banks in question. I would also note that the establishment of too many bright-line rules may prove counterproductive to the goal of encouraging good bank cultures. For one thing, detailed rules can be construed as implying that the responsibility for good conduct rests with the public authorities. For another, rules may create opportunities or incentives for legal or regulatory arbitrage. When banks work to find creative ways around rules, it can have an insidious effect on culture. As I see it, an organization’s culture gets into trouble when it equates “what is right” with what is legally permissible, and when “what is wrong” becomes viewed as what is legally impermissible. A proliferation of rules—followed by the gaming of these rules—can be ultimately self-defeating. The end result may not only be a loss of trust, but also over time a more burdensome regulatory regime than would otherwise be the case. So, while regulation and supervision are necessary to ensure a resilient and robust financial system, I very much doubt that they are sufficient. They need to be supplemented by bank management that pays close attention to incentives, conduct, and culture. As I have previously said, incentives drive conduct, which establishes the social norms that help define a firm’s culture. 11 The first step is for firms to evaluate the incentives that they have in place with respect to personnel evaluation, compensation, and promotion and to make sure they are consistent with the type of behaviors they want to encourage. For example, how are compliance violations treated in compensation and promotion decisions? Are incentives in place to encourage people to speak up early, when problems are smaller and more manageable? When employees do speak up, how are they subsequently treated? My colleagues and I at the New York Fed have commented previously on the essential role of good culture in a bank’s reputation, financial condition and performance, and in customer confidence and trust. 12 As we have argued, “cultural capital”—through its ability to limit misconduct risk—can be an important bulwark to a firm’s financial capital. 13 Culture is often viewed as a “soft” topic, but I would disagree. The financial penalties associated with misconduct are anything but soft—with bank fines since the crisis estimated at more than $320 billion as of year-end 2016. 14 The hit to a bank’s reputation from misconduct can also be quantified through, for example, the associated impact on its share price or funding costs. Culture should be about concrete incentives and behaviors that help achieve specific goals, implying that it should not be viewed as a “soft” issue. I have argued on several occasions that bank leaders could get a better view into their firms’ progress on conduct and culture by doing more collectively. 15 For example, major banks in the United States could participate in an industry-wide survey of their employees conducted by an independent third party, with the results anonymized to encourage respondents to be candid in their assessments. I suspect that these results would create a more accurate picture of how banks are doing, and would likely underscore how much work continues to be needed to improve bank cultures. Another idea that I have discussed is the creation of a database of banker misconduct to combat the problem of “rolling bad apples.” In these cases, employees who are dismissed due to suspicion or proof of misconduct are unwittingly hired by other firms in the industry, where they have the opportunity to repeat their actions. Understandably, firms are concerned about legal risk if they share information about banker misconduct, but there may be ways to address these concerns through legislation. Once again, I invite the industry to take the initiative on these issues, and to look to the public sector for support. For their part, I believe that supervisors have a special role to play in assessing incentives at the firm level and their possible implications for bank behavior and misconduct. Supervisors can mitigate misconduct risks by supporting the development of effective corporate governance regimes, prudent risk management policies, and strong compliance and control structures—all within a framework of effective oversight from the firm's board of directors. Ultimately, establishing and maintaining an effective culture with appropriate risk governance and controls is the responsibility of individual firms and the industry, but the official sector can help by highlighting best practices and addressing collective action problems and other market failures. Areas Where Further Work on Incentives Is Warranted I would like to briefly touch on some areas where further work on incentives may be warranted, including regulatory changes that might address certain incentive and first-mover problems. At the outset, let me say that I do not have all the answers and do not mean to suggest that these are the only areas that need improvement. But, these issues are ones where more investigation into possible solutions may be warranted. As I discussed earlier, we have made substantial progress in raising banks’ capital buffers. But, I believe it would also be worthwhile to evaluate other changes to our capital regime to encourage earlier action by banks when the economic environment deteriorates. Banks are naturally reluctant to raise capital due to concerns about stigma and potential equity dilution. This hesitancy was demonstrated clearly during the financial crisis. Bank management may also delay such a move because they may be prone to over-optimism about the outlook for their firm or the economy. There is also an externality problem, as a bank does not internalize the benefit that accrues to the financial system when it takes steps to strengthen its own financial condition. Although supervisors have tools available in such circumstances, these require a safety-and-soundness basis that may not always be available in a timely manner. Changes in the 2018 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review program enable banks to avoid a Federal Reserve Board objection based on the quantitative assessment by raising new capital. While this is a step in the right direction, the current regime may not be sufficient to ensure that banks will raise capital more proactively. Compensation is also a powerful incentive. As I mentioned earlier, the emphasis in compensation practices on short-term performance over longer-term sustainable returns was a key vulnerability revealed during the crisis that helped motivate imprudent behavior. Currently, senior bankers are paid mainly in cash and deferred stock grants. This structure creates incentives to take actions to maximize a bank’s share price, rather than to minimize the risk of the bank’s failure. While compensation practices today feature a larger deferred component, greater emphasis on deferral in the form of long-term debt—which can also be recognized as TLAC—could better align senior managers’ interests with the long-term safety and soundness of the firm. 16 As I see it, this approach could have two benefits. For one, it would reduce the incentives for risk-taking. For another, if TLAC debt holdings were at risk of conversion to equity in the event of failure, I believe senior bankers would be incentivized to cut dividends or raise equity capital earlier to reduce the risk of failure. Having a regime in place that creates strong incentives for management to steer aggressively away from bad outcomes would be better than one in which management has incentives to temporize in the face of rising risks. Some banks have experimented with such compensation schemes, and I would encourage more to do so. But, this type of reform may also need a push from the regulatory side. Banks may be reluctant to adopt such pay structures on their own for competitive reasons. They may perceive that there is a first-mover disadvantage in attracting and retaining talent. Another possible reform could involve putting a greater onus on senior management for the costs incurred from regulatory fines or other legal liabilities, rather than on shareholders alone. Shareholders should not be shielded from such costs and fines—as they may have also profited from associated gains—but it doesn’t seem fair or prudent to shield the decision-makers from responsibility for costly breakdowns as much as they are now. Greater personal liability may also be a powerful incentive to promote better behavior. I suspect changes in these areas would lead senior managers to encourage their staff to speak up earlier about emerging risks, be more attentive when red flags were raised, and respond sooner and more forcefully. I would also note that the many regulatory reforms introduced over the past decade may create incentives of their own, with important implications for bank behavior. Such incentives may alter the nature and locus of risk-taking, and therefore need to be closely monitored. Risks could be shifted outside the banking system, or the incentives could lead to different bank strategies, business models, and product offerings that introduce new risks. There is a long history of such behavior. For example, off-balance-sheet instruments rose sharply in the 1980s in response to the introduction of minimum primary and total capital requirements based on balance sheet size. More recently, in some jurisdictions the use of leverage ratios based on period-end reporting of assets—as compared to period averages in the United States—has encouraged window-dressing behavior by some banks at quarter-end. So, while the reforms have mostly had the intended effect of encouraging safer institutions, authorities and financial institutions should also be mindful of potential unintended consequences. Conclusion To sum up, we have made considerable progress toward a more resilient and robust financial system. While we should do more to make the regulatory regime more efficient, transparent, and simple, there are outstanding issues that still require additional work—such as the cross-border resolution of large global banks. We should also focus more on incentives, which can help ensure that regulations are dynamic and work well, and that banks are incentivized to take action early to steer away from trouble. Finally, regulation and supervision are necessary but not sufficient—they must be supplemented by bank cultures that encourage ethical behavior, the early identification of problems, and a willingness to address those problems proactively. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Won Chai, Gerard Dages, James Hennessy, Beverly Hirtle, Thomas Noone, Kevin Stiroh, Katherine Tilghman Hill, and Emily Yang assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report (January 2011). 3 For further discussion, see remarks by Kevin J. Stiroh, A Perspective on Supervisory Objectives and Trade-offs , February 23, 2017. 4 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, The Federal Reserve System: Purposes and Functions (2018). 5 See remarks by Randal K. Quarles, Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-Crisis Regulation , January 19, 2018. See also remarks by William C. Dudley, Lessons from the Financial Crisis , November 6, 2017. 6 For further discussion, see Ashcraft and Schuermann, Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage Credit , Staff Report No. 318, March 2008. 7 See remarks by Lorie Logan, The Role of the New York Fed as Administrator and Producer of Reference Rates , January 9, 2018. See also the Alternative Reference Rates Committee . 8 See Financial Stability Board, Final Report on Foreign Exchange Benchmarks , and FX Global Code . 9 For further discussion of supervisory activities, see Eisenbach, Haughwout, Hirtle, Kovner, Lucca, and Plosser, Supervising Large, Complex Financial Institutions: What Do Supervisors Do? February 2017. For a discussion of the complementarity of supervision and regulation, see Eisenbach, Lucca, and Townsend, The Economics of Bank Supervision , Staff Report No 769, January 2017. 10 For a discussion in the context of misconduct risk, see remarks by Kevin J. Stiroh, Misconduct Risk, Culture and Supervision, December 7, 2017. See also Chaly, Hennessy, Menand, Stiroh, and Tracy, Misconduct Risk, Culture and Supervision , December 2017. 11 William C. Dudley, Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue , October 20, 2016. 12 See for exampleWilliam C. Dudley, Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services Industry , Remarks at the Workshop on Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry, October 20, 2014. William C. Dudley, op. cit. October 20, 2016. William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Culture Imperative - An Interbank Symposium , January 11, 2017. William C. Dudley, Reforming Culture for the Long Term , Remarks at the Banking Standards Board, March 21, 2017. Michael Held, Reforming Culture and Conduct in the Financial Services Industry: How Can Lawyers Help? March 8, 2017. Kevin J. Stiroh, op cit. December 7, 2017. 13 See Stiroh, op. cit. December 7, 2017 and Chaly et al op. cit. 14 Boston Consulting Group, “Staying the Course in Banking,” March 2, 2017. 15 See e.g., William C. Dudley, op cit. October 20, 2014 and William C. Dudley, op. cit. March 21, 2017. 16 For related discussion, see Mehran and Tracy, Deferred Cash Compensation: Enhancing Stability in the Financial Services Industry , August 2016, and Mehran and Tracy, Performance Bonds for Bankers: Taking Aim at Misconduct , November 9, 2016. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

Welcoming Remarks at the Community Bankers Conference - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Welcoming Remarks at the Community Bankers Conference April 18, 2018 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Community Bankers Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City As prepared for delivery Thank you for joining us today for our 16th Annual Community Bankers Conference. This is my last opportunity to address this fine group of community bank leaders in my role as president of the New York Fed. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Since becoming head of the New York Fed in 2009, I have had the opportunity to watch the evolution of community banking up close. I observed the resilience of community banks at the height of the financial crisis and how your organizations managed during those turbulent times. I also have had the privilege of meeting with many of you during my regional visits, and I remain impressed with how small banks remain important pillars of economic support for their communities. The past decade has seen significant change for your industry. There has been significant consolidation among institutions and the remaining community banks are much healthier. Back in 2009, there were 191 community banks in the Second District with an aggregate of $223 billion in total assets. In contrast, there are 135 community banks today. Despite this contraction in number, the remaining firms have continued to grow and thrive, and now have assets totaling $291 billion, which is an increase of about 30 percent. Community banks are much stronger financially today. In 2009, troubled assets were 26 percent of capital, primarily reflecting a large volume of construction lending. That ratio has declined significantly, to 8.5 percent today—demonstrating that community bank leaders have the capacity to take action, effectively work out troubled assets, and generate capital. These data tell a welcome story regarding your ability to successfully conduct business through the economic recovery. So, where does the industry go from here and what challenges lie ahead? That is the theme of today’s conference, and I expect a robust and enlightening series of discussions from both panelists and presenters. From my perspective, there are two challenges that I would highlight: ongoing advances in technology, and interest rate risk. First, major technological changes are compelling banks to embrace technology to better meet the needs of their customers. Today’s customer expects increased digital access, and a bank’s failure to advance technologically would be very damaging for its franchise value. But, the use of new technology comes with its own risks that require significant investment and attention—especially around cybersecurity. Second, in today’s low interest rate environment, we have observed that some community banks have taken on more interest rate risk by increasing the maturity of their assets and the average duration of their loan portfolios. In the last rate tightening cycle, we observed that banks with larger concentrations of long-term earning assets experienced lower margins. It will be important for community banks that are very sensitive to interest rate risk to evaluate the risk management of their loan portfolios. Finally, when I meet with community bankers, I am often asked the following question: “When will we see regulatory relief?” My simple answer is soon, I hope. There is wide ranging consensus—across party lines and among regulators, the Federal Reserve included—that we need to reform the regulatory requirements for small banks. As I have said, I favor regulatory relief for smaller banking organizations. 2 Their size and complexity do not pose a significant risk to the system, and they lack the scale to absorb large compliance and other regulatory costs. Given broad agreement on this issue, I am hopeful that relief will be forthcoming. Let me conclude by saying that we continue to recognize the important role community banks play in our economy. According to a study by our colleagues at the Kansas City Fed, the U.S. banking system is unique because of its balance between a small number of large banks and thousands of community banks. 3 That balance helps serve the needs of a large and diverse U.S. economy that includes businesses of all sizes and consumers with different needs and preferences. As the U.S. economy continues to grow and expand—as I expect it will—your personalized customer service, commitment to relationship banking, and adaptability to technological advances will serve you and your communities well. I will miss many aspects of my role at the New York Fed, particularly the opportunities I’ve had to interact with the community bankers in our district. Please enjoy today’s conference, and thank you for coming. 1 Sumeet Batra, Richard Ciccotelli, and Jacqueline Fenton assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See William C. Dudley, The Importance of Incentives in Ensuring a Resilient and Robust Financial System , March 26, 2018. 3 Keeton, William & Kahn, George A. & Schroeder, Linda & Weiner, Stuart E., 2003. "The role of community banks in the U.S. economy," Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, issue Q II, pages 15-43. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

April 18, 2018 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Lehman College, Bronx, New York As prepared for delivery It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak here today at Lehman College. In my remarks, I will focus on the economic outlook—both over the near and longer term—and I will discuss some of the important monetary policy issues that will be considered in the years ahead, after my tenure at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York is (sadly) over. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The Economic Outlook Over the near term, the economic outlook remains quite favorable. I anticipate that the economy will continue to grow at an above-trend pace in 2018 and 2019, which will put sufficient pressure on the nation’s resources to push up inflation to the FOMC’s longer-run 2 percent objective. There are several reasons to be confident in this growth outlook: Monetary policy remains accommodative, financial conditions are still easy, and the global economy is in the midst of a synchronized expansion. Moreover, significant fiscal policy stimulus from tax cuts and increased federal spending will boost real household disposable income and corporate profits, which should support further gains in consumption and capital spending. In this context, I would not take much signal from the slowdown in consumer spending in the first two months of this year. As I see it, this slowdown was mostly due to two transitory factors: a retrenchment following the spurt in activity from recovery efforts following Hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria, and the delay in this year’s tax refund payments to those receiving certain tax credits. 2 Strong payroll employment gains also suggest that the slowdown in household spending will be temporary. Over the last three months, payroll gains have climbed to a monthly pace of 202,000 jobs, somewhat above 2017’s monthly average of 182,000. Robust job gains coupled with moderate growth in labor compensation should ensure that household incomes will continue to rise at a solid rate, even before factoring in the impact of this year’s reduction in personal income taxes. With respect to inflation, most of the evidence is consistent with a slow movement toward the FOMC’s 2 percent objective. On a year-over-year basis through February, the overall Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) price index and the core PCE price index—which excludes the more volatile food and energy components—have risen by 1.8 percent and 1.6 percent, respectively, from troughs of 1.4 percent and 1.3 percent last summer. Further gains appear likely at the end of this month, when the sharp decline in cellular telephone services prices that occurred a year ago drops out of the year-over-year calculations. In the current environment, I see three important issues regarding the appropriate monetary policy stance: How quickly to remove monetary policy accommodation—is a gradual path of removal still appropriate now that the unemployment rate is 4.1 percent? How far to go in removing monetary policy accommodation—will monetary policy have to move to a somewhat restrictive setting in the years ahead? How should the FOMC factor fiscal policy and trade policy developments into its monetary policy decisions? I will take each of these in turn. As I see it, a gradual path of interest rate increases remains appropriate. Even though the unemployment rate is low, inflation remains below our 2 percent objective. As long as that is true, the case for tightening policy more aggressively does not seem compelling. My conclusion is reinforced by the fact that we do not know with much precision how low the unemployment rate can go without prompting a significant rise in inflation. We do not directly observe the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, or NAIRU. Rather, we only infer it from the response of wage compensation and price inflation as the labor market tightens. Also, the U.S. labor market may have more slack than the 4.1 percent unemployment rate suggests. Over the past six months, the unemployment rate has remained steady despite robust payroll gains. As the labor market has improved, more people have been actively seeking employment. As a result, the labor force participation rate has flattened out despite the ongoing aging of the workforce population. Furthermore, because the U.S. labor force participation rate for prime age workers is low compared to many advanced economies, the labor market could conceivably improve even further before encountering significant resource constraints. That said, the Federal Reserve should not overstay its welcome. It is important to get monetary policy back to a neutral setting before the labor market becomes so tight that wages and prices begin to rise at a pace inconsistent with the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective. Our mandate from Congress is maximum sustainable employment and price stability—not simply a high level of employment at one point of the business cycle. With respect to how far the FOMC should go in removing monetary policy accommodation, two major issues stand out. First, what represents a neutral monetary policy setting? Second, under what circumstances would it be appropriate to move beyond neutral to a restrictive setting? Unfortunately, we do not also observe the neutral real (i.e., adjusted for inflation) short-term interest rate, or r*. There is a wide range of estimates at any time, and they evolve as the economic environment changes. For example, all else equal, continued buoyant financial conditions amid recent and anticipated future rate hikes imply that r* may be higher than previously estimated. A shift to a more stimulative fiscal policy could also imply a somewhat higher r*, at least temporarily. One’s view of the neutral rate may also be influenced by one’s assessment of the longer-term economic environment. For example, if we are in a period of “secular stagnation”—characterized by chronic excess global savings and aging populations—then one would expect r* to remain persistently low. 3 But, if we are in a world of abating headwinds as we recover from the financial crisis, then one would expect r* to rise over time. This lack of clarity about the environment increases the degree of uncertainty about the level of r*. Despite all these uncertainties, one still has to have a viewpoint. In the current circumstances, I would judge that r* over the medium term is likely to be somewhere around 1 percent. Although that is higher than the estimates from some models, I have nudged up my estimate because financial conditions are still easy and fiscal policy will likely be quite stimulative in 2018 and 2019. 4 If the neutral real interest rate is around 1 percent, there is still some distance to go before monetary policy actually gets tight. At the FOMC’s 2 percent inflation objective, my estimate of r* implies that the federal funds rate would need to rise to around 3 percent for monetary policy to be considered neutral. Of course, as the factors that influence r* change, my estimate of r* will also move around over time. Whether monetary policy will need to move to a restrictive setting depends crucially on how low the unemployment rate can go without inflation climbing meaningfully above 2 percent. Although the jury is still out on this question, last month’s Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP, is instructive. 5 Most FOMC participants—including me—have the unemployment rate moving considerably below their estimate of NAIRU by 2020, with inflation climbing slightly above 2 percent and the federal funds rate moving above their estimates of its likely long-run value. Thus, the March SEP implies that most FOMC participants expect that monetary policy will need to become slightly restrictive in the years ahead. Recent fiscal and trade policy developments are likely to increase the uncertainty around the distance to a neutral monetary policy stance and the possibility that the FOMC will have to move to a restrictive stance. The shift in fiscal policy toward stimulus is somewhat challenging because of its timing—it is unusual to move fiscal policy sharply in a stimulative direction at a mature stage of a business cycle—and because the shift puts the nation’s fiscal path on an unsustainable trajectory. According to the projections released earlier this month from the Congressional Budget Office, or CBO, the federal budget deficit is anticipated to exceed 4½ percent of GDP in 2019, well above the level that would be needed to keep the federal debt-to-GDP ratio from rising. 6 Moreover, the CBO expects that the pressures on the budget will be substantial over the next decade, with deficit projections ranging between 4½ and 5½ percent of GDP throughout the period. Debt service costs will move sharply upward in coming years as federal debt continues to grow and interest rates likely increase further. Additionally, entitlement spending is likely to increase sharply as members of the baby boom generation continue to retire—myself included. 7 The shift toward a more aggressive U.S. posture on trade also likely increases uncertainty. On the one hand, such a posture could lead to revised trade agreements that provide the United States with greater access to foreign markets and better protection of intellectual property. This would tend to raise U.S. productivity and real GDP growth. On the other hand, tougher bargaining could lead to retaliation and higher trade barriers, here and abroad. In contrast to the first scenario, this outcome would be quite negative—leading to higher inflation, lower productivity, and slower potential GDP growth. 8 Over time, how U.S. trade policy evolves will have important implications for the performance of the U.S. economy—and, by extension, for U.S. monetary policy. By increasing uncertainty around the economic outlook, these shifts in fiscal and trade policy could make it more difficult for the FOMC to achieve its dual mandate objectives in the years ahead. Longer-term Monetary Policy Issues Over the longer term, the FOMC will also need to address a number of other important issues. These include: 1) Determining the appropriate long-term implementation framework for U.S. monetary policy, and 2) deciding whether the strategic framework underlying monetary policy decisions needs to be adjusted to mitigate the risks associated with getting pinned at the effective lower bound for short-term interest rates. 9 For the first issue, I see two options: return to the “corridor”-type system that was in place prior to the financial crisis, or remain with the framework that has been in place since the crisis—namely, a “floor” system. In a corridor system, reserves in the banking system are scarce, and the federal funds rate is set by adjusting the supply of reserves through open market operations to balance demand and supply at the FOMC’s target range. In contrast, in a floor system, reserves are abundant, so that the interest rate the Federal Reserve pays on excess reserves, or IOER, is the primary tool used to control the federal funds rate. In my view, the case for retaining the current floor system is very compelling for a number of reasons. First, it is operationally much less complex than a corridor system. In the current regime, the setting of IOER is largely sufficient to maintain the federal funds rate within the FOMC’s target range, as we have seen over the past few years. 10 In contrast, a corridor system requires forecasting the many exogenous factors that affect the amount of bank reserves outstanding, and then engaging in open market operations on a near daily basis to keep reserves at a level consistent with the FOMC’s target range. 11 This task would likely be more difficult now because of greater fluctuation in these exogenous factors relative to when the corridor regime was last in place. Second, a corridor system constrains the Federal Reserve’s ability to provide the types of lender-of-last-resort backstops that can help support financial stability. Prior to gaining the authority to pay interest on reserves in the fall of 2008, Federal Reserve officials—myself included—were faced with a question: if the take-down on a proposed liquidity facility were large, how would we be able to drain the added reserves on a timely basis to maintain control of the federal funds rate? This was not just a theoretical issue during the financial crisis. The initial auctions of the Term Auction Facility, or TAF, were kept relatively small, in part, because of concerns that larger programs would make it more difficult for the manager of the System Open Market Account (me, in that particular case) to drain sufficient reserves to offset the TAF reserve additions. Similarly, the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF)—which involved the swap of Treasury collateral from the Federal Reserve against lower-quality collateral held by primary dealers—was introduced in large part because collateral swaps, unlike cash loans, did not affect the amount of reserves in the banking system. My overall point is that broad-based, open-ended lender-of-last-resort facilities are more difficult to accommodate in a corridor system because of the need to drain any reserve additions to keep the federal funds rate close to the FOMC’s target. I see this as an important shortcoming of the pre-crisis corridor regime that does not get sufficient attention. Having the ability to introduce broad and credible lender-of-last-resort backstops—well secured by pledged collateral—can be critical when confidence falters and financial stability is at risk. Private sector participants are more likely to continue to engage with their counterparties—and to borrow and lend—when they know a central bank backstop will be available if economic and financial conditions deteriorate. A corridor regime could cause the Federal Reserve to delay or avoid providing such backstops, which could increase financial stability risks by causing lenders and borrowers to disengage with one another earlier. 12 Although the FOMC has not made a final decision about a future framework for implementing monetary policy, meeting minutes confirm that participants recognize the advantages of a floor system. As the November 2016 FOMC minutes note: “Meeting participants commented on the advantages of using an approach to policy implementation in which active management of the supply of reserves would not be required….[S]uch an approach was seen as likely to be relatively simple and efficient to administer, relatively straightforward to communicate, and effective in enabling interest rate control across a wide range of circumstances.” 13 The second major issue facing the FOMC is whether to change its strategic framework to mitigate the risk of a return to the effective lower bound for interest rates. Once the federal funds rate is close to zero, the FOMC is constrained in its ability to lower short-term interest rates further, and the other available policy options to provide monetary policy stimulus may be less effective. If the FOMC were unable to provide sufficient stimulus, the economy could have difficulty recovering. In turn, inflation and inflation expectations could fall—and thus raise real interest rates—effectively tightening monetary policy and making the task of generating a sustainable recovery even more difficult. Some have argued that a desirable way to reduce this risk would be to raise the FOMC’s inflation objective from 2 percent to perhaps 3 or 4 percent. Their reasoning is that if the inflation objective were somewhat higher, nominal interest rates at the later stages of the business cycle would also tend to be higher, which would provide greater scope for the FOMC to cut short-term interest rates to stimulate the economy, if necessary. While recognizing that there is a legitimate effective lower bound risk, I do not support the option of raising the inflation objective, for three reasons. First, I doubt that a higher inflation target would be viewed as consistent with the Federal Reserve’s Congressional mandate to pursue price stability. Our employment and inflation mandates have been established by Congress, not by the Federal Reserve. Second, the risks of being pinned at the effective lower bound for interest rates may be overstated. Only once in the postwar period have we reached the zero lower bound. Upending several decades of effort to anchor inflation expectations around 2 percent might be too high a price to pay to reduce the effective lower bound risk by what might prove to be a small amount. In this vein, it is important to recognize that the FOMC now has a more credible set of tools available to use at the effective lower bound than it did in 2008, when those tools were largely unproven. Forward guidance about the path of short-term interest rates and quantitative easing have been effective in providing monetary policy stimulus in the post-crisis period. Because this is now more broadly appreciated, households and businesses should be more confident that the Federal Reserve has sufficient tools available at the effective lower bound to generate a sustainable economic recovery. This greater confidence, in turn, should help keep inflation expectations from declining—which should also mitigate the risks associated with hitting the lower bound. Third, there are arguably better ways of reducing risks associated with the effective lower bound than a higher inflation objective. In particular, Congress could increase the size and scope of the automatic fiscal stabilizers that support economic activity and income during economic downturns. For example, Congress could enact legislation in which employment payroll taxes would be automatically reduced when the unemployment rate rose above a particular threshold. With such stabilizers in place, households and businesses would anticipate additional income support in the face of a cyclical downturn. This approach would be more powerful than discretionary fiscal actions that carry a greater degree of uncertainty. Another option to help better anchor inflation expectations around the current objective would be to move to a price-level targeting, or PLT, regime. Under the current inflation targeting regime, the FOMC follows a “bygones are bygones” policy: Misses of the inflation objective on one side are not deliberately offset by subsequent misses on the other. Therefore, when inflation runs persistently below the objective, policymakers do not strive to push inflation above the objective in the future. Under these conditions, the risk is that inflation expectations will become unanchored to the downside. In contrast, under a price-level targeting regime, the FOMC would commit to make up any shortfalls below its 2 percent objective by allowing inflation to climb above the objective for the time necessary to eliminate the shortfall. This commitment to offsetting the period of below-target inflation with a period of above-target inflation would, presumably, help keep inflation expectations from becoming unanchored to the downside. However, a symmetric PLT regime—in which misses have to be made up on both sides of the inflation objective—has an important shortcoming. Compensating for inflation overshoots by deliberately keeping inflation below the FOMC’s 2 percent objective would increase the risk of getting pinned at the effective lower bound for interest rates. As a consequence, some—including former Chairman Ben Bernanke—have proposed adopting an asymmetric PLT regime. In such a system, misses below the objective would be offset by misses above only when the effective lower bound was binding. Under normal circumstances, misses above the objective would not be offset. Rather, they would be treated as “bygones,” as is currently the case. 14 However, I suspect that establishing a modified PLT regime would present some challenges. First, for such a modified PLT to be effective in anchoring inflation expectations, households and businesses would have to understand how the regime would work, and view the Federal Reserve’s commitment as credible. One can imagine that such credibility might be hard to sustain during a long spell of inflation misses to the downside. Second, while such a regime might be attractive in broad brush form, the devil lies in the details. If inflation undershot for a few years, what would the desired overshoot path look like? How high would the FOMC permit inflation to go above its objective, and for how long? What would happen if the Fed failed to fully offset past downside misses and cumulative undershoots became sizable? My view is that we should further study how PLT frameworks might work in practice. 15 But, it is possible that a simpler approach of committing to keeping the average inflation rate around 2 percent over the medium term might be just as appealing. It might be sufficient to better anchor inflation expectations while avoiding the communication challenges and complexity of an asymmetric PLT regime. In this vein, I also would evaluate whether the inflation goal should be recast as a range of, perhaps, 1½ to 2½ percent, from the current 2 percent objective. A range might have several advantages over a point target. First, it might be viewed as more realistic given that measured inflation will always randomly fluctuate relative to its underlying trend. That is to say, even if the FOMC performs its job exceedingly well, very rarely will the inflation rate, as measured by the PCE price index, be precisely at 2 percent. Second, having a relatively narrow range would send a message that the FOMC is discriminating between two regimes—one in which inflation is within the range and concerns about inflation are low, versus another in which inflation is outside the range and concerns about inflation are more elevated. Even so, I would not recommend shifting to such a range currently. I would only consider doing so once the FOMC has successfully and sustainably pushed inflation back to its 2 percent objective. Making such a change now might be viewed as “moving the goal posts,” given the persistent shortfall of inflation in recent years relative to the objective. And, doing so now might imply a greater tolerance for missing inflation to the low side in an asymmetric way. That would not be desirable at a time when inflation expectations are, if anything, too low, rather than too high relative to the FOMC’s objective. To sum up, the economy is broadly in a good place and the short-term economic outlook remains favorable. On a personal level, I am pleased that I will be leaving my current position at a time when the FOMC is likely to be very close to its employment and inflation objectives—recognizing, of course, the terrible damage of the financial crisis and the long time it has taken to get here. Uncertainty about trade policy and the fact that we are now on an unsustainable fiscal path, however, have raised the longer-term risks. With respect to monetary policy, there are a number of important choices the FOMC will need to make in the years ahead. I have outlined some of my preferences today: continuing with the current floor system for the implementation of monetary policy, and some of the steps that we could take to reduce the risk should interest rates return to the effective lower bound in the future. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 Gerard Dages, Jonathan McCarthy, and Paolo Pesenti assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 Specifically, the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Additional Child Tax Credit. 3 See, for example, Lawrence Summers, U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound . 4 See, for example, some estimates based on the frequently-cited Laubach and Williams model. See Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams (2003), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest,” Review of Economics and Statistics , v. 85, iss. 4, pp. 1063-70; Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams (2016), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest Redux,” Business Economics , v. 51, iss. 2, pp. 57-67; and Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach and John C. Williams (2017), “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants,” Journal of International Economics , Supplement 1, v. 108, pp. S59-75. 5 See Economic projections of Federal Reserve Board members and Federal Reserve Bank presidents under their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy, March 2018 . 6 See Congressional Budget Office (2018), The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2018 to 2028 , April 9, 2018. 7 See also William C. Dudley, The Outlook for the U.S. Economy and Beyond , January 11, 2018. 8 For a further discussion, see William C. Dudley, Making Globalization Work , March 1, 2018. 9 The costs of holding cash make possible the use of (slightly) negative interest rates—employed by some countries outside the U.S. in recent years—as a result, the term “effective lower bound” is used here. 10 Control of the federal funds rate has also been supported by the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility, which accepts cash from an array of institutional investors at a rate 25 basis points below the interest rate paid on excess reserves. 11 These exogenous factors include the U.S. Treasury’s cash balance at the Federal Reserve, the foreign central bank repo pool, the overnight reverse repo facility, and currency outstanding. 12 Because the amount of reserves in a floor system is greater than in a corridor system, this also can be helpful in easing frictions in terms of payment flows. With large reserve balances, banks have higher cash balances at the Fed. As a result, they are less likely to incur daylight overdrafts and, thus, they have less need to monitor, and, at times, delay outgoing payments. 13 See Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, November 1–2, 2016 . 14 See Ben Bernanke, Monetary Policy in a New Era , Brookings Institution, October 2, 2017. 15 Others have proposed adopting a nominal GDP targeting regime, which has its own strengths and weaknesses, but it is not considered here for the sake of brevity. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

May 24, 2018 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at Bank of England’s Markets Forum 2018, London, England As prepared for delivery Thank you, Mark, and thanks to the Bank of England for the opportunity to talk about the important issue of reference rates. I will focus my remarks today on reference rate reform in the United States—where we have been, where we are, and where we are headed. In short, I will argue that while much has already been accomplished, we still have a lot more to do—and it must happen within a compressed time frame. This is an important point that Andrew Bailey usefully underscored for us last year. Because of the great uncertainty over LIBOR’s future and the risks to financial stability that would likely accompany a disorderly transition to alternative reference rates, we need aggressive action to move to a more durable and resilient benchmark regime. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 1 LIBOR Scandal Demonstrated the Imperative for Reform Although the backdrop to current reference rate reform efforts is well known here, some historical context is useful when considering the issues facing us today. That history highlights why alternatives to LIBOR are needed. It also illustrates the importance of continuing to focus on bank culture and proper incentives in order to support financial stability over the longer term. At its core, the problem we face today is that the financial system has built a tremendously large edifice on a structurally impaired foundation. While many in the industry cannot recall a time when LIBOR did not exist, in fact, it was only developed in the 1980s. Since then, the use of LIBOR as a reference rate has exploded—with the size of financial contracts referencing U.S.-dollar LIBOR today estimated at close to $200 trillion. 2 The vast majority of these exposures are derivative obligations, such as interest rate swaps. But, that tally also includes trillions of dollars of cash products, such as residential and commercial mortgages, corporate bonds and loans, and securitized products. And, with new contracts referencing LIBOR still being written, this balance continues to grow significantly. Broadly speaking, reference rates are vital to efficient market functioning. They facilitate trading in standardized contracts, which lowers transaction costs and increases market liquidity. Robust reference rates can also reduce information asymmetries and the risk of misconduct by providing transparent, independent pricing. But, in the case of LIBOR, the foundation had serious flaws. Most notably, LIBOR was (and is) based on submissions from individual banks—which, in turn, were based on hypothetical borrowing rates or expert judgments, and not actual transactions. Moreover, deficiencies existed in regulatory oversight and governance of the rate-setting mechanism. These vulnerabilities enabled the manipulation of the rate for the financial benefit of individuals and institutions. Amid profound breakdowns in controls and compliance, individual traders conspired with rate submitters at their own institutions or traders at other firms to manipulate the setting of the rate to improve their trading results. During the global financial crisis, panel banks also reportedly submitted lower borrowing rates than they could actually obtain in the marketplace. They did so to disguise their financial fragility at a time when uncertainty over bank liquidity and solvency was high. 3 The resulting scandal was particularly disturbing because of its scale and flagrancy, including collusion by employees across firms. It led to billions of dollars in fines, jail terms for some individuals, and severe reputational damage to the financial industry as a whole. The global financial crisis exposed excessive risk-taking and a long series of lapses in judgment, and the LIBOR scandal further undermined trust in the ethical standards of the banking industry. The scandal provides many cautionary lessons, including the ways in which poor technical design can be exploited, the limitations of self-regulation, the problems that arise when loyalty is to one’s trading co-conspirators rather than to one’s institution, and the need for robust controls. It also underscores the power of incentives to drive individuals and firms to do things that are imprudent and/or unethical. 4 And, the governance and control framework that the banks and the LIBOR administrator had in place proved woefully insufficient to prevent misconduct that stemmed from poor incentives. In this context, one could say it was a situation ripe for exploitation. The openness and brazenness of misconduct as captured in the recorded transcripts also point to serious deficiencies in bank culture. My New York Fed colleagues and I have commented frequently on the need for sound culture and incentives as a complement to effective regulation and supervision. While there has been some progress on this issue in recent years, the LIBOR and other rate-rigging scandals—not to mention more recent breakdowns at individual banks—point to the need for further strengthening of bank culture. 5 I look forward to the discussion with Minouche and Andrew on improving culture in the fixed income, currency, and commodity markets in the following panel. One of the key lessons from the financial crisis was that critical pieces of financial system infrastructure must be both strong and resilient, and the LIBOR scandal underscored this need. 6 The essential problem with LIBOR is the inherent fragility of its “inverted pyramid,” where the pricing of hundreds of trillions of dollars of financial instruments rests on the expert judgment of relatively few individuals, informed by a very small base of unsecured interbank transactions. Moreover, that base has contracted further in recent years, due to many factors, including regulatory reform and the quantitative easing programs initiated by central banks in many of the major advanced economies. Relative to the vast sums of U.S.-dollar LIBOR contracts I mentioned earlier, the median daily volume of unsecured three-month U.S.-dollar wholesale borrowing is minuscule, at around $1 billion, and many days see less than $500 million in volume. 7 This lack of market liquidity means that these rates cannot be sufficiently transaction-based to be truly representative, and rates that are not transaction-based are more at risk to be manipulated. So, despite efforts to improve LIBOR in recent years—and there undoubtedly have been important changes that have strengthened its administration and governance—the lack of underlying market liquidity for nearly all currencies and maturities remains a problem, and there is no obvious solution. 8 The setting of LIBOR still depends heavily on expert judgment. Even for U.S.-dollar LIBOR, actual transactions are the basis for only about one-third of the rate submissions for tenors of one and three months. This is noteworthy because these are the maturities that are referenced by the bulk of financial contracts. 9 In light of the history of LIBOR—and in the context of more than $320 billion in overall misconduct fines since the crisis—banks are naturally reluctant to assume the legal risks associated with submitting quotes based on very shallow markets. 10 Indeed, that is why some banks have left individual LIBOR panels in recent years. 11 Andrew Bailey drove home this point in his July 2017 speech. He explained that the Financial Conduct Authority had to press hard to persuade banks to remain on the panels and voluntarily submit LIBOR quotes through the end of 2021. 12 LIBOR’s potential cessation after 2021 poses a clear risk to financial stability, and prudent risk management means that all of us must prepare for a world without LIBOR. The Official Sector Response In recent years, international and domestic authorities alike have actively worked with the private sector to address LIBOR’s shortcomings and to find alternative rates. One notable development has been the publication of an international set of principles for financial benchmarks, developed by the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) in 2013. 13 These principles—which include 19 specific standards across governance, benchmark quality, methodology, and accountability—have emerged as the international standard. IOSCO has rightly focused on tying benchmarks more closely to observable, arms-length transactions. This represents an important step toward eliminating excessive reliance on expert judgment. The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has been a galvanizing force at the international level. The FSB and its members have published proposals, plans, and timelines for reference rate reform and have promoted the strengthening of the major interest rate benchmarks. The FSB has been carrying out work on the development and introduction of alternative benchmarks, developing a plan to accomplish a transition to new benchmarks, encouraging work by the private sector on contract robustness, and reporting regularly on the progress made. 14 The Federal Reserve has played a lead role in the development of these recommendations as applied to U.S.-dollar LIBOR, working closely with the other major financial regulatory agencies in the United States. This effort has also involved coordinating with the official sector sponsors of similar efforts around the world. 15 In late 2014, in response to FSB and Financial Stability Oversight Council recommendations, the Federal Reserve convened the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC)—a group of market participants established to identify more robust alternative U.S.-dollar reference rates that are risk-free or nearly risk-free, fit the needs of the derivatives market, and are compliant with IOSCO principles. 16 This effort paralleled similar ones in other jurisdictions to find reference rates that are well-suited to local conditions and market needs—including the UK’s Working Group on Sterling Risk-Free Reference Rates. The ARRC was also tasked with developing a transition plan to facilitate the adoption of these rates in a voluntary and orderly manner, and with considering best practices in contract design to prepare for the possibility that LIBOR ceases to be published. Publication of Alternative Reference Rates by the Federal Reserve The ARRC has made important progress in achieving its mandate. Notably, in June 2017, it selected the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR, as its preferred alternative to U.S.-dollar LIBOR. SOFR is a broad measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight using U.S. Treasury securities as collateral, and is thus relevant to a wide range of market participants. The rate is entirely transaction-based, and the underlying market is robust, with current daily volume of more than $700 billion. (By comparison, unsecured three-month U.S.-dollar wholesale borrowing totals roughly $1 billion per day, as I mentioned earlier.) SOFR moves closely with LIBOR and other money market rates over time, and because it covers multiple segments of the repo market, it provides scope for future market evolution. 17 Besides being more resistant to manipulation, this nearly risk-free rate should also prove much more resilient during periods of financial stress, because the U.S. Treasury repo market is likely to remain deep and active during such episodes. The New York Fed administers and produces SOFR in cooperation with the Office of Financial Research. We began publishing this rate on April 3 of this year, along with two other repo rates: the Tri-Party General Collateral Rate and the Broad General Collateral Rate. 18 This work complements steps by the Federal Reserve to promote greater transparency in rates in unsecured markets through enhancements to the calculation of the effective federal funds rate (EFFR) and the launching of an entirely new rate, the overnight bank funding rate (OBFR). 19 I have long been a proponent of the idea that central banks are well suited to take on this responsibility. Reference rates have strong public good properties, and the private sector faces notable coordination challenges in this area. Central banks have a long history in producing such measures—recognizing that traditionally this has been for purposes related to monetary policy—and are trusted independent parties. In my view, central banks also ultimately “own” the financial stability risks that are present when key reference rates are flawed. Better to recognize this responsibility and move proactively to mitigate such risks than to step aside and hope that someone else will take up the mantle of reform. The Federal Reserve has designed these benchmarks to be compliant with IOSCO principles, with regular review by oversight bodies and comprehensive ethics and conflict-of-interest policies for staff. 20 Best practice also dictates that administrators periodically review the rates they produce to assess whether changes in the underlying markets require changes in how those rates are administered. We have dedicated significant resources to these efforts, and are committed to the continued production of rates so that market participants can have confidence about their long-term viability. For these reasons, the Federal Reserve concurs with the ARRC that SOFR represents a compelling alternative to U.S.-dollar LIBOR—particularly for most derivatives transactions, where a near risk-free rate is more appropriate than a rate that incorporates a bank credit risk premium. Nevertheless, market adoption of SOFR faces its own challenges, such as the development of sufficient liquidity in derivatives that reference SOFR, and the establishment of a term reference rate, which I will discuss in a moment. These elements will have to be built over time. The ARRC’s Paced Transition Plan lays out a timeline for the milestones that must reached over the coming quarters and years for a successful transition. 21 I am confident that the ARRC will succeed, but it will take considerable attention and effort. Progress is already evident. The Chicago Mercantile Exchange began offering SOFR futures contracts earlier this month, and trading activity has gotten off to a good start. Development of SOFR derivatives, in turn, will support the creation of a term reference rate. Although the ARRC’s transition plan anticipates that this will be completed by the end of 2021, it would be better for this to occur more expeditiously. The good news is that is broadly appreciated. In this vein, the Committee’s second report discussed some of the term rate alternatives, and development of proposals for a term reference rate was recently added to its mandate. In this regard, I would also encourage market participants, academics, and other interested parties to contribute to the effort to develop a term reference rate. Another key area of focus—further motivated by Andrew’s warning—is the development of fallback contract language in the event that LIBOR ceases to be published. The absence of such language creates the potential for large-scale disorder in global financial markets should LIBOR go away. Put simply, this is an unacceptable risk. The International Swap Dealers Association (ISDA) has been working on this issue for the derivatives market and is expected to issue a consultative document soon that should prove instrumental in making further progress. The ARRC has also been coordinating a similar effort across cash products of all types. The goal is to achieve consensus on a consistent approach across markets whenever feasible. Looking Ahead As I have noted previously, LIBOR continues to have significant shortcomings despite strengthened governance in recent years, and uncertainty about its future will only grow over time. This uncertainty reflects the limited liquidity underlying LIBOR and the corresponding legal risks I discussed earlier. But, I am also skeptical about whether LIBOR can ever be adequately transaction-based. As Andrew highlighted, there is no guarantee that LIBOR will continue to exist beyond December 2021. In my view, LIBOR is likely to go away—and it should, because it is not supported by a sufficiently robust regime. The LIBOR countdown clock should provide an impetus for action, but it should also make market participants and regulators increasingly nervous as we approach the deadline—especially if longer-term solutions are not in train or in place. Time is of the essence, and we must manage it well. The ARRC and others have laid out valuable transition plans, and we need to ensure that they are executed expeditiously and well. Of course, I do not mean to minimize the costs involved. This is a monumental and complicated effort—one that the industry has never undertaken—and it will entail overcoming many obstacles. It requires collective action by a wide variety of market participants, some of whom may not be fully convinced of the need for change. And, there may be others with a direct interest in the preservation of LIBOR—such as its administrator—who may not support moving away from the status quo. There also undoubtedly will be those who seek a free ride on the efforts of others. And, of course, the effort will encounter inertia and wishful thinking. All of this is to be expected in such a large undertaking with significant upfront costs. Nevertheless, delay is not a viable option. This task is borne out of necessity. Financial crises typically result when we fail to identify vulnerabilities, and then unexpected triggers turn those vulnerabilities into points of weakness that can lead to catastrophic failure. The discontinuation of LIBOR, however, is different. We can see it coming, and we know the impact of a disorderly transition would be huge. Therefore, a half-hearted effort or a failure to act would be inexcusable, especially after all we have learned from the experience of the financial crisis. Moving this core piece of the global financial system to a firm and durable foundation is essential and worth the cost. This task is admittedly hard, but I am optimistic given our past successes. We have demonstrated that effective collective action can provide solutions to longstanding structural vulnerabilities in the financial system. A key lesson from the crisis is that structural vulnerabilities must be addressed continually. If they are ignored, larger problems eventually will result. For example, through collective action over the past decade, we have successfully addressed structural weaknesses in the tri-party repo market, the over-the-counter derivatives market, and money market mutual funds. Each of these challenges required a tailored solution that relied on different tools—including a diverse mix of market, regulatory and supervisory measures—to get the job done. Everything isn’t a nail, and the best tool is not always a hammer. You have to identify the problem that needs fixing and select the right tool for the job. This is likely to require both official sector engagement and private sector initiative. In the case of LIBOR, the official sector has taken a multi-pronged approach: strengthening the LIBOR regime, developing reference rate principles, using its convening authority to marshal private sector participation, supplying robust alternative reference rates, and using the bully pulpit to educate and spur action. International coordination has featured strongly in these efforts, and should continue to do so. This approach has achieved a great deal to date, but, in light of the risks and potential implications, will it be sufficient? The transition away from LIBOR represents a significant risk event for firms of all sizes, and they should actively manage this transition through their existing frameworks for identification, management, and mitigation of risk. Supervisors should continue to support this objective by ensuring that all firms are aware of the transition and that LIBOR-related issues are being addressed in a way that is commensurate with a firm’s exposures and risks. More broadly, the official sector will continue to push market participants to take all necessary steps to mitigate the risks to financial stability from a disorderly transition. In closing, the LIBOR scandal certainly was one low point among many during the financial crisis and its aftermath. It highlighted the need for reform of a critical area of the global financial system. We have made considerable progress since then, but reform still has a long way to go. The remaining work, by necessity, will involve purposeful collective action and engagement across the financial industry to address market-wide issues. It also will require firm-specific action to manage individual risks. The challenge is that the window for action is narrowing. Therefore, we must redouble our efforts to ensure a successful transition from LIBOR to a more sound and durable regime. Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 1 James Bergin, Raymond Check, Caren Cox, Gerard Dages, Joshua Frost, Matthew Lieber, William Riordan, and Kevin Stiroh assisted in preparing these remarks. 2 See Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Second Report , March 2018 3 See remarks by William C. Dudley, Restoring Confidence in Reference Rates , October 2, 2014 4 See remarks by William C. Dudley, The Importance of Incentives in Ensuring a Resilient and Robust Financial System , March 26, 2018 5 See, for example: William C. Dudley, Enhancing Financial Stability by Improving Culture in the Financial Services Industry , October 20, 2014 William C. Dudley, Opening Remarks at Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue , October 20, 2016 William C. Dudley, Remarks at the Culture Imperative – An Interbank Symposium , January 11, 2017 William C. Dudley, Reforming Culture for the Long Term , March 21, 2017 Michael Held, Reforming Culture and Conduct in the Financial Services Industry: How Can Lawyers Help? , March 8, 2017 Kevin J. Stiroh, Misconduct Risk, Culture and Supervision , December 7, 2017 6 See remarks by William C. Dudley, Lessons from the Financial Crisis , November 6, 2017 7 See Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Second Report , March 2018 8 The U.K. Wheatley Review led to changes in many areas of LIBOR, including statutory regulation of LIBOR, selection of a new administrator, new governance and oversight regimes, and a code of conduct for submitters. See The Wheatley Review of LIBOR: Final Report 9 See ICE LIBOR Quarterly Volume Report - Q1 2018 10 See Boston Consulting Group, Staying the Course in Banking , March 2, 2017 11 See FCA statement on LIBOR panels , November 24, 2017 12 See Andrew Bailey, The Future of LIBOR , July 27, 2017 13 See The Board of the International Organization of Securities Commissions, Principles for Financial Benchmarks: Final Report , July 2013 14 See the Financial Stability Board’s publications on financial benchmarks 15 See Remarks by Jerome H. Powell at the ARRC , November 2, 2017 16 The membership also includes the major financial regulatory agencies in the U.S. on an ex officio basis. See the Alternative Reference Rates Committee 17 See Presentation by Joshua Frost at the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Roundtable , Introducing the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), November 2, 2017 18 See Secured Overnight Financing Rate Data 19 For more discussion, see Remarks by Lorie K. Logan, The Role of the New York Fed as Administrator and Producer of Reference Rates , January 9, 2018 20 Because the New York Fed is a component of the Federal Reserve System and produces its benchmark rates for public policy purposes, the rates are not within the scope of the IOSCO principles. However, as a matter of policy, the New York Fed is committed to administering benchmarks in a manner consistent with the principles. See Statement of Compliance with the IOSCO Principles for Financial Benchmarks , January 18, 2018 21 See Alternative Reference Rates Committee, Second Report , March 2018 By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
