Chairman Jerome H. Powell At Conversation with the Chairman: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting, Washington, D.C. Share Watch Live Thank you to all the educators who are here with us in Washington or are joining us online. I look forward to responding to your questions. But first, I have a few thoughts about the vital work you do as economics educators and its connection to what the Federal Reserve is trying to accomplish. I promise to be brief, because it is a school night. I am here today, and the Fed has organized this event, because of the importance of economics education. Some of your students may go on to become professional economists, but all of them, I hope, will apply the valuable lessons and the skills they have gained from economics in other careers and in others aspects of their lives. Studying economics can benefit students in multiple ways. The lessons of economics are valuable in a wide variety of vocations. Moreover, the knowledge gained will empower students as consumers, managers of their own finances, and as informed citizens. Economics has been consistently useful to me over my career in law, finance, and government service. It is, of course, central to my current role as a monetary policymaker and financial regulator. In government, economic analysis is one of the principal tools we use in making policy decisions. Among other things, economics is an essential facet of the science of public policy. What policies actually work? Which ones sound good but don't work, or are actually counter-productive? Economics gives us the tools to answer those questions and help us make the best the decisions on behalf of the public. Of course, economics is not only the basis for judgments and decisions made by the Fed and other government agencies. It also underpins the countless decisions by consumers, businesses, and investors that drive economic activity. The concepts you teach and apply in the classroom guide those decisions and even help explain human behavior outside of the workings of the economy. For example, to continue to grow and succeed, any business owner should understand the differences between fixed cost, variable cost, average cost, and marginal cost. Businesses and investors need to understand present or discounted value, but so should any parent or grandparent starting a college fund. Economics teaches us about the power of incentives, which are central to thinking about and understanding regulatory and tax policy. But incentives also help motivate people in a variety of other settings, such as encouraging students to do their best in school, helping reduce traffic jams, or even nudging someone to save more or to exercise regularly. Economics is a practical and powerful tool for understanding how we relate to each other. And that's why what you do for your students is so important. Like all teachers, you are helping prepare them for success in life. The knowledge you impart and the intellect and talents you help develop are tools that your students can use to achieve that success. Economics teaches analytical and critical thinking skills useful to anyone. Part of your students' success is their economic success as capable, creative, and productive members of the workforce and as consumers adept at managing their finances. Your students benefit from this education, but so does everyone else in society. We all benefit when better-educated citizens support economic policies that help our nation prosper. We all benefit from the capability, creativity, and productivity of our workforce, because nothing is more important to a healthy and growing economy. Responsible consumers skilled in managing their finances are better prepared to weather bad times, and stronger household finances overall can help sustain economic growth and mitigate a downturn. Stabilizing growth and mitigating a downturn, of course, are aspects of the Federal Reserve's mission. Monetary policy can be a powerful tool to achieve these ends, but, in truth, its powers are dwarfed by larger forces, such as the productivity of the American people and the strength of their finances. By educating students and supporting their future contributions to the economy as workers and consumers, all teachers, especially economics teachers, are furthering our goals at the Fed, so let me offer my further thanks for making our job easier. To help support your work as teachers, the Federal Reserve Board and the 12 Reserve Banks conduct programs, organize events, and publish books to spread knowledge of economics, financial literacy, and the role of the Fed in promoting a healthy economy and financial system. You can find some of those resources at our websites: FederalReserve.gov and FederalReserveEducation.org. Each of the Reserve Banks has community outreach and educational initiatives, and the outreach to economics teachers is coordinated by the System Economic Education Group, which has been chaired by Princeton Williams. At the Board of Governors, for some years we have operated a program called FedEd, which sends Board employees into high schools throughout the Washington, D.C., area. This outreach depends on several dozen volunteers from our staff--typically, recent college graduates--who help teach about the Fed, economics and finance, and answer questions about work opportunities at the Board. The Federal Reserve is dedicated to promoting diversity in our ranks and in the economics profession, and FedEd and other programs across the Federal Reserve System have helped advance this goal by reaching many schools with significant numbers of minority students. Let me leave it there, and again thank you for participating in this town hall, and thank you for the valuable work you do every school day. Related Content Conversation with the Chairman: A Teacher Town Hall Meeting Last Update: February 06, 2019 Back to Top

Chairman Jerome H. Powell At “Rural Places, Rural Spaces: Closing Financial Services Gaps in Persistent Poverty America,” a policy forum sponsored by Hope Enterprise Corporation, Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi Share Watch Live Thank you for that kind introduction. I also want to thank Hope Enterprise Corporation for inviting me to speak and Mississippi Valley State University (MVSU) for hosting us on its lovely campus. It is a great pleasure to visit the Mississippi Delta. This region gave America the priceless musical heritage of the Blues. It was also the site of some of the watershed events of the civil rights movement. But the Delta, like many rural areas, has long confronted the challenge of poverty. Today I'll speak about three areas of opportunity for addressing the challenges of rural poverty‑‑education and workforce development, entrepreneurship and small business development, as well as access to financial services--the topic of this conference. MVSU's mission, providing young people an affordable college education, is itself a very powerful antipoverty program‑‑for its graduates, of course, but also for other communities that are touched by the university. MVSU opened its doors in 1950 as Mississippi Vocational College. The vocation of every member of its first class of 200 students was teaching. And even as it added other programs and became a full-fledged university, MVSU has continued to train many of the teachers who enrich, inspire, and spark the imagination of children who grow up in the Delta. MVSU and other historically black colleges and universities, or HBCUs, play a crucial role in their communities. For much of the 20th century, HBCUs were the primary means for black men and women to obtain the education needed for middle class or professional jobs. Larger percentages of HBCU students, compared with students at predominantly white institutions, come from lower-income families and are the first in their families to attend college. This university and other HBCUs support intellectual leadership, creativity, and innovation. I want to honor you for this proud history and for your continuing commitment to a better future for your students and for the region where many of your students were born and will build their lives and raise their families. 1 Challenges and Opportunities in Poor Rural Communities Today, data at the national level show a strong economy. Unemployment is near a half-century low, and economic output is growing at a solid pace. But we know that prosperity has not been felt as much in some areas, including many rural places. The Federal Reserve can help by carrying out our monetary policy mission of supporting maximum employment and price stability. We also support strong communities by conducting research, promoting community development, and enforcing laws like the Community Reinvestment Act, which helps ensure that people have adequate access to financial services wherever they live. We not only work with communities, we are in communities, through the presence of our 12 regional Reserve Banks. Poverty remains a challenge in many rural communities. Indeed, 70 percent of the 473 "persistent poverty" counties in the United States are rural. 2 Unemployment and mortality rates remain high in these communities. Along with lower incomes and wealth, the rate of business start-ups in these areas is lower. And their residents have less access to financial services. Many of these disparities have existed for generations, and in some places have roots in a history of discrimination. These areas also generally lack diverse industries and employment options and often have suffered from a decline in a traditional industry. In Appalachia for instance, timber, coal mining, tobacco, and textiles have long been in decline. 3 Likewise, the number of jobs in agriculture and low-skilled manufacturing, mainstays of the Delta's economy, is decreasing as a result of automation and outsourcing. 4 Education and Workforce Development High-quality education and training play a crucial role in extending opportunity in rural areas, starting with early childhood education. 5 But in many rural communities, access to high-quality preschool education is limited. Mississippi is one of several mostly rural states where nearly half of residents lack access to good quality childcare, which is the main source of early childhood education. 6 Many decades of research also confirm that children who grow up in areas with better-quality K-12 schools or in classes with higher-quality teachers have better outcomes in life. 7 Later in life, workforce training and education are most effective when they train workers in skills needed by local employers. Rural areas where traditional industries are declining and where new employers may be moving in often experience a mismatch between the skills of local workers and those demanded by the new employers. Training and retraining programs tend to be centralized and concentrated in areas with a higher population density, which puts many rural areas at a disadvantage. 8 Education benefits both the student and the community. It is true that some young people leave their hometowns to seek greater opportunity. However, it is also true that young families, drawn back home by family and social ties, are the largest source of in-migration in many rural communities. Young families are more likely to come if they believe their children will get a good education. Returnees often bring back important skills and experiences and make meaningful contributions to the local economy. 9 An excellent example is Tim Lampkin, an MVSU graduate. Tim grew up and graduated from high school in Clarksdale. After graduating from MVSU, he moved to Mobile for work. He wasn't gone long, though, before he felt called to return to make his home here in the Delta. Since moving back, Tim has founded several businesses, as well as a nonprofit that helps people of color start and grow their own businesses. Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development As with Tim and his clients, entrepreneurship opportunities can motivate residents who have left rural communities to return home‑‑or to keep them from moving away in the first place. Business ownership represents an important source of income and wealth for both owners and their employees. Recognizing this fact, successful communities find ways to help residents turn what they know and do best, including skills they may have gained from industries in decline, into profitable small businesses. 10 One example of a community taking this approach is Clarksdale, Mississippi. About 10 years ago, civic and business leaders assessed what made Clarksdale special and how those characteristics could help the community thrive. Since Clarksdale calls itself "Home of the Blues," attracting tourists using the local Blues culture seemed promising. Over the years, Clarksdale has created new jobs by investing to improve its downtown, and has supported local businesses that cater to tourists interested in the community's musical heritage. This growth is also creating new businesses not directly related to tourism--businesses such as Urgent and Primary Care of Clarksdale. Dr. Mary Williams opened her urgent care facility last spring, partly in response to the closure of nearby Quitman County Hospital. Dr. Williams worked with local organizations to develop a business plan and obtain the financing needed to open a business that is critical to the community. DeWitt, Arkansas, is another rural community where entrepreneurship is sparking a local revival. DeWitt is a town of about 3,000 people. Like Itta Bena and many small towns, it has seen a steady decline in population over the past few decades. The economy there is a mix of manufacturing and agriculture, and many families have farmed the land for generations, such as the family of Tami and Troy Hornbeck. The Hornbecks grew up in DeWitt, starting and eventually selling a successful business built on a new soybean varietal that grows well in the South. More recently, they have been helping lead a new industry in their community using waste vegetable oil from local restaurants and oil pressed from camelina, a crop farmers are beginning to grow locally. This cooperative effort involves a partnership between a community college, a university, the local government, farmers and restaurants, and a Community Development Financial Institution, or CDFI, among others. 11 While still in the early stages, it has led to the creation of several new businesses and imbued the town with a new sense of what is possible. Entrepreneurs such as the Hornbecks and Dr. Williams need support to succeed, the kind of support HBCUs and other institutions of higher education have long provided. MVSU itself is supporting rural minority entrepreneurs through its participation in the HBCU Entrepreneurial Ecosystem Initiative, which teaches students how to start and grow a business. But inspiring stories like these are not as common as they could be. Entrepreneurship has the potential to play a greater role in poor rural areas, particularly in areas whose residents are predominantly black and other people of color. Recent surveys have found relatively high levels of interest in owning businesses among young people of color. 12 Indeed, nationwide, black women represent one of the fastest growing groups of entrepreneurs. 13 Yet research by the Federal Reserve suggests people of color experience greater challenges in gaining access to credit to start or expand businesses, which leads me to my last topic and the focus of this forum: access to financial services. 14 Access to Financial Services Access to safe and affordable financial services is vital, especially among families with limited wealth‑‑whether they are looking to invest in education, start a business, or simply manage the ups and downs of life. Family income and savings represent the largest source of funding for students' education. However, more than half of students or their families also borrow to finance their studies. And racial wealth disparities make black students more likely than white students to borrow for their education. 15 Similarly, racial wealth disparities mean access to credit is critical for would-be entrepreneurs who must borrow to supplement personal savings and support from friends and family. Banks often consider credit scores when evaluating loan requests, however, and high-poverty regions tend to have a larger percentage of people with no established credit rating or a low credit score. This combination of low wealth and low credit scores limits access to credit or causes borrowers to turn to higher-cost credit. Fortunately, CDFIs are helping potential borrowers improve their creditworthiness and providing them with safe and affordable credit. While CDFIs fill a critical gap in some communities, most consumers use other banks and credit unions. In rural areas, this often means a community bank. 16 Industry consolidation has led to a long-term decline in the number of community banks. While most rural communities continue to be relatively well served, that is less often the case in communities with high-poverty rates. 17 In 2018, Federal Reserve staff members met with leaders in rural areas across the country that had recently experienced a bank branch closure. We found that small businesses, older people, and people with limited access to transportation are most affected. 18 We also learned that the loss of the branch often meant more than the loss of access to financial services; it also meant the loss of financial advice, local civic leadership, and an institution that brought needed customers to nearby businesses. Regulation and supervision need to be carefully tailored to suit the size and business model of different types of institutions. At the Fed, we have renewed our efforts to avoid unnecessary regulatory burden on community banks, which provide essential credit in their local communities. Another means to address the issue of branch closures is the Community Reinvestment Act, or CRA, which encourages banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve. The CRA has been an important tool for strengthening local communities. The trend toward fewer branches and increased use of technology to deliver financial services presents a particular challenge to our current approach to CRA evaluations. Specifically, the current regulations use a bank's branches to define its assessment area, the area for which it is evaluated for CRA purposes. To the extent that banks serve much broader areas using online or other non-branch delivery systems, or have so many assessment areas that examiners cannot do a thorough evaluation in each, the financial needs of many rural communities may be overlooked. We believe that revisions to the CRA's implementing regulations should more effectively encourage banks to seek opportunities in underserved areas. 19 Conclusion To summarize my main points today, people in rural communities who are struggling with persistent poverty need access to high-quality education from preschool through college. They need support for their aspirations to own their own businesses. And they need access to safe and affordable credit. I will conclude where I began, by applauding both MVSU and Hope for their long-standing contribution toward bettering the lives of the people of Itta Bena and similar rural communities. 1. For a history of the role of HBCUs, see, for example, Todd Greene and Ashley Bozarth (2018), "The Critical Role of Historically Black Colleges and Universities in Workforce Development," in Stuart Andreason, Todd Greene, Heath Prince, and Carl E. Van Horn, eds., Investing in America's Workforce, vol. 1: Investing in Workers (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research), pp. 189‑94; and Ronald A. Johnson (2018), "HBCUs as Pipelines for Diversified Intellect, Creativity, and Innovation," in Stuart Andreason, Todd Greene, Heath Prince, and Carl E. Van Horn, eds., Investing in America's Workforce, vol. 1: Investing in Workers (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research), pp. 195-204. Return to text 2. As defined in PL 115-31 as counties where 20 percent or more of the population live in poverty as measured by the U.S. Census Bureau in the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses (for more information, see https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/saipe/guidance/model-input-data/decennial.html ) and the 2011‑2015 American Community Survey . Return to text 3. See, for example, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2012), "From Textiles to Turnaround: A Tale of Two Cities," Economic Development Podcast, July; Karl Rhodes (2013), " The Future of Coal" (PDF), Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Econ Focus, vol. 17 (fourth quarter), pp. 28-31. Return to text 4. See, for example, Sungki Hong and Hannah G. Shell (2018), "60% of District's Jobs Could Face Automation in the Next 20 Years," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Regional Economist, vol. 26 (third quarter), pp. 19-20, 22-23; and Charles Davidson (2017), "Tending to the Farm, Part 3: Technology Reshapes Agriculture," Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Economy Matters, January 12. Return to text 5. See Rob Grunewald (2018), "Early Childhood Investments: Paving the Way for the Future Workforce" (PDF), in Stuart Andreason, Todd Greene, Heath Prince, and Carl E. Van Horn, eds., Investing in America's Workforce, vol. 1: Investing in Workers (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research), pp. 297-314. Return to text 6. See, for example, Rasheed Malik, Katie Hamm, Leila Schochet, Cristina Novoa, Simon Workman, and Steven Jessen-Howard (2018), America's Child Care Deserts in 2018 (Washington: Center for American Progress, December). Return to text 7. See, for example, Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014), "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 129 (November), pp. 1553-1623; and Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, and Jonah E. Rockoff (2014), "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood," American Economic Review, vol. 104 (September), pp. 2633-79. Return to text 8. See Kate Dunham, Annelies Goger, Jennifer Henderson-Frakes, and Nichole Tucker (2005), Workforce Development in Rural Areas: Changes in Access, Service Delivery and Partnerships (PDF) , U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration Occasional Paper 2005-07 (Oakland, Calif.: Social Policy Research Associates, June). Return to text 9. See John Cromartie, Christiane von Reichert, and Ryan Arthun (2015), Factors Affecting Former Residents' Returning to Rural Communities (PDF), USDA Economic Research Service Report No. 185 (Washington: U.S. Department of Agriculture, May). Return to text 10. Such support systems generally include consistent and easily accessible ways for potential business owners to find the advice, financing, and education they need to be successful. See Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (2015), Grow Your Own: Entrepreneurship-Based Economic Development for Local Communities (PDF) (Kansas City, Mo.: FRB Kansas City). Return to text 11. CDFI Certification is a designation given by the CDFI Fund of the U.S. Department of the Treasury to specialized organizations that provide financial services in low-income communities and to people who lack access to financing. CDFIs include regulated institutions, such as community development banks and credit unions, and nonregulated institutions, like loan and venture capital funds. Return to text 12. See FRB Kansas City, Grow Your Own, in note 10. Return to text 13. See Walker's Legacy (2016), Black Women Entrepreneurs: Past and Present Conditions of Black Women's Business Ownership (Washington: Walker's Legacy, October). Return to text 14. Alicia Robb, Mels de Zeeuw, and Brett Barkley (2018), "Mind the Gap: How Do Credit Market Experiences and Borrowing Patterns Differ for Minority-Owned Firms?" Community and Economic Development Discussion Paper 03-18 (Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, September). Return to text 15. Judith Scott-Clayton and Jing Li (2016), "Black-White Disparity in Student Loan Debt More Than Triples after Graduation," Evidence Speaks Reports, vol. 2 (3) (Washington: Brookings Institution, October). See, for example, Robert Kelchen (2015), "Financial Need and Aid Volatility among Students with Zero Expected Family Contribution," Journal of Student Financial Aid, vol. 44 (January), pp. 179-201; and Fenaba R. Addo (2018), "Parents' Wealth Helps Explain Racial Disparities in Student Loan Debt," Bridges, Fall , pp. 9-11. Return to text 16. See Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2017), Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Rural Employer Firms (PDF) (Richmond, Va.: FRB Richmond). Return to text 17. See Randal K. Quarles (2018), "Trends in Urban and Rural Community Banks," speech delivered at "Community Banking in the 21st Century," Sixth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, St. Louis, Mo., October 4. According to 2017 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Summary of Deposits data , nonmetro Persistent Poverty Counties had, on average, 0.36 bank branches per 1,000 people, compared with 0.53 for other nonmetro counties. Return to text 18. These findings are broadly consistent with the literature, which identifies adverse effects of branch closures for small business borrowers, in particular, as well as for low-income communities. See, for example, Hoai-Luu Q. Nguyen (2014), "Do Bank Branches Still Matter? The Effect of Closings on Local Economic Outcomes (PDF)," Massachusetts Institute of Technology Working Paper (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT, December); and O. Emre Ergungor (2006), "Bank Branch Presence and Access to Credit in Low-to-Moderate Income Neighborhoods," Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 06-16 (Cleveland, Ohio: FRB Cleveland, December). Return to text 19. See Lael Brainard (2018), "Keeping Community at the Heart of the Community Reinvestment Act," speech delivered at the Association of Neighborhood and Housing Development Eighth Annual Community Development Conference, New York, May 18. Return to text Last Update: April 27, 2021 Back to Top

Chair Jerome H. Powell At the Citizens Budget Commission 87th Annual Awards Dinner, New York, New York Share Watch Live It is a pleasure to speak here this evening at the 87th Awards Dinner. Tonight I will start with the near-term outlook for the U.S. economy. Then I will turn to a topic that is inspired by the Citizens Budget Commission's mission statement, which focuses on the "well-being of future New Yorkers." I imagine that future New Yorkers attending this dinner in 50 years may not look back on the near-term outlook in February 2018 as very interesting or important. So, tonight, after a brief review of the here and now, I will focus on an issue that is likely to be of more lasting importance: the need for policies that will support and encourage participation in the labor force, promote longer-term growth in our rapidly evolving economy, and spread the benefits of prosperity as widely as possible. The State of the Economy and Near-Term Prospects Beginning with the here and now, Congress has charged the Federal Reserve with achieving maximum employment and stable prices, two objectives that together are called the dual mandate. I am pleased to say that, judged against these goals, the economy is in a good place. The current economic expansion has been under way for almost 10 years. This long period of growth has pushed the unemployment rate down near historic lows ( figure 1 ). The employment gains have been broad based across all racial and ethnic groups and all levels of educational attainment as well as among the disabled ( figure 2 ). 1 And while the unemployment rate for African Americans and Hispanics remains above the rates for whites and Asians, the disparities have narrowed appreciably as the economic expansion has continued. Nearly all job market indicators are better than a few years ago, and many are at their most favorable levels in decades. After lagging earlier in the expansion, wages and overall compensation--pay plus benefits­­--are now growing faster than a few years ago ( figure 3 ). It is especially encouraging that the labor force participation rate of people in their prime working years, ages 25 to 54, has been rising for the past three years. More plentiful jobs and rising wages are drawing more people into the workforce and encouraging others who might have left to stay. In addition, business-sector productivity growth, which had been disappointing during the expansion, moved up in the first three quarters of 2018. Rising productivity allows wages to increase without adding to inflation pressures. Sustained productivity growth is a necessary ingredient for longer-run improvements in living standards. The price stability side of our mandate is also in a good place. After remaining below our target for several years, inflation by our preferred measure averaged roughly 2 percent last year ( figure 4 ). Inflation has softened a bit since then, largely reflecting the recent drop in oil prices. Futures markets and other indicators suggest that oil prices are unlikely to fall further, and if this proves correct, oil's drag on overall inflation will subside. Consistent with that view, core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices and often provides a better signal of where inflation is heading, is currently running just a touch below our 2 percent objective. Signs of upward pressure on inflation appear muted despite the strong labor market. While the data I have discussed so far give a favorable picture of the economy, it is also important to acknowledge that not everyone has shared in the benefits of the expansion to the same extent, and that too many households still struggle to make ends meet. 2 In addition, over the past few months we have seen some crosscurrents and conflicting signals about the near-term outlook. For instance, growth has slowed in some major economies, particularly China and Europe. Uncertainty is elevated around some unresolved government policy issues, including Brexit and ongoing trade negotiations. And financial conditions have tightened since last fall. While most of the incoming domestic economic data have been solid, some surveys of business and consumer sentiment have moved lower. Unexpectedly weak retail sales data for December also give reason for caution. Given the positive outlook but also muted inflation pressures and the crosscurrents I just mentioned, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) will be patient as we determine what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support our dual-mandate objectives. This common-sense risk-management approach has served the Committee well in the past. I will turn now from the near-term outlook to the question of how the economy will perform over the long haul. Longer-Term Challenges and Opportunities From 1991 through 2007, the economy expanded annually at about 3 percent, similar to the pace for much of second half of the 20th century. Since 2007, however, growth has averaged just 1.6 percent. If the earlier 3 percent growth had persisted over the past 12 years, incomes today would be almost 20 percent higher than they now are. From the standpoint of future Americans, if the slower growth persists for a half-century, incomes will end up roughly half of what they would have been. Why has growth slowed, and what can we do about it? To understand the causes of the slowdown, it is useful to divide growth into two components: (1) growth in the cumulative number of hours of worked by all workers and (2) growth in the amount of output derived, on average, from each hour of work. We refer to output per hour of work as "labor productivity." From 1991 through 2007, when the economy expanded at a 3 percent average rate, hours worked increased about 1 percent a year and economy-wide productivity grew about 2 percent ( figure 5 ). 3 Since 2007, both of these growth factors have slowed by about half, with hours worked annually increasing only 0.5 percent from 2008 to 2018 and productivity rising just 1 percent on average. 4 Growth in hours worked has slowed, in part, because of slower U.S. population growth. Birth rates have edged down, and immigration has slowed. Not only is the total population growing more slowly, but the share of the population in their prime working years is falling steadily as the very large baby-boom generation is moving into retirement. Demographic factors are generally slow moving and predictable, and there is no surprise in the fact that slower population growth and the retirement of the baby boomers are now contributing to slower growth in the total amount of work performed in the economy. There is another factor contributing to the slower growth in hours, however, and this factor is more surprising and more troubling. To be counted as "in the labor force," a person must either be employed or have looked for work within the past four weeks. The share of people of working age who are actually in the labor force has fallen significantly since the late 1990s. This decline raises the important question of why have people of working age increasingly chosen not to work. The data suggest that there are both positive and more problematic forces at work. For example, among those aged 16 to 24, participation in the labor market has fallen from about 65 percent in the 1990s to 55 percent now ( figure 6 ). But this drop in participation appears to reflect young people getting more education. The fraction of this age group who are neither in school nor in the labor force has held fairly constant at around 11 percent, and measures of school enrollment are up. 5 Higher educational attainment is much more important in today's job market than in the past, and investing in education today has long-term benefits for both the student and for society. 6 Statistics confirm that higher educational attainment is associated with higher labor force participation, lower unemployment, and higher wages. Turning to those aged 25 to 54, the participation picture is more troubling. Among prime-age men, participation has been falling for more than 60 years, with the decline averaging about 1.5 percentage points per decade ( figure 7 ). For women, participation rose over the second half of the 20th century until peaking in the late 1990s. Since then, women's participation has dropped just a bit. To put these numbers in context, let's look at data from other advanced economies. Prime-age male participation has fallen some across most of these economies since 1995 ( figure 8 ). But the decline in the United States has been much larger than most, and U.S. participation was below the middle of the pack at the outset. As a result, the United States now has the fourth lowest participation rate among 34 advanced economies. For women's participation, the details are different, but the bottom line is similar. In the mid-1990s, the United States ranked in the upper tier for prime-age women's participation, but since then participation by women has advanced rapidly in many countries while it has declined slightly in the United States. Now the United States is sixth lowest among these 34 countries. Researchers have investigated numerous possible reasons for the decline in prime-age participation. Among men, the drop in participation is much sharper for those with only a high school education or less. The drop for women is also sharper for those who are high school educated. This pattern is consistent with the idea that a modern economy demands ever-higher skills, and that workers without those skills are being left behind ( figure 9 ). But the international experience suggests that this outcome is not inevitable: The drop in participation among those with less education is much smaller in some comparable countries than in the United States. 7 The research into labor force participation in the United States and across the world does not find a magic fix, but it does suggest a variety of policies that might better prepare people for the modern workforce as well as support and reward labor force participation. 8 I should note that the Fed has neither the tools nor the mandate to directly address the forces that are holding back labor force participation. We can contribute by fostering a strong labor market, in accordance with our mandate. While it is not the Fed's role to advocate particular labor force policies, I do want to put a spotlight on this important issue. I strongly believe policies that bring prime-age workers into productive employment, particularly those who may have been left behind because of low skills or educational attainment, could bring great benefits both to those workers and to our economy. The second factor accounting for the slowdown in GDP growth is the slower pace of labor productivity growth, or output per hour worked. When measured annually, labor productivity growth is volatile, but focusing on five-year averages, we can see that from 1975 through 2007, productivity growth averaged about 2 percent while fluctuating between about 1 and 4 percent ( figure 10 ). Since then, growth seems to have settled at the low end of that historical range. Unlike the situation with labor force participation, the slowdown in productivity growth is also evident in most advanced economies, and the U.S. experience is roughly comparable to that of other countries. There is an ongoing debate over the causes and implications of this global slowdown in productivity growth. Some argue that the rapid growth seen over much of the 20th century was historically anomalous, and that we are destined to return to the slower growth of centuries past. Others are more optimistic that strong growth can return. Many have noted that during the current expansion, investment and capital accumulation have been lower than in previous expansions, so perhaps we just need to invest more. Unfortunately, it does not seem to be that simple. Standard reasoning holds that capital-per-worker drives productivity. While we have had slower capital accumulation of late, we have also had slower growth in labor supply--hours worked. Thus, capital per worker, according to some analysis, has continued to increase roughly at its pre-recession trend. In this view, the productivity problem is not simply one of inadequate investment. 9 Researchers have proposed several reasons why, even if the quantity of investment has kept up, recent investment may be leading to smaller productivity advances than in the past. The more optimistic analysts argue that we may be in a productivity lull while businesses work to realize the full benefit of advances that are embedded in recent investment. 10 Others suggest that productivity-advancing ideas are inherently harder to find and exploit than in the past, implying that slower productivity growth may be with us for the long haul. 11 This debate is unlikely to be resolved anytime soon. In the meantime, we should look for policies that will create an environment in which productivity can flourish. We need policies that support innovation and create a favorable environment for investment in both the skills of workers and the tools they have. Indeed, the recent tax reforms were designed in part to boost capital investment and thus productivity. Once again, my goal tonight is to highlight the importance of growth-enhancing policies. Because these policies are not the province of the Fed, I will not advocate for particular approaches. Instead, I will just observe that researchers and policy analysts have proposed many promising ideas that may be capable of attracting wide support. Policies that succeed in enhancing productivity growth would greatly benefit future generations of Americans. Conclusion To conclude, the United States is currently in the midst of one of the longest economic expansions in our history. Unemployment is low and inflation is close to our 2 percent objective. My colleagues and I on the FOMC are focused on using our monetary policy tools to sustain those favorable conditions. Tonight I have also highlighted some longer-term challenges we face, including low labor force participation by prime-age workers and low productivity growth. By promoting macroeconomic stability, the Fed helps create a healthy environment for growth. But these longer-term issues require policies that are more in the province of elected representatives. The nation would benefit greatly from a search for policies with broad appeal that could promote labor force participation and higher productivity, with benefits shared broadly across the nation. 1. The unemployment rate of those with a disability and between the ages of 16 and 64 fell from more than 16 percent in 2011 to less than 9 percent in 2018. Meanwhile, their labor force participation rate has been rising over the past few years. In 2018, about 8 percent of the population aged 16 to 64 reported themselves as having a disability, and their labor force participation rate was 33 percent. Return to text 2. For example, a Federal Reserve survey indicates that in early 2018, after nearly a decade of growth, as many as 40 percent of households were unprepared for an emergency expense of as little as $400. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households (Washington: Board of Governors, May), available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/other20180522a.htm . Return to text 3. These estimates are based on the Congressional Budget Office's (2019) estimates for potential GDP for the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2019 to 2029 (Washington: CBO, January). Economy-wide productivity includes the nonbusiness sector. Return to text 4. John G. Fernald, Robert E. Hall, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (2017), " The Disappointing Recovery of Output after 2009 ," NBER Working Paper No. 23543 (Washington: National Bureau of Economic Research, June). Return to text 5. It is also true that a smaller share of students are holding down a job while in school. Return to text 6. For example, see Maria E. Canon, Marianna Kudlyak, and Yang Liu (2015), " Youth Labor Force Participation Continues to Fall, but It Might Be for a Good Reason ," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Regional Economist (St. Louis, Mo.: FRB St. Louis, January). Return to text 7. Mary C. Daly, Joseph H. Pedtke, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Annemarie Schweinert (2018), " Why Aren't U.S. Workers Working? " Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, FRBSF Economic Letter 2018-24 (San Francisco: FRB San Francisco, November 13). Return to text 8. Francesco Grigoli, Zsóka Kóczán, and Petia Topalova (2018), " Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects (PDF) ," chapter 2 in International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook (Washington: IMF, April), pp. 1-58. Return to text 9. See Fernald and others, "Disappointing Recovery," in note 4. Return to text 10. For example, Brynjolfsson, Mitchell, and Rock (2018) highlight the need to make complimentary investments in intangibles to take advantage of artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies (see Erik Brynjolfsson, Tom Mitchell, and Daniel Rock (2018), "What Can Machines Learn and What Does It Mean for Occupations and the Economy?" AEA Papers and Proceedings , vol. 108 (May), pp. 43-47). And Mokyr (2014) argues that the vast array of computers and other relatively new tools will usher in a new wave of progress just like the invention of barometers and microscopes and other tools propelled the technology in the 1700s (see Joel Mokyr (2014), "The Next Age of Invention," City Journal, Winter). Return to text 11. Bloom and others (2017) as well as Thompson and Spanuth (2018) discuss how it has become more costly to make technological advances. See Nicholas Bloom, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb (2017), "Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?" available at https://web.stanford.edu/~chadj/papers.html ; and Neil Thompson and Svenja Spanuth (2018), "The Decline of Computers As a General Purpose Technology: Why Deep Learning and the End of Moore's Law Are Fragmenting Computing," available at https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3287769. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: February 28, 2019 Back to Top

Chair Jerome H. Powell At the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California Share Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, a place dedicated to scholarship supporting policies to better peoples' lives. As today is International Women's Day, I would like to preface my remarks by commending the American Economic Association for highlighting the diversity challenges of the economics profession and charting a way forward. Diversity is also a priority at the Fed: I want the Fed to be known within the economics profession as a great place for women, minorities, and others of diverse backgrounds to be respected, listened to, and happy. Just over 10 years ago, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC, or the Committee) lowered the federal funds rate close to zero, which we refer to as the effective lower bound, or ELB. Unable to lower rates further, the Committee turned to two novel tools to promote the recovery. The first was forward guidance, which is communication about the future path of interest rates. The second was large-scale purchases of longer-term securities, which became known as quantitative easing, or QE. There is a range of views, but most studies have found that these tools provided significant support for the recovery. From the outset, the Committee viewed them as extraordinary measures to be unwound, or "normalized," when conditions ultimately warranted. Today I will explore some important features of normalization and then turn to what comes after. In some ways, we are returning to the pre-crisis normal. In other ways, things will be different. The world has moved on in the last decade, and attempting to re-create the past would be neither practical nor wise. As normalization moves into its later stages, my colleagues and I also believe that this is an important moment to take stock of issues raised by the remarkable experiences of the past decade. We are therefore conducting a review of the Fed's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices. I will conclude with some thoughts on the review. Balance Sheet Normalization Between December 2008 and October 2014, the Federal Reserve purchased $3.7 trillion in longer-term Treasury and agency securities in order to support the economy both by easing dislocations in market functioning and by driving down longer-term interest rates. Consistent with the Committee's long-stated intention, in October 2017 we started the process of balance sheet normalization. We began gradually reducing the reinvestment of payments received as assets matured or were prepaid, allowing our holdings to shrink. The process of reducing the size of the portfolio is now well along. To frame the discussion of the final stages of normalization of the size of the balance sheet, it is useful to consider what the phrase "normal balance sheet" meant in the decades before the crisis. During that period, the main monetary policy decision for the FOMC was choosing a target value for the federal funds rate. Subject to that choice, the Fed allowed the demand for its liabilities to determine the size of the balance sheet. This is a feature of "normal" that we are returning to: After normalization, the size of the Fed's balance sheet will once again be driven by the demand for our liabilities. To see what this means, consider figure 1 , which shows the size of the Fed's balance sheet through time, as measured by total liabilities. The values are stated as a percentage of the dollar value of GDP, or gross domestic product. 1 Liabilities began to grow sharply at the end of 2008 and continued to increase until the end of 2014. Since that time, liabilities relative to GDP have fallen appreciably. To understand these changes, it is useful to focus on a snapshot of the balance sheet at three points in time: before the crisis, when the balance sheet was at its largest, and a rough projection for the end of this year ( table 1 ). In 2006, the dominant liability was currency held by the public, and the dominant asset was Treasury securities. The Fed's asset purchase programs increased the balance sheet from just below 6 percent to nearly 25 percent of GDP by the end of 2014. 2 Balance sheets must balance, of course, and the Fed issued reserves as payment for the assets purchased. This action pushed reserves to nearly 15 percent of GDP. The Committee has long said that the size of the balance sheet will be considered normalized when the balance sheet is once again at the smallest level consistent with conducting monetary policy efficiently and effectively. Just how large that will be is uncertain, because we do not yet have a clear sense of the normal level of demand for our liabilities. Current estimates suggest, however, that something in the ballpark of the 2019:Q4 projected values may be the new normal. The normalized balance sheet may be smaller or larger than that estimate and will grow gradually over time as demand for currency rises with the economy. In all plausible cases, the balance sheet will be considerably larger than before the crisis. To understand the differences between the new and old normal, consider the final column in the table, which shows the change, measured in percentage points of GDP, between 2006:Q4 and the 2019:Q4 projection in the table. In this estimate, relative to before the crisis, the balance sheet will have grown as a share of GDP by about 10.6 percentage points. Bank reserves account for the biggest part of the growth, or about 5.6 percent of GDP. The crisis revealed that banks, especially the largest and most complex, faced much more liquidity risk than had previously been thought. Because of both new liquidity regulations and improved management, banks now hold much higher levels of high-quality liquid assets than before the crisis. Many banks choose to hold reserves as an important part of their strong liquidity positions. The rest of the increase in liabilities is accounted for by three other categories. First, public currency holdings will have grown by 2.4 percentage points as a share of GDP. Second, the U.S. Treasury maintains an account at the Fed, which has been running 1.4 percentage points higher as a share of GDP. And, third, other liabilities, which are mainly associated with the mechanics of the national and international financial system, will have grown by 1.1 percentage points. As was the case before the crisis, the FOMC's chosen operating regime for controlling short-term interest rates also plays a role in determining the appropriate quantity of reserves. In January, the Committee stated its intention to continue in our current regime in which our main policy rate, the federal funds rate or possibly some successor, is held within its target range by the interest rates we set on reserves and on the overnight reverse repo facility. 3 In this system, active management of the supply of reserves is not required. Thus, the supply of reserves must be "ample," in the sense of being sufficient to satisfy reserve demands even in the face of volatility in factors affecting the reserve market. 4 Put another way, the quantity of reserves will equal the typical reserve demands of depositories plus a buffer to allow for reserve market fluctuations. While the precise level of reserves that will prove ample is uncertain, standard projections, such as those in the table, suggest we could be near that level later this year. As we feel our way cautiously to this goal, we will move transparently and predictably in order to minimize needless market disruption and risks to our dual-mandate objectives. The Committee is now well along in our discussions of a plan to conclude balance sheet runoff later this year. Once balance sheet runoff ends, we may, if appropriate, hold the size of the balance sheet constant for a time to allow reserves to very gradually decline to the desired level as other liabilities, such as currency, increase. We expect to announce further details of this plan reasonably soon. There is no real precedent for the balance sheet normalization process, and we have adapted our approach along the way. In these final phases, we will adjust the details of our normalization plans if economic and financial conditions warrant. After decisions regarding the size of the balance sheet have been made, we will turn to remaining issues, such as the ultimate maturity composition of the portfolio. The Committee has long stated that it intends to return to a portfolio consisting primarily of Treasury securities. Forward Guidance and the Normalization of Policy Communication The Committee has also been normalizing communication about our policy after a decade of forward guidance. Since December 2008, the FOMC's postmeeting statement had contained ever-evolving forms of guidance about keeping the federal funds rate at the ELB or about the gradual pace at which that rate would return to more normal levels. We removed the last elements of this crisis-era guidance in January. 5 The federal funds rate is now within the broad range of estimates of the neutral rate--the interest rate that tends neither to stimulate nor to restrain the economy. Committee participants generally agree that this policy stance is appropriate to promote our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. Future adjustments will depend on what incoming data tell us about the baseline outlook and risks to that outlook. Policy communication will not simply revert to the ways of the early 2000s, however, for transparency advances have continued apace since then. The most significant change from the standpoint of forward guidance is that, since January 2012, the FOMC's quarterly Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) has included federal funds rate projections reaching up to three years into the future--often referred to as the "dot plot." Returning to a world of little or no explicit forward guidance in the FOMC's postmeeting statement presents a challenge, for the dot plot has, on occasion, been a source of confusion. Until now, forward guidance in the statement has been a main tool for communicating committee intentions and minimizing that confusion. For example, in early 2014, the Committee's intentions were at odds with a common misreading of the dots, and Chair Yellen explained, "[O]ne should not look to the dot plot, so to speak, as the primary way in which the Committee wants to or is speaking about policy to the public at large. The FOMC statement is the device that the Committee as a policymaking group uses to express its opinions . . . about the likely path of rates." 6 If the Committee remains largely out of the business of explicit forward guidance, we will need to find other ways to address the collateral confusion that sometimes surrounds the dots. As readers of the FOMC minutes will know, at our last meeting in January there was an impromptu discussion among some participants of general concerns about the dots. My own view is that, if properly understood, the dot plot can be a constructive element of comprehensive policy communication. Let me follow my two predecessors as Chair in attempting to advance that proper understanding. Each participant's dots reflect that participant's view of the policy that would be appropriate in the scenario that he or she sees as most likely. As someone who has filled out an SEP projection 27 times over the last seven years, I can say that there are times when I feel that something like the "most likely" scenario I write down is, indeed, reasonably likely to happen. At other times, when uncertainty around the outlook is unusually high, I dutifully write down what I see as the appropriate funds rate path in the most likely scenario, but I do so aware that this projection may be easily misinterpreted, for what is "most likely" may not be particularly likely. Very different scenarios may be similarly likely. Further, at times downside risks may deserve significant weight in policy deliberations. In short, as Chairman Bernanke explained, the SEP projections are merely "inputs" to policy that do not convey "the risks, the uncertainties, all the things that inform our collective judgment." 7 Effectively conveying our views about risks and their role in policy projections can be challenging at times, and we are always looking for ways to improve our communications. I have asked the communications subcommittee of the FOMC to explore ways in which we can more effectively communicate about the role of the rate projections. For now, let me leave you with a cautionary tale about focusing too much on dots. Here is a picture composed of different colored dots ( figure 2 ). The meaning of it is not clear, although if you stare at it long enough you might see a pattern. But let's take a step back ( figure 3 ). As you can see, if you are too focused on a few dots, you may miss the larger picture. Delivering on the FOMC's intention to ultimately normalize policy continues to be a major priority at the Fed. Normalization is far along, and, considering the unprecedented nature of the exercise, it is proceeding smoothly. I am confident that we can effectively manage the remaining stages. Beyond Normalization We live in a time of intense scrutiny and declining trust in public institutions around the world. At the Fed, we are committed to working hard to build and sustain the public's trust. The Fed has special responsibilities in this regard. Our monetary policy independence allows us to serve the public without regard to short-term political considerations, which, as history has shown, is critical for sound monetary policymaking. But that precious grant of independence brings with it a special obligation to be open and transparent, welcoming scrutiny by the public and their elected representatives in Congress. Only in this way can the Fed maintain its legitimacy in our democratic system. Among other initiatives, my colleagues and I on the FOMC are undertaking a year-long review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. The review will involve a series of "Fed Listens" events around the country. These will include town-hall-style meetings and a conference where academic and nonacademic experts will share their views. These events will inform staff work and FOMC discussions as we plan for the future. While this is the first time the Fed has opened itself up in this way, many central banks around the world have conducted similar reviews, and our approach builds on their experiences. We believe that our existing framework for conducting monetary policy has generally served the public well, and the review may or may not produce major changes. Consistent with the experience of other central banks with these reviews, the process is more likely to produce evolution rather than revolution. We seek no changes in law and we are not considering fundamental changes in the structure of the Fed, or in the 2 percent inflation objective. While there is a high bar for adopting fundamental change, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage broadly with the public as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability. Without ruling out other topics, we have highlighted three questions that seem particularly important at present ( figure 4 ): 1. Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective? 2. Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? 3. How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved? I would like to spend a few minutes discussing the first topic. Because interest rates around the world have steadily declined for several decades, rates in normal times now tend to be much closer to zero than in the past ( figure 5 ). 8 Thus, when a recession comes, the Fed is likely to have less capacity to cut interest rates to stimulate the economy than in the past, suggesting that trips to the ELB may be more frequent. The post-crisis period has seen many economies around the world stuck for an extended period at the ELB, with slow growth and inflation well below target. Persistently weak inflation could lead inflation expectations to drift downward, which would imply still lower interest rates, leaving even less room for central banks to cut interest rates to support the economy during a downturn. It is therefore very important for central banks to find more effective ways to battle the low-inflation syndrome that seems to accompany proximity to the ELB. In the late 1990s, motivated by the Japanese experience with deflation and sluggish economic performance, economists began developing the argument that a central bank might substantially reduce the economic costs of ELB spells by adopting a makeup strategy. 9 The simplest version goes like this: If a spell with interest rates near the ELB leads to a persistent shortfall of inflation relative to the central bank's goal, once the ELB spell ends, the central bank would deliberately make up for the lost inflation by stimulating the economy and temporarily pushing inflation modestly above the target. In standard macroeconomic models, if households and businesses are confident that this future inflationary stimulus will be coming, that prospect will promote anticipatory consumption and investment. This can substantially reduce the economic costs of ELB spells. 10 Researchers have suggested many variations on makeup strategies. 11 For example, the central bank could target average inflation over time, implying that misses on either side of the target would be offset. By the time of the crisis, there was a well-established body of model-based research suggesting that some kind of makeup policy could be beneficial. 12 In light of this research, one might ask why the Fed and other major central banks chose not to pursue such a policy. 13 The answer lies in the uncertain distance between models and reality. For makeup strategies to achieve their stabilizing benefits, households and businesses must be quite confident that the "makeup stimulus" is really coming. This confidence is what prompts them to raise spending and investment in the midst of a downturn. In models, confidence in the policy is merely an assumption. In practice, when policymakers considered these policies in the wake of the crisis, they had major questions about whether a central bank's promise of good times to come would have moved the hearts, minds, and pocketbooks of the public. Part of the problem is that when the time comes to deliver the inflationary stimulus, that policy is likely to be unpopular--what is known as the time consistency problem in economics. 14 Experience in the United States and around the world suggests that more frequent ELB episodes could prove quite costly in the future. My FOMC colleagues and I believe that we have a responsibility to the American people to consider policies that might promote significantly better economic outcomes. Makeup strategies are probably the most prominent idea and deserve serious attention. They are largely untried, however, and we have reason to question how they would perform in practice. Before they could be successfully implemented, there would have to be widespread societal understanding and acceptance--as I suggested, a high bar for any fundamental change. In this review, we seek to start a discussion about makeup strategies and other policies that might broadly benefit the American people. Conclusion Tonight I have focused on policy normalization and our efforts to engage the public in what may come after. Before concluding, I will say a few words on current conditions and the outlook. Right now, most measures of the health and strength of the labor market look as favorable as they have in many decades. Inflation will probably run a bit below our objective for a time due to declines in energy prices, but those effects are likely to prove transitory. Core inflation, which is often a reliable indicator of where inflation is headed over time, is quite close to 2 percent. Despite this favorable picture, we have seen some cross-currents in recent months. With nothing in the outlook demanding an immediate policy response and particularly given muted inflation pressures, the Committee has adopted a patient, wait-and-see approach to considering any alteration in the stance of policy. Considering monetary policy more broadly, we are inviting thorough public scrutiny and are hoping to foster conversation regarding how the Fed can best exercise the precious monetary policy independence we have been granted. Our goal is to enhance the public's trust in the Federal Reserve--our most valuable asset. References Bank of Japan (2016). " New Framework for Strengthening Monetary Easing: 'Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing with Yield Curve Control' (PDF) ," announcement, September 21. Bernanke, Ben S. (2017). "Monetary Policy in a New Era," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute of International Economics, Washington, October 12-13. Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019). " Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Brand, Claus, Marcin Bielecki, and Adrian Penalver, eds. (2018). " The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF) ," ECB Occasional Paper Series No. 217. Frankfurt, Germany: European Central Bank, December. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). " The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 1, pp. 139-211. English, William B., J. David López-Salido, and Robert J. Tetlow (2015). "The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions," IMF Economic Review, vol. 63 (April), pp. 22-70. Friedman, Milton (1969). The Optimum Quantity of Money. New York: MacMillan. Hebden, James, and J. David López-Salido (2018). " From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July. Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams (2017). "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol. 108 (May, Supplement 1), pp. S59-S75. Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017), " Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 317-72. King, Mervyn, and David Low (2014). " Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF) ," NBER Working Paper Series 19887. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams (2019). Monetary Policy Frameworks and the Effective Lower Bound on Interest Rates (PDF) , Staff Report 877. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January. Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005). "Average Inflation Targeting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 37 (October), pp. 837-63. Rachel, Lukasz, and Thomas D. Smith (2017). "Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?" International Journal of Central Banking, vol. 13 (September), pp. 1-42. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000), "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Wolman, Alexander L. (2005). "Real Implications of the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 37 (March), pp. 273‑96. 1. The balance sheet had been steady at around 5 percent of GDP since about 1980, as currency slowly grew as a share of GDP, but the increase was offset by a decline in reserves. Return to text 2. This size is similar to that of the balance sheet relative to GDP in the wake of the Great Depression. Return to text 3. As noted in the minutes of the November 2018 FOMC meeting (see https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20181108.htm ), participants discussed costs and benefits of various alternatives to the federal funds rate, such as the overnight bank funding rate, and recommended further study of the issue. Return to text 4. Both supply and demand factors can show large fluctuations. Return to text 5. Of course, "patience" as used in the January FOMC statement (see https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130a.htm ) might be seen as forward guidance. This type of guidance was used at times before the crisis and may play a role in the future. It is not, however, the explicit guidance about the medium-term level or direction of rates that distinguished the crisis-era guidance. Return to text 6. See page 9 of Chair Yellen's March 2014 press conference transcript, available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20140319.pdf . Return to text 7. See page 6 of Chairman Bernanke's April 2012 press conference transcript, available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/mediacenter/files/FOMCpresconf20120425.pdf . Note that the SEP does provide some general information about the balance of risks, but this information is far less complete than the detail provided on the modal outlook. Return to text 8. For evidence on the secular decline in interest rates in the United States and abroad, see King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018). Return to text 9. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) and references therein. Return to text 10. Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), for example, show that optimal policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during subsequent economic expansions. See also Wolman (2005) for a discussion of the effectiveness of price-level targeting at the ELB. For a discussion of the relationship between price-level targeting and average-inflation targeting, see Nessén and Vestin (2005). Return to text 11. The strategy in Reifschneider and Williams (2000), for instance, involves a central bank following a Taylor rule modified to make up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes. Kiley and Roberts (2017) study a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during normal times to compensate for below-target inflation during ELB episodes. See also Bernanke (2017) for a strategy in which low inflation is made up if it occurs when the federal funds rate is at or near the ELB. Return to text 12. See, for example, English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015); Hebden and López-Salido (2018); Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019); and Mertens and Williams (2019). Return to text 13. The Bank of Japan (2016) came closest, announcing in September 2016 an "inflation-overshooting commitment" (p. 1). The commitment did not, however, come with any explicit goal for a degree or duration of overshoot. Return to text 14. Transcripts of FOMC discussions (see, for example, 2011 transcripts, available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomchistorical2011.htm ) reveal that some policymakers were dubious about whether it would be appropriate or even feasible for a current FOMC to bind a future FOMC to a policy that it might find objectionable, which contributed to more general doubts over whether the policy would be credible. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: March 08, 2019 Back to Top
