are addressed at greater length in Daniel K. Tarullo (2015), " Thinking Critically about Nonbank Financial Intermediaries ," remarks at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 17. Return to text 2. A working definition of runnable liabilities is provided by Jack Bao, Josh David, and Song Han in "The Runnables," FEDS Notes, September 3, 2015, www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/the-runnables-20150903.html : We define "runnables" as "pay-on-demand" transactions which embed defaultable promises made by private agents or state and local governments without explicit insurance from the federal government. A transaction is considered "pay-on-demand" if its term to maturity is short or the claimholder of the long-term debt has a put option that can be exercised on short notice. In general, the pay-on-demand feature implies that in the event of stress--caused by credit-risk concerns, large swings in short-term interest rates, or deteriorations in market liquidity--investors may exhibit bank-run-like behavior by redeeming their shares, unwinding their transactions, or deciding not to roll over their positions. Return to text 3. Funding considerations are most relevant where funding is needed for an intermediary's existing balance sheet of longer-term assets, since forced sales are the most likely alternative. But they may also be useful in thinking about forms of non-bank credit in which the intermediary has only a small balance sheet of its own and essentially relies on external funding either to buy the loans directly or to fund them until they can be sold to other investors. The potential fragility of such a business model in recessionary periods could be of concern if it had come to occupy a large part of the market for certain forms of lending. In these circumstances, the withdrawal of these kinds of lenders could leave a hole that insured depository institutions--with their stickier funding sources and required capital levels--might not be able to fill completely. The result could be the unavailability of credit for borrowers that were creditworthy even in less favorable economic times. Return to text 4. For some of the factors involved in this increased demand, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), " Shadow Banking after the Financial Crisis ," remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Conference on Challenges in Global Finance, San Francisco, June 12. Return to text 5. For examples see Mark Carlson, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Fabio Natalucci, Bill Nelson, Marcelo Ochoa, Jeremy Stein, and Skander Van den Heuvel (forthcoming), " The Demand for Short-Term, Safe Assets and Financial Stability: Some Evidence and Implications for Central Bank Policies " International Journal of Central Banking ; Morgan Ricks (2016), The Money Problem (Chicago: University of Chicago Press); Jeremy Stein (2012) "Monetary Policy as Financial Stability Regulation," Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, pp. 57-95; Perry Mehrling (2011), The New Lombard Street (Princeton:, NJ: Princeton University Press); and Gary Gorton and Andrew Metrick (2010), "Regulating the Shadow Banking System," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Washington: Brookings Institution, Fall), pp. 261-97. Return to text Last Update: July 12, 2016 Back to Top
