Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts Share It is a pleasure to speak at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's annual conference, and I am grateful to President Rosengren and the organizers for inviting me. This afternoon I would like to discuss the challenges to formulating macroprudential policy for the U.S. financial system. 1 The U.S. financial system is extremely complex. We have one of the largest nonbank sectors as a percentage of the overall financial system among advanced market economies. Since the crisis, changes in the regulation and supervision of the financial sector, most significantly those related to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act) and the Basel III process, have addressed many of the weaknesses revealed by the crisis. Nonetheless, challenges to our efforts to preserve financial stability remain. The Structure, Vulnerabilities, and Regulation of the U.S. Financial System To set the stage, it is useful to start with a brief overview of the structure of the U.S. financial system. A diverse set of institutions provides credit to households and businesses, and others provide deposit-like services and facilitate transactions across the financial system. 2 As can be seen from panel A of figure 1 , banks currently supply about one-third of the credit in the U.S. system. In addition to banks, institutions thought of as long-term investors, such as insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds, provide anotherone-third of credit within the system, while the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs), primarily Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, supply 20 percent of credit. A final group, which I will refer to as other nonbanks and is often associated with substantial reliance on short-term wholesale funding, consists of broker-dealers, money market mutual funds (MMFs), finance companies, issuers of asset-backed securities, and mortgage real estate investment trusts, which together provide 14 percent of credit. 3 In the first quarter of this year, U.S. financial firms held credit market debt equal to $38 trillion, or 2.2 times the gross domestic product (GDP) of the United States. As the figure shows, the size of the financial sector relative to GDP grew for nearly 50 years but declined after the financial crisis and has only started increasing again this year. From the perspective of financial stability, there are two important dimensions along which the categories of institutions in figure 1 differ. First, banks, the GSEs, and most of what I have called other nonbanks tend to be more leveraged than other institutions. Second, some institutions are more reliant on short-term funding and hence vulnerable to runs. For example, MMFs were pressured during the recent crisis, as their deposit-like liabilities--held as assets by highly risk-averse investors and not backstopped by a deposit insurance system--led to a run dynamic after a large fund broke the buck. In addition (as highlighted in table 1 ), nearly half of the liabilities of broker-dealers consists--and consisted then--of short-term wholesale funding, which proved to be unstable in the crisis. The pros and cons of a multifaceted financial system The significant role of nonbanks in the U.S. financial system and the associated complex web of interconnections bring both advantages and challenges relative to the more bank-dependent systems of other advanced economies. 4 A potential advantage of lower bank dependence is the possibility that a contraction in credit supply from banks can be offset by credit supply from other institutions or capital markets, thereby acting as a spare tire for credit supply. As shown in table 2 , historical evidence suggests that the credit provided by what I termed long-term investors--that is, insurance companies, pension funds, and mutual funds--has tended to offset movements in bank credit relative to GDP, as indicated by the strong negative correlation of credit held by these institutions with bank credit during recessions. In other words, these institutions have acted as a spare tire for the banking sector. 5 However, complexity also poses challenges. While the financial crisis arguably started in the nonbank sector, it quickly spread to the banking sector because of interconnections that were hard for regulators to detect and greatly underappreciated by investors and risk managers in the private sector. 6 For example, when banks provide loans directly to households and businesses, the chain of intermediation is short and simple; in the nonbank sector, intermediation chains are long and often involve a multitude of both banks and other nonbank financial institutions. 7 Regulatory, supervisory, and financial industry reforms since the crisis U.S. regulators have undertaken a number of reforms to address weaknesses revealed by the crisis. The most significant set of reforms has focused on the banking sector and, in particular, on regulation and supervision of the largest, most interconnected firms. Changes include significantly higher capital requirements, additional capital charges for global systemically important banks, macro-based stress testing, and requirements that improve the resilience of banks' liquidity risk profile. Changes for the nonbank sector have been more limited, but steps have been taken, including the final rule on risk retention in securitization, issued jointly by the Federal Reserve and five other agencies in October of last year, and the new MMF rules issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in July of last year, following a Section 120 recommendation by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC). 8 More recently, the SEC has also proposed rules to modernize data reporting by investment companies and advisers, as well as to enhance liquidity risk management and disclosure by open-end mutual funds, including exchange-traded funds. 9 Other provisions include the central clearing requirement for standardized over-the-counter derivatives and the designation by the FSOC of four nonbanks as systemically important financial institutions. 10 The industry has also undertaken important changes to bolster the resilience of its practices, including notable improvements to internal risk-management processes. 11 Some challenges to macroprudential policy The steps taken since the crisis have almost certainly improved the resilience of the U.S. financial system, but I would like to highlight two significant challenges that remain. First, new regulations may lead to shifts in the institutional location of particular financial activities, which can potentially offset the expected effects of the regulatory reforms. The most significant changes in regulation have focused on large banks. This focus has been appropriate, as large banks are the most interconnected and complex institutions. Nonetheless, potential shifts of activity away from more regulated to less regulated institutions could lead to new risks. It is still too early to gauge the degree to which such adaptations to regulatory changes may occur, although there are tentative signs. For example, we have seen notable growth in mortgage originations at independent mortgage companies as reflected in the striking increase in the share of home-purchase originations by independent mortgage companies from 35 percent in 2010 to 47 percent in 2014. This growth coincides with the timing of Basel III, stress testing, and banks' renewed appreciation of the legal risks in mortgage originations. 12 As another example, there have also been many reports of diminished liquidity in fixed-income markets. Some observers have linked this shift to new regulations that have raised the costs of market making, although the evidence for changes in market liquidity is far from conclusive and a range of factors related to market structure may have contributed to the reporting of such shifts. 13 Despite limited evidence to date, the possibility of activity relocating in response to regulation is a potential impediment to the effectiveness of macroprudential policy. This is clearly the case when activity moves from a regulated to an unregulated institution. But it may also be relevant even when activity moves from one regulated institution to an institution regulated by a different authority. This scenario can occur in the United States because different regulators are responsible for different institutions, and financial stability traditionally has not been, and in a number of cases is still not, a central component of these regulators' mandates. To be sure, the situation has improved since the crisis, as the FSOC facilitates interagency dialogue and has a shared responsibility for identifying risks and reporting on these findings and actions taken in its annual report submitted to the Congress. In addition, FSOC members jointly identify systemically important nonbank financial institutions. Despite these improvements, it remains possible that the FSOC members' different mandates, some of which do not include macroprudential regulation, may hinder coordination. By contrast, in the United Kingdom, fewer member agencies are represented on the Financial Policy Committee at the Bank of England, and each agency has an explicit macroprudential mandate. The committee has a number of tools to carry out this mandate, which currently are sectoral capital requirements, the countercyclical capital buffer, and limits on loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios for mortgage lending. A second significant challenge to macroprudential policy remains the relative lack of measures in the U.S. macroeconomic toolkit to address a cyclical buildup of financial stability risks. Since the crisis, frameworks have been or are currently being developed to deploy some countercyclical tools during periods when risks escalate, including the analysis of salient risks in annual stress tests for banks, the Basel III countercyclical capital buffer, and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) proposal for minimum margins on securities financing transactions. But the FSB proposal is far from being implemented, and a number of tools used in other countries are either not available to U.S. regulators or very far from being implemented. For example, several other countries have used tools such as time-varying risk weights and time-varying loan-to-value and debt-to-income caps on mortgages. Indeed, international experience points to the usefulness of these tools, whereas the efficacy of new tools in the United States, such as the countercyclical capital buffer, remains untested. 14 In considering the difficulties caused by the relative unavailability of macroprudential tools in the United States, we need to recognize that there may well be an interaction between the extent to which the entire financial system can be strengthened and made more robust through structural measures--such as those imposed on the banking system since the Dodd-Frank Act--and the extent to which a country needs to rely more on macroprudential measures. 15 Inter alia, this recognition could provide an ex post rationalization for the United States having imposed stronger capital and other charges than most foreign countries. Implications for monetary policy Though I remain concerned that the U.S. macroprudential toolkit is not large and not yet battle tested, that does not imply that I see acute risks to financial stability in the near term. Indeed, banks are well capitalized and have sizable liquidity buffers, the housing market is not overheated, and borrowing by households and businesses has only begun to pick up after years of decline or very slow growth. Further, I believe that the careful monitoring of the financial system now carried out by Fed staff members, particularly those in the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research, and by the FSOC contributes to the stability of the U.S. financial system--though we have always to remind ourselves that, historically, not even the best intelligence services have succeeded in identifying every significant potential threat accurately and in a timely manner. This is another reminder of the importance of building resilience in the financial system. Nonetheless, the limited macroprudential toolkit in the United States leads me to conclude that there may be times when adjustments in monetary policy should be discussed as a means to curb risks to financial stability. The deployment of monetary policy comes with significant costs. A more restrictive monetary policy would, all else being equal, lead to deviations from price stability and full employment. Moreover, financial stability considerations can sometimes point to the need for accommodative monetary policy. For example, the accommodative U.S. monetary policy since 2008 has helped repair the balance sheets of households, nonfinancial firms, and the financial sector. Given these considerations, how should monetary policy be deployed to foster financial stability? This topic is a matter for further research, some of which will look similar to the analysis in an earlier time of whether and how monetary policy should react to rapidly rising asset prices. That discussion reached the conclusion that monetary policy should be deployed to deal with errant asset prices (assuming, of course, that they could be identified) only to the extent that not doing so would result in a worse outcome for current and future output and inflation. 16 There are some calculations--for example, by Lars Svensson--that suggest it would hardly ever make sense to deploy monetary policy to deal with potential financial instability. The contention that macroprudential measures would be a better approach is persuasive, except when there are no relevant macroprudential measures available. I believe we need more research into the question. I also struggle in trying to find consistency between the certainty that many have that higher interest rates would have prevented the Global Financial Crisis and the view that the interest rate should not be used to deal with potential financial instabilities. Perhaps that problem can be solved by seeking to distinguish between a situation in which the interest rate is not at its short-run natural rate and one in which asset-pricing problems are sector specific. Of course, we should not exaggerate. It is one thing to say we have no macroprudential tools and another to say that having more macroprudential measures--particularly in the area of housing finance--could provide major financial stability benefits. It also seems likely that monetary policy should be used for macroprudential purposes with an eye to the tradeoffs between reduced financial imbalances, price stability, and maximum employment. In this regard, a number of recent research papers have begun to frame the issue in terms of such tradeoffs, although this is a new area that deserves further research. 17 It may also be fruitful for researchers to continue investigating the deployment of new or little-used monetary policy tools. For example, it is arguable that reserve requirements--a traditional monetary policy instrument--can be viewed as a macroprudential tool. In addition, some research has begun to ask important questions about the size and structure of monetary authority liabilities in fostering financial stability. 18 Conclusion To sum up: The need for coordination across different regulators with distinct mandates creates challenges to the timely deployment of macroprudential measures in the United States. Further, the toolkit to act countercyclically in the face of building financial stability risks is limited, requires more research on its efficacy, and may need to be enhanced. Given these challenges, we need to consider the potential role of monetary policy in fostering financial stability while recognizing that there is more research to be done in clarifying the potential costs and benefits of doing so when conditions appear so to warrant. After all of the successful work that has been done to reform the financial system since the Global Financial Crisis, this summary may appear daunting and disappointing. But it is important to highlight these challenges now. Currently, the U.S. financial system appears resilient, reflecting the impressive progress made since the crisis. We need to address these questions now, before new risks emerge. References Adrian, Tobias, and Hyun-Song. Shin (2010). " The Changing Nature of Financial Intermediation and the Financial Crisis of 2007-09 (PDF) ," Staff Reports Working Paper No. 439. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April. Ajello, Andrea, Thomas Laubach, David López-Salido, and Taisuke Nakata (2015). " Financial Stability and Optimal Interest-Rate Policy (PDF) ," working paper. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Bhutta, Neil, Jack Popper, and Daniel R. Ringo (forthcoming). "The 2014 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Data," Federal Reserve Bulletin . Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Agency, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Securities and Exchange Commission (2014). " Six Federal Agencies Jointly Approve Final Risk Retention Rule ," press release, October 22. Cecchetti, Stephen G., and Enisse Kharroubi (2012). " Reassessing the Impact of Finance on Growth (PDF) ," BIS Working Papers 381. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, July. Claessens, Stijn (2014). " An Overview of Macroprudential Policy Tools (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper WP/14/214. Washington: International Monetary Fund, December. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2012). " Registration of Swap Dealers and Major Swap Participants (PDF) ," final rules, Federal Register, vol. 77 (January 19), pp.2613-29. Dudley, William C. (2015). " Regulation and Liquidity Provision ," speech delivered at the SIFMA Liquidity Forum, New York, September 30. Financial Stability Board (2013). Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking: Policy Framework for Strengthening Oversight and Regulation of Shadow Banking Entities (PDF) . Basel, Switzerland: FSB, August. -------- (2014). Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2014 (PDF) . Basel, Switzerland: FSB, October. Fischer, Stanley (2015a). " The Importance of the Nonbank Financial Sector ," speech delivered at the Bundesbank conference "Debt and Financial Stability--Regulatory Challenges," Frankfurt, Germany, March 27. -------- (2015b). " Nonbank Financial Intermediation, Financial Stability, and the Road Forward ," speech delivered at "Central Banking in the Shadows: Monetary Policy and Financial Stability Postcrisis," 20th Annual Financial Markets Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Stone Mountain, Ga., March 30. Frost, Joshua, Lorie Logan, Antoine Martin, Patrick McCabe, Fabio Natalucci, and Julie Remache (2015). " Overnight RRP Operations as a Monetary Policy Tool: Some Design Considerations (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 712. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February. International Monetary Fund (2014). " Shadow Banking around the Globe: How Large, and How Risky? (PDF) " in Global Financial Stability Report: Risk Taking, Liquidity, and Shadow Banking--Curbing Excess while Promoting Growth. Washington: IMF, October, pp. 65-104. Joint Forum (2015). Developments in Credit Risk Management across Sectors: Current Practices and Recommendations (PDF) . Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, June. Kashyap, Anil K., and Jeremy C. Stein (2012). "The Optimal Conduct of Monetary Policy with Interest on Reserves," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics , vol. 4 (January), pp. 266-82. Kuttner, Kenneth N., and Ilhyock Shim (2013). "Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies," NBER Working Paper Series 19723. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December. Philippon, Thomas, and Ariell Reshef (2012). "Wages and Human Capital in the U.S. Financial Industry: 1909-2006," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 127 (November), pp. 1551-1609. Svensson, Lars (2015). " Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind ," presentation delivered at the AQR Institute of Asset Management event "Perspectives: Unprecedented Monetary Policy Intervention," London Business School, London, June 25. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015). Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 (PDF) . Washington: Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2012). " Clearing Agency Standards (PDF) ," final rule, 17 C.F.R. pt. 240, October 22. -------- (2014). " SEC Adopts Money Market Fund Reform Rules: Rules Provide Structural and Operational Reform to Address Run Risks in Money Market Funds ," press release, July 23. -------- (2015a). " SEC Proposes Rules to Modernize and Enhance Information Reported by Investment Companies and Investment Advisers: Proposals Would Improve Quality and Accessibility of Information for Investors and Regulatory Monitoring ," press release, May 20. -------- (2015b). " SEC Proposes Liquidity Management Rules for Mutual Funds and ETFs ," press release, September 22. Zingales, Luigi (2015). "Does Finance Benefit Society?" NBER Working Paper Series 20894. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Sirio Aramonte, Rochelle Edge, Luca Guerrieri, Michael Kiley, Nellie Liang, and Stacey Tevlin for their help in preparing this speech. Return to text 2. In my overview of the financial system, I am sizing the major players by their credit provision. But clearly, this is not the only metric that could and should be applied. If we consider net income, or other proxies for value-added by different subsegments of the financial system, we also capture the role of financial service companies and organized exchanges--companies with limited balance sheets, but which nonetheless play a vital role in the workings of our financial system. Return to text 3. Other nonbanks are often referred to as shadow banks because they engage in bank-like credit intermediation but are generally not subject to the same supervision and regulation as traditional banks and do not have direct access to deposit insurance. I will continue to call them other nonbanks. There is no universally accepted definition of what constitutes shadow banking. As noted in International Monetary Fund (2014), most definitions classify shadow banks by entity. Accordingly, by referring to other nonbanks as shadow banks, I am following an entity-based definition. Indeed, the definition that I am using is what the International Monetary Fund would call the Flow of Funds definition of shadow banks (see table 2.1, page 73). The Financial Stability Board (2013) describes shadow banking as "credit intermediation involving entities and activities (fully or partially) outside the regular banking system" (p. ii) and, in its annual Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report (see Financial Stability Board, 2014), focuses on a class of institutions called Other Financial Intermediaries, which includes all financial intermediaries that are not banks, insurance companies, pension funds, public financial institutions, or central banks (p. 8). This definition is close to the one that I am using but includes mutual funds. The definition used by Adrian and Shin (2010) is also close to the one that I am using but includes public financial institutions (specifically, GSEs and agency and GSE-backed mortgage pools). As the International Monetary Fund (2014) notes, shadow banking can also be defined according to activities and, indeed, they propose a classification that defines shadow banking as encompassing those activities by banks and nonbanks financed by nontraditional (noncore) liabilities. Return to text 4. See Financial Stability Board (2014) for comparisons of the size of the bank and nonbank sectors in other advanced economies. Return to text 5. Recent research has examined the potential benefits and costs associated with the growth and complexity of the financial system, including Cecchetti and Kharroubi (2012), Philippon and Reshef (2012), and Zingales (2015). Return to text 6. See Fischer (2015a, 2015b) for more detailed narratives on developments in the nonbank sector at the start of the global financial crisis. Return to text 7. For example, in the old days, a bank would originate a mortgage and hold it in its portfolio. Today, a bank might originate the same mortgage, but, instead of holding that loan on its balance sheet, it could securitize it--in effect, sell it--and the resulting security might be purchased with the help of short-term funding provided by an MMF. And the process might not end there: Next, that mortgage-backed security might be sold and repackaged into several new securities, and so on. Return to text 8. The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the SEC, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the Department of Housing and Urban Development approved final rules for risk retention, as required under the Dodd-Frank Act, in October 2014 (Board of Governors and others, 2014). Under the final rules, sponsors of almost all types of securities will have to hold a 5percent stake in the securities, although securitizations that are collateralized by qualified residential mortgages (as defined by the agencies) are exempt from risk retention. The intent of risk retention is to improve loan underwriting and securitization structuring by better aligning the interests of lenders, securitization sponsors, and investors. The SEC adopted new MMF rules in July 2014 (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2014). These rules include two key provisions: a floating net asset value requirement for prime MMFs sold to institutional investors and a system of "standby" liquidity fees and temporary restrictions on redemptions, or "gates," for all MMFs except government MMFs that can be imposed at the discretion of an MMF's board when the fund's liquidity is impaired. These rules are intended to mitigate the vulnerability of MMFs to destabilizing runs. Return to text 9. On May 20, 2015, the SEC proposed rules to enhance and modernize disclosure of portfolio information and risks by registered investment companies, including mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2015a). The proposals would require funds to disclose to the SEC and the public more information about their borrowing, usage, and terms of derivatives and repurchase agreements, securities lending activity, and sensitivity to interest rates. In addition, the proposal would introduce structured reporting formats to facilitate analysis of the data by the SEC and the public. Also on May 20, 2015, the SEC proposed rules to require investment advisers to report more information about the assets, borrowing, and derivatives exposures of the separately managed accounts that they manage (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2015a). On September 22, 2015, the SEC proposed rules to enhance liquidity risk management by mutual funds and ETFs (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2015b).The proposal would require each of these funds to adopt a liquidity risk-management program, categorize the liquidity of every portfolio asset, set its own minimum share of "three-day liquid assets," and disclose information about portfolio liquidity and the use of lines of credit and inter-fund lending. The proposal also would allow mutual funds to use "swing pricing," a process of adjusting the net asset value of a fund's shares to pass on to purchasing or redeeming investors more of the costs associated with their trading activity. Return to text 10. The Dodd-Frank Act requires that standardized swaps that previously traded in over-the-counter (OTC) markets be cleared through central counterparties, and that large participants in standardized swap markets be subject to heightened regulation. These requirements are meant to address the vulnerabilities in the OTC derivatives market that were highlighted by the 2008 financial crisis. The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) and the SEC are tasked with implementing the Dodd-Frank Act provisions by defining registration and business-conduct requirements that apply to the clearing organizations, to large participants in the swap market, and to data repositories. The SEC and the CFTC have finalized or initiated the rulemaking process for many of these regulations. For instance, the CFTC issued the final rule on the registration of swap dealers and major swap participants in January 2012 (Commodity Futures Trading Commission, 2012), while the SEC issued the final rule on operational and risk-management requirements for clearing agencies in October 2012 (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, 2012). Return to text 11. The list of reforms in this section of the speech is not comprehensive and omits important steps taken by the private sector. For example, supervisory and industry efforts have reduced the amount of intraday credit provided by the two large clearing banks (JPMorgan Chase and Bank of New York Mellon), which should improve the resilience of the triparty repurchase agreement market. The industry has also undertaken important changes to bolster the resilience of its practices. For example, firms in many parts of the financial system have initiated notable improvements to their internal risk-management processes. See Joint Forum (2015) for examples of enhancements to credit risk practices that have been made by firms since the crisis. These enhancements include increased focus on stress tests, enhanced reporting of exposures to counterparties and to industries, and improved systems to enable more detailed and more timely reporting. Return to text 12. For further description of recent dynamics in the mortgage market, see Bhutta, Popper, and Ringo (forthcoming). Return to text 13. As highlighted in detail in the report about events in U.S. Treasury markets on October 15, 2014, the move toward increasingly electronic, algorithmic, and high-speed trading in the foreign exchange, equity, and Treasury securities markets is almost certainly changing some aspects of liquidity. See U.S. Treasury and others (2015), which includes the findings of staff from the Department of the Treasury, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the SEC, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. See also Dudley (2015). Return to text 14. See Claessens (2014) for a comprehensive list of macroprudential tools and their uses across countries. See also Kuttner and Shim (2013), who find stronger effects of policies like loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratio caps on housing credit relative to policies targeted at banks' balance sheets and thereby loan supply. Return to text 15. I am grateful to Michael Kiley of the Fed for this insight. Return to text 16. For more information on monetary policy and financial stability, see Svensson (2015). Return to text 17. See Ajello and others (2015) and Svensson (2015) for examples of recent research in this area. Return to text 18. See Kashyap and Stein (2012) and Frost and others (2015) for examples of research on these questions. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: October 02, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Group of Thirty International Banking Seminar, Lima, Peru Share The U.S. economy continues to grow at a moderate pace, a pace sufficient to generate ongoing improvements in the labor market. On average, payrolls have expanded about 200,000 per month so far this year, and the unemployment rate has declined to 5.1 percent, just a bit above Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' median estimate of the normal long-run level of unemployment. But there remain additional forms of slack in the labor market that are not fully captured by the standard unemployment rate. The labor force participation rate remains below most estimates of its underlying trend, and an unusually large number of people are working part time but would prefer to work full time. Moreover, nominal wage growth has remained subdued. Real wage growth has also been subdued, possibly reflecting the low rates of productivity growth in the United States economy during recent years. As you know, the last two months saw slower reported payroll gains of about 140,000 per month. While this step-down is somewhat disappointing, the pace of job growth is still sufficiently strong gradually to erode slack in the labor market, and the prospects for further labor market improvement look good overall. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth in the first half of 2015 is now estimated to have been at an annual rate of 2-1/4 percent, and private forecasters are projecting GDP to continue to rise, at a pace in the neighborhood of 2 percent, in the second half. Consumer spending has been rising solidly of late, likely a reflection of the boost to purchasing power from the lower oil prices as well as the ongoing job gains and a wealth-to-income ratio that remains high even after the recent declines in the stock market. Further, the negative effect of low oil prices on the growth of investment in the U.S. energy sector appears to be waning. The restraint on net exports stemming from the appreciation of the dollar over the past year, and from global developments more generally, may be a negative influence on GDP growth for somewhat longer, but that restraint is likely to continue to be outweighed by the other sources of growth. Although the labor market has been approaching estimates of maximum employment, inflation has been well below the FOMC's 2 percent objective. Inflation has been held down by the declines in crude oil prices over the past year, and the stronger dollar is exerting downward pressure on U.S. inflation as well. Year-over-year changes in headline personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices have been running only a little above zero, and core inflation is at about 1-1/4 percent. But for reasons discussed at length in Janet Yellen's recent speech at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored, inflation is likely to move back toward 2 percent as the transitory effects of oil prices and the dollar fade, and as the economic expansion continues. What about Monetary Policy? In support of our dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability, the Federal Reserve has maintained a highly accommodative monetary policy stance since the financial crisis; this policy has fostered the marked improvement in labor market conditions that we have seen and has helped check undesirable disinflationary pressures. In its statement at the end of the September meeting, the FOMC noted that it anticipates that it will be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate when it has seen some further improvement in the labor market and is reasonably confident that inflation will move back to 2 percent over the medium term. In the SEP, the Summary of Economic Projections prepared by FOMC participants in advance of the September meeting, most participants, myself included, anticipated that achieving these conditions would entail an initial increase in the federal funds rate later this year. Of course, that assessment was premised on the assumption of continued solid economic growth and further improvement in the labor market, which are key factors supporting our expectation that inflation will rise to our 2 percent objective. A great deal of market attention has focused on the exact timing of our first increase in the funds rate, but what matters for overall financial conditions is expectations for the entire trajectory of short-term interest rates. In that regard, most members of the FOMC anticipate that economic conditions are likely to warrant raising short-term interest rates at a gradual pace over the next few years. However, that is an expectation, not a commitment. Both the timing of the first rate increase and any subsequent adjustments to the federal funds rate target will depend critically on future developments in the economy. For example, it is conceivable that inflation may rise more slowly or rapidly than we currently anticipate. Should such developments occur, we would adjust the stance of policy in response. Considerable uncertainties also surround the outlook for economic activity. For example, we cannot be certain about the pace at which the headwinds still restraining the domestic economy will continue to fade. Moreover, net exports have served as a significant drag on growth over the past year and recent global economic and financial developments highlight the risk that a slowdown in foreign growth might restrain U.S. economic activity somewhat further. The decision not to raise the interest rate in September has generated a great deal of discussion at this meeting of the IMF and World Bank and elsewhere. The decision was based, in part, on a desire to have more time to appraise recent developments in the global economy, especially those originating in the Chinese economy, before beginning the normalization of interest rates. There may well have been more comments on foreign economic developments in recent FOMC statements than was common in the past. That is natural given the increasing influence of foreign economic developments on the United States economy, both through imports and exports, and through capital account developments. The September statement notes that we are monitoring developments abroad. Nonetheless, we do not currently anticipate that the effects of these recent developments on the U.S. economy will prove to be large enough to have a significant effect on the path for policy. That said, recent employment reports have been somewhat disappointing and, as always, we are closely monitoring developments that could affect our sense of the economic outlook and the risks surrounding that outlook. Among these risks is the possibility that shifting expectations concerning U.S. interest rates could lead to more volatility in financial markets and the value of the dollar, intensifying spillovers to other economies, including emerging market economies. We are mindful that this could be the case even though monetary policy normalization in the United States will only occur in the context of a strengthening U.S. economy, and even though it has been clear from conversations at this conference that many officials of emerging market and other countries feel sufficiently forewarned and prepared for them to want us "to just do it." However, we have to remain cognizant of the risks ahead. We remain committed to communicating our intentions as clearly as possible--but not more clearly than the facts warrant--to assist market participants, be they in the private or the public sector, in understanding our intentions as they make their investment decisions. Last Update: October 11, 2015 Back to Top

," in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual , vol. 10. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, pp. 253‑74. Powell, Jerome (2015). " 'Audit the Fed' and Other Proposals ," speech delivered at the Catholic University of America, Columbus School of Law, Washington, February 9. Rogoff, Kenneth (1985). "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 100 (November), pp. 1169-89. Stein, Herbert (1969). The Fiscal Revolution in America . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Svensson, Lars (2015). " Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind ," presentation delivered at the AQR Institute of Asset Management event "Perspectives: Unprecedented Monetary Policy Intervention," London Business School, London, June 25. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2014). " Monetary Policy and Financial Stability ," speech delivered at the 30th Annual National Association for Business Economics Economic Policy Conference, Arlington, Va., February 25. Tinbergen, Jan (1952). On the Theory of Economic Policy . Amsterdam: North‐Holland. Walsh, Carl E. (1995). "Optimal Contracts for Central Bankers," American Economic Review , vol. 85 (March), pp. 150-67. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis, Ellen Meade, and Jonathan Rose for their help in preparing this speech. Return to text 2. The lecture, titled "Modern Central Banking," was printed in the conference volume, Capie and others (1994). A standalone version, including revisions following the discussion at that conference, is available as Fischer (1995a). Return to text 3. See Joyce, Lildholdt, and Sorensen (2010). Return to text 4. These theoretical results are demonstrated in the seminal work of Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983). Return to text 5. See Cukierman (2008). Return to text 6. See Rogoff (1985) for a well-known model that predicted such an outcome. Return to text 7. See also Posen (1995) and Forder (1996). Return to text 8. This distinction was introduced by Guy Debelle and the present author; see Debelle and Fischer (1994) and Fischer (1995a). Return to text 9. See Tinbergen (1952). Return to text 10. For further discussion of this issue, see Fischer (2010), a set of comments given as part of a panel at the Reserve Bank of Australia 50th Anniversary Symposium. Return to text 11. See Gerberding, Worms, and Seitz (2004); and Clarida and Gertler (1997). Return to text 12. Not only do the principles of democracy demand such accountability, but economic theory also points to accountability as one way of addressing an inflationary bias that might otherwise take hold. I have in mind here the principal-agent model of Walsh (1995). Return to text 13. Prior to 1999, the FOMC released statements only after meetings at which the federal funds rate was changed. Over time, the statements released by the FOMC have become more informative about the Committee's views of the economy and policy. Return to text 14. There are a number of additional transparency improvements that are less directly related to monetary policy communication, including detailed reports on liquidity facility and lending programs during the financial crisis, which can be found on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_reports.htm . In addition, a full list of securities held in the System Open Market Account portfolio is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website at www.newyorkfed.org/markets/soma/sysopen_accholdings.html . Return to text 15. Given the benefits of transparency, central banks around the world have also greatly augmented their public communications over the past 20 years. Recent papers measuring transparency across central banks include Crowe and Meade (2008) and Dincer and Eichengreen (2014). Dincer and Eichengreen (2014) conclude that almost all of the central banks around the world had greater transparency in 2010 than they did in 1998. See for example Figure 1 in that paper. These measures of transparency cover a variety of factors, including the openness about policy objectives and economic data, disclosures about the procedures used in deliberations, the speed of such disclosures, and transparency about the operational aspects of meeting targets. Return to text 16. See the Summary of Economic Projections submitted in conjunction with the September 2015 FOMC meeting, an addendum to Board of Governors (2015). Return to text 17. See Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015, H.R. 24, 114 Cong. (2015); and Federal Reserve Transparency Act of 2015, S. 264, 114 Cong. (2015). Return to text 18. Audited financial statements for the Federal Reserve System can be found on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_fedfinancials.htm . Return to text 19. See the Fed Oversight Reform and Modernization Act of 2015, H.R. 3189, 114 Cong. (2015). Return to text 20. For additional discussion of these proposals, see Powell (2015). Return to text 21. Discussions and descriptions of issues related to central banking remittances to fiscal authorities and the challenges involved are discussed in Bank for International Settlements (2003), particularly the chapter "Central Bank Balance Sheets and Fiscal Operations." Return to text 22. Recall that the Federal Reserve was itself created in response to a severe financial panic, the Panic of 1907. This panic led to the creation of the National Monetary Commission, whose 1911 report was a major factor in the creation of the Federal Reserve Act, signed into law in 1913. Return to text 23. See, for example, Tarullo (2014). Return to text 24. The use of the federal funds rate also affects particular sectors more than others--but that effect is softened by being spread over the entire economy. Return to text 25. A few of the members--namely, the governor and deputy governors of the Bank of England--are on both the Monetary Policy Committee and the FPC, but the remaining members do not overlap. The FPC members are the governor, three of the deputy governors, the chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority, the bank's executive director for financial stability strategy and risk, four external members appointed by the chancellor, and a nonvoting representative of the Treasury. The current membership of the FPC is available on the Bank of England's website at www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/Pages/people/fpc.aspx . Return to text 26. The macroprudential tools that the FPC may use were granted to it by specific acts of the U.K. Parliament. In addition, each year, the chancellor remits a letter to the FPC on issues that are of particular relevance to the government. Return to text 27. This is an instance of a general point made by Avinash Dixit (1996). Return to text 28. In the U.K. case, all responsibility for supervision of the financial sector was taken away from the Bank of England shortly after it was given its monetary policy independence; it was returned to the bank in the reforms implemented after the outbreak of the global financial crisis. Return to text Last Update: November 04, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Monetary Policy Implementation and Transmission in the Post-Crisis Period," a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C. Share Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar] toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows] seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows] increase/decrease volume; [M] toggles mute on/off; [F] toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The [Tab] key may be used in combination with the [Enter/Return] key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Good evening. My discussion tonight will focus on a key transmission channel in an open economy--the exchange rate. 1 The exchange rate is a primary focus of central bankers in small open economies as well as a prime concern of the broader public in those economies--and, to a lesser extent, in even the largest of economies. When I was governor of the Bank of Israel prior to joining the Federal Reserve, my markets screen was continuously open at a chart of the exchange rate of the shekel against the dollar. For small open economies, the exchange rate may well matter as much for output and inflation as do interest rates. 2 Given that the U.S. economy is much less open than Israel's, it is not surprising that fluctuations in the dollar typically receive somewhat less attention here in the United States. Indeed, much of the focus on dollar fluctuations in the recent research literature is on transmission to foreign economies, including through balance sheet channels, as in the Bank for International Settlements paper (Hofmann, Shim, and Shin, forthcoming) that will be presented tomorrow. Nevertheless, the exchange value of the dollar also plays a significant role in the U.S. economy, a role that has increased over time given growing global trade and financial linkages. My remarks will focus on the consequences of the dollar's ascent since last summer for U.S. output and inflation--and thus for monetary policy. Size of Dollar's Appreciation and Its Causes As seen in figure 1 , the roughly 15 percent appreciation of the broad real dollar since July 2014 is large, though not unprecedented by historical standards. 3 Two related factors appear to have played key roles in the dollar's rise. First, while the U.S. economy has performed relatively well--as is visible especially in our steady progress toward full employment--major foreign economies have generally experienced weak growth, along with persistently low inflation. Because foreign central banks responded appropriately by providing additional monetary accommodation, foreign interest rates have declined relative to U.S. interest rates, encouraging investors to shift into dollar-denominated assets and in turn boosting the dollar. But widening interest rate differentials can explain only part of the dollar's large ascent. A second factor has been heightened concern about the global outlook and an associated decrease in investor risk tolerance--factors that tend to increase investment in dollar assets. In recent months, investors have been particularly focused on the possibility of a sharp slowdown in China and other emerging market economies, with commodity exporters seen as particularly vulnerable in the wake of the dramatic drop in oil and non-oil commodity prices since the summer of 2014. Effects of a Stronger Dollar on U.S. Activity and Inflation In considering the transmission of changes in the dollar's value to U.S. output and inflation, it will be convenient for illustrative purposes to focus on the effects of a 10 percent appreciation that is assumed to be permanent--and then to draw on this analysis to provide some guidance on how the dollar's rise since mid-2014 has played out. Because the main way in which a stronger dollar affects U.S. output is through causing real exports to decline, I will begin by focusing on the factors determining the export response. Broadly speaking, an appreciation of the dollar reduces U.S. exports because it causes the relative price of U.S. goods to rise in foreign markets; for example, the price in yen of a U.S.-made pair of jeans will rise. To gauge the quantitative effects on exports, the thick blue line in figure 2 shows the response of U.S. real exports to a 10 percent dollar appreciation that is derived from a large econometric model of U.S. trade maintained by the Federal Reserve Board staff. 4 Real exports fall about 3 percent after a year and more than 7 percent after three years. 5 The gradual response of exports reflects that it takes some time for households and firms in foreign countries to substitute away from the now more expensive U.S.-made goods. A stronger dollar makes foreign goods cheaper for U.S. consumers and hence boosts U.S. real imports. Nevertheless, an extensive literature has found that the degree of pass-through of exchange rate changes to U.S. import prices is low, as foreign exporters prefer to keep the dollar price of the goods they sell in the U.S. market relatively constant. For example, a typical estimate is that an appreciation of the dollar of 10 percent causes U.S. non-oil import prices to fall only about 3 percent after a year and only slightly more thereafter. 6 The low exchange rate pass-through helps account for the more modest estimated response of U.S. real imports to a 10 percent exchange rate appreciation shown by the thin red line in figure 2, which indicates that real imports rise only about 3-3/4 percent after three years. 7 Figure 3 uses these results to gauge how a 10 percent dollar appreciation would reduce U.S. gross domestic product (GDP) through the net export channels we have just discussed. The staff's model indicates that the direct effects on GDP through net exports are large, with GDP falling over 1-1/2 percent below baseline after three years. Moreover, the effects materialize quite gradually, with over half of the adverse effects on GDP occurring at a horizon of more than a year. In interpreting these estimated effects on GDP, it is important to underscore that the estimates do not take account of any offset due to monetary policy easing--a key consideration that I will discuss shortly. Even so, recalling that the dollar's actual appreciation has been about 15 percent, the model estimates suggest that the cumulative reduction in U.S. aggregate demand from the dollar's appreciation is likely to total almost 2-1/2 percent of GDP after three years--in the absence of policy action to boost private demand or government spending. Given these perhaps surprisingly large effects, an obvious question is, how well has the model done so far in accounting for the actual behavior of U.S. real net exports? While trade flows are affected by many factors that are difficult to capture in models--such as the labor disputes at major ports that occurred earlier this year--the drag from net exports over the past year does appear to be relatively close to the estimated effect implied by the staff's econometric trade model, with net exports reducing GDP by almost 3/4 percentage point in the data, compared with an estimated fall of 1 percentage point in the model. Looking forward, given that the effects of the stronger dollar play through gradually to the economy, there is good reason to expect that the drag on GDP growth from the stronger dollar will persist well into next year and likely spell continued weakness in the traded-goods-producing sectors of the economy that are especially exposed to the exchange rate. Indeed, the more export-oriented manufacturing sector has already taken a hit during the past year and has experienced weaker growth than the broader economy. Turning now to inflation, consumer price inflation has been running well below the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target, and the strong dollar has played an appreciable role in this shortfall. One way in which the stronger dollar depresses inflation is by putting downward pressure on import prices. Figure 4 uses an econometric model discussed in a recent speech by Chair Yellen to illustrate how a 10 percent appreciation of the dollar might play through to core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation, which excludes the more volatile food and energy components. 8 This particular model implies that core PCE inflation dips about 0.5 percent in the two quarters following the appreciation before gradually returning to baseline, which is consistent with a four-quarter decline in core PCE inflation of about 0.3 percent in the first year following the shock. While the Board staff uses a range of models to gauge the effect of shocks, the model employed in figure 4--as well as other models used by staff--suggests that the dollar's large appreciation will probably depress core PCE inflation between 1/4 and 1/2 percentage point this year through this import price channel. Thus, given that core PCE inflation is running around 1-1/4 percent on a four-quarter-change basis, the stronger dollar has played a material role in holding core PCE inflation below 2 percent. A second channel through which dollar appreciation reduces inflation is by increasing economic slack. Greater slack amplifies the downward pressure on inflation, although the quantitative effect is probably fairly modest given the flat slope of the Phillips curve. Because the pass-through of dollar appreciation to oil and food commodity prices is much higher than for most imports, dollar appreciation tends to depress overall PCE inflation by even more than it depresses core inflation. An important difference between the transmission of dollar appreciation to inflation compared with output is that the effects on inflation are probably more transient. In particular, given that most of the effect on inflation occurs through changes in import prices--and import prices respond quickly to the exchange rate--the peak effect on inflation probably occurs within a few quarters. From the standpoint of the outlook, this transience means that some of the forces holding down inflation in 2015--particularly those due to a stronger dollar and lower energy prices--will begin to fade next year. Consequently, overall PCE inflation is likely on this account alone to rebound next year to around 1-1/2 percent. And as long as inflation expectations remain well anchored, both core and overall inflation are likely to rise gradually toward 2 percent over the medium term as the labor market improves further and the transitory effects of declines in energy and import prices dissipate. U.S. Monetary Policy and the Dollar The stronger dollar and some of the factors causing it, including weaker foreign demand, have played an important role in accounting for revisions to the expected path of U.S. policy rates compared with what was expected in the summer of last year. The forecasts made by Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants on a quarterly basis, which are published in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), provide a good indication of the extent to which forecasts for inflation, output growth, and the federal funds rate have changed since the summer of 2014. The June 2014 SEP showed U.S. GDP growth centered at roughly 3 percent in 2015 and core inflation running around 1-3/4 percent, and the median participant projected that the appropriate level of the federal funds rate at the end of 2015 would be 1-1/4 percent before rising to 2-1/2 percent at the end of 2016. 9 But in the most recent SEP following the September 2015 FOMC meeting, the median participant saw GDP growth at only 2 percent this year, core inflation at 1-1/2 percent, and the federal funds rate below 1/2 percent at the end of 2015 before rising to only 1-1/2 percent at the end of 2016. 10 This greater degree of monetary accommodation seems appropriate given the adverse effects on U.S. aggregate demand coming from the rise in the dollar, an associated weakening of foreign economic prospects, and other developments that have restrained spending and kept inflation undesirably low. Monetary policy easing helps through "crowding in" domestic demand, which in turn helps boost price inflation and makes it less likely that inflation expectations drift below our 2 percent target. The Board staff's general-equilibrium models that take explicit account of the ability of monetary policy to crowd in domestic demand--including the staff's FRB/US and multicountry SIGMA models--suggest that monetary policy easing can substantially mitigate the effects of adverse shocks on GDP, including from the recent run-up in the dollar. In the case of the dollar shock considered previously, these models suggest that the all-in effects of the stronger dollar on GDP are only about one-half to two-thirds as large as implied by the trade model that abstracts from a monetary policy response--still substantial, to be sure, but much less significant for the economy than if monetary policy failed to play an active role. Conclusion To wrap up, while the dollar's appreciation and foreign weakness have been a sizable shock, the U.S. economy appears to be weathering them reasonably well, notwithstanding their large effects on certain sectors of the economy heavily exposed to international trade. Monetary policy has played a key role in achieving these outcomes through deferring liftoff relative to what was expected a little over a year ago. The October 2015 FOMC statement indicated that it may be appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate at the next meeting in December, though the outcome will depend on the Committee's assessment of the progress--realized and expected--that has been made toward meeting our goals of maximum employment and price stability. 11 Of course, as policymakers, we must always be vigilant to events unfolding differently than we expect, and we must be ready to react accordingly. References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014). " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 17-18, 2014 ," press release, July 9. -------- (2015a). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, October 28. -------- (2015b). " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 16-17, 2015 ," press release, October 8. Bussière, Matthieu, Simona Delle Chiaie, and Tuomas A. Peltonen (2014). "Exchange Rate Pass-Through in the Global Economy: The Role of Emerging Market Economies," IMF Economic Review, vol. 62 (1), pp. 146-78. Gopinath, Gita (2015). "The International Price System," NBER Working Paper Series 21646. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October. Hofmann, Boris, Ilhyock Shim, and Hyun Song Shin (forthcoming). "The Risk Taking Channel of Currency Appreciation," BIS Working Paper. Loretan, Mico (2005). " Indexes of the Foreign Exchange Value of the Dollar (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 91 (Winter), pp. 1-8. Yellen, Janet L. (2015). " Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mass., September 24. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Christopher Erceg, Joseph Gruber, and Deborah Lindner for their contributions to this speech and to William English and David Skidmore for comments. Return to text 2. At times, starting in the 1990s, several central banks--most prominently, the Bank of Canada--have used a monetary conditions index , generally a weighted average of changes in a short-term interest rate and a multilateral exchange rate from some baseline, as a policy indicator. Return to text 3. The broad dollar is a weighted average of the foreign exchange value of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of a broad group of major U.S. trading partners. More information on the construction of the index can be found in Loretan (2005). Return to text 4. The results presented here are taken from the staff's U.S. International Transactions (USIT) model of the U.S. external sector. A forthcoming article in the Federal Reserve Board's International Finance Discussion Papers, or IFDP, Notes series will provide further detail on the structure and estimation of the trade block of the USIT model that is used in these computations. Return to text 5. It may be useful to note that exports in 2014 amounted to about 13-1/2 percent of GDP and imports to 16-1/2 percent of gross domestic product. Return to text 6. These estimates are consistent with recent analysis by Gopinath (2015) and Bussière, Delle Chiaie, and Peltonen (2014). Return to text 7. In the staff's trade model, imports are specified to depend on GDP in addition to the exchange rate. The estimates shown in figure 2 simply show the effects arising through the latter channel. Similarly for exports, the staff's model also controls for changes in a trade-weighted aggregate of foreign GDP, with the estimates in figure 2 showing only the effects from a change in the value of the dollar. Return to text 8. This econometric model is described in the appendix to Yellen (2015). Return to text 9. The SEP is an addendum to the FOMC minutes. For the June 2014 SEP, see Board of Governors (2014). Return to text 10. The September 2015 SEP is available in Board of Governors (2015b). Return to text 11. For the October 2015 FOMC statement, see Board of Governors (2015a). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: November 12, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Policy Challenges in a Diverging Global Economy" 2015 Asia Economic Policy Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California Share I am grateful for the opportunity to participate in the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's Asia Economic Policy Conference, and I thank the organizers for inviting me. 1 After a long period of rapid economic growth, Asia's emerging economies appear to have entered a transitional phase. For decades, emerging Asian economies have been among the fastest growing and most dynamic in the world. Supported by an export-oriented development model, annual growth averaged 7-1/2 percent in the three decades leading up to the global financial crisis. As shown in table 1 , the fast pace of growth in emerging Asia has also supported impressive gains in per capita income within the region. As the economies of emerging Asia have developed, they have followed a similar growth trajectory, also apparent in table 1. Along a path pioneered by Japan in the 1960s, initial integration into the global economy has been followed by a period of rapid export-led economic growth, which subsequently slows as the economy develops and incomes rise. In a process that has been likened to the pattern of flying geese, development in Japan pushed more labor-intensive production from Japan into the "Asian tigers"--that is, Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan--with that set of countries experiencing rapid growth in the 1970s and 1980s. As the tigers developed, low-value-added production was pushed further on, into the group of countries known as the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)--primarily Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and, more recently, China, where growth took off in the 1980s and accelerated through the 2000s. 2 At each step in this process, the slowing of growth in the relatively developed and globally integrated Asian economies was matched by an acceleration of growth in the less developed and less integrated economies, maintaining the overall rapid pace of growth in the region. 3 Now, with China perhaps beginning to follow the same trajectory of slowing growth as has been experienced by its predecessors in the East Asian growth model and without economies of sufficient scale to fill the gap (with the notable exception of India, which I will discuss later), growth for the region as a whole is declining. As shown in table 2 , taken from the most recent International Monetary Fund (IMF) regional outlook for Asia, growth in emerging Asia is set to decline in 2015 and 2016, with China's growth decelerating. 4 Furthermore, the IMF projections through 2020 call for almost no pickup from this slower pace. In my discussion, I will first address some of the factors behind slowing growth in emerging Asia, importantly including demographics. I will then cover one of the global implications of this deceleration, the effect on commodity markets, before looking at the prospects for India to recharge the region's growth dynamic. I will end with some thoughts on Asia's place in the global economy both now and in the years to come. Why Is Growth in Emerging Asia Slowing? The first thing to say and think about Asian growth is that growth at a rate of above 6 percent is not slow; it is slower than it has been, but it remains impressive. There are four factors weighing on emerging Asian growth that I would like to highlight. First, emerging Asia continues to be negatively affected by slow demand growth elsewhere, including in the advanced economies. Second, economies generally decelerate as they develop, a pattern that has already been evidenced in many of emerging Asia's growth pioneers. Third, the tremendous growth of trade in the region, driven by the process of global integration and the growth of production-sharing networks, may have plateaued. Lastly, demographic trends in a number of emerging Asian countries are likely to affect growth in the coming years. 5 Regarding the first of the factors that I just listed, contrary to often-repeated and often-resurrected stories of emerging market growth "decoupling" from that of the advanced economies, the truth is that advanced-economy demand continues to play a key role in emerging Asia's economic conditions. 6 And, as we all know, advanced-economy demand for imports in recent years has been lackluster. Real goods imports in the United States, Japan, and the euro area have all increased at an average annual pace of about 3-1/2 percent over the past three years, in all cases about half the average pace recorded in the two decades leading up to the financial crisis. Regarding the second factor, as is well established by theory and supported by empirical experience, economic growth tends to decelerate as a country develops. In a capital-poor developing economy, initial increases in investment generally have high returns, which then decline as capital accumulates. Likewise, the initial phase of integration with the global economy is typically marked by strong gains in productivity as methods and technologies are adopted from more advanced economies. Over time, the boost to growth from this catch-up in productivity fades. Also, as incomes rise and consumption grows, there is a tendency for a relatively rapid increase in demand for services. The shift of domestic resources toward the production of services, which are typically associated with lower productivity growth, tends to further lower trend growth. The factors that have tended to temper growth as economies develop appear to be at play in China. Following years of exceptionally high investment, the return on capital appears to be moderating, and the ratio of investment to gross domestic product (GDP), after peaking near 50 percent of GDP in 2011, has begun to edge down. As viewed in the context of the Lewis model, China could be reaching the stage at which the supply of labor from the subsistence agricultural sector becomes a constraint on growth. Further, productivity growth, though robust by global standards, has been declining. This decrease is likely due, at least in part, to the rapid growth of services consumption. One of the most noteworthy aspects of China's recent GDP data has been the strength of services, with services now accounting for half of the value added in GDP, up from just over 40 percent in 2008. Next, I would like to discuss the third factor weighing on Asian growth--trade. Global integration and trade growth have played a key role in the Asian economic success story, and the recent slowdown in global trade, over and above what might be expected given the weakness of advanced-economy demand discussed earlier, is likely to affect emerging Asian growth prospects. During the financial crisis, global trade collapsed. After the immediate crisis faded, trade bounced back in many cases. But the bounceback was more limited than the decline, with the increase in the volume of trade since 2012 only matching the pace of global output growth, a considerable deceleration from the previous two decades, when trade increased at twice the pace of global output. While the legacy of the crisis, particularly the continued weakness of traded-good-intensive investment in many economies, has likely contributed to the weakness of global trade, a slowdown in intra-Asian regional trade also appears to be a factor. After increasing at an average rate of about 15 percent a year through the 2000s, nominal intra-Asian trade flows have flattened out considerably over the past couple of years, in part reflecting a slowdown in the growth of production sharing within the region. The outlook for a renewed surge in intra-Asian trade does not appear to be promising. The growth of production-sharing networks in Asia has been tied to the region's export-oriented growth model. In particular, China's integration into the global economy as the hub of this production network provided a significant boost to the development and growth of these networks. As China and the region shift toward domestic demand and away from external demand, it seems unlikely that trade growth in the region will return to its earlier exceptional pace. To the extent that the expansion of these networks was tied to export-led growth that depended partly on preferential treatment of the export sector, more-balanced growth in these economies may also result in a better allocation of production across countries. If growth of trade is lower as a result, that is not necessarily a problem. However, there is a well-established literature indicating that trade encourages greater efficiency, along with the dissemination of technological innovation, and slower growth of trade could reduce this effect. It also bears noting that Asian trade growth has been accompanied by the creation of a variety of intraregional and broader trade agreements--including the 10-nation ASEAN and membership in the World Trade Organization, which China achieved in 2001 and Vietnam in 2007--as well as a host of bilateral agreements, both within and outside the region. I will return briefly to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) at the end of the talk. Finally, demographics are an additional factor likely to lower growth in the region, particularly in Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, Thailand, and China, notwithstanding the recent relaxation of the one-child policy. As shown in table 3 , both China and Thailand have a median population age of about 37 years, about the same as the median in the United States. The median age is even higher in Hong Kong, Korea, and Singapore, all of which have medians of 40 years or more. Relatedly, as shown in the second column of the table, China, Thailand, and the relatively developed emerging Asian economies are expected to have a significant percentage of their populations older than 65 years by 2030, with the proportion similar to that in the United States, though still below those in Germany and Japan. In contrast, demographics are less of an issue elsewhere in the region, particularly in India and most of ASEAN, including Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Vietnam, which have medians of 30 years or less. Just as slowing workforce growth is likely to be a drag on growth in many developed countries, trend growth is likely to be held back by demographic developments in relatively elderly emerging Asian economies as well. Up to this point, I have discussed a number of factors that are likely to lower emerging Asia's growth trajectory in the coming years. However, the overall message is not a pessimistic one; rather, for the most part, the slowing of growth is a natural transition and an outcome of Asia's remarkable economic success. As many have noted over the years, maintaining growth sufficiently rapid to meet the development aspirations of the region will require a transition toward an economic paradigm more rooted in domestic demand, particularly consumption. The need for this transition, or rebalancing, is most apparent and also widely acknowledged in China, the current hub of emerging Asia's export-led model. The need for these economies--primarily China, but also those economies that export through China--to switch toward domestic demand largely reflects their having become too big and too important to rely to the extent they have on the export-led models of the past. On growth, the bottom line that should be emphasized is that even with a diminished pace of growth, the region is still expected to significantly outpace the global economy and make by far the largest contribution to global growth in the years ahead. Spillovers from Asia's Economic Transition: Commodity Markets I will now focus on an area where the spillovers of Asia' economic transition are likely to be substantial--global commodity markets. Emerging Asia has played an outsized role in commodity markets for some time now. Specifically, China, with its investment-heavy growth model, has accounted for a substantial amount of incremental commodity demand over the past two decades. Since 2000, China has accounted for roughly 40 percent of the increase in global demand for oil and 80 percent of the growth in demand for steel. For copper, all of the incremental rise in global demand has come from China, with demand excluding China falling over the period. The strength of emerging Asian demand growth pushed commodity prices up sharply over most of the past decade, at least temporarily reversing what seemed to be an inexorable decline in both commodity prices and the terms of trade of commodity producers in the preceding two decades. Higher prices were a tremendous boon to commodity producers and supported a decade of strong growth in a number of emerging market economies, as well as commodity sectors in certain advanced economies, including Australia and the United States. Since mid-2014, commodity prices have plummeted, with oil prices falling almost 60 percent and a broad index of metals prices losing about one-third of its value, dragging down growth in many commodity producers. Although rapid commodity output growth in recent years, which has reflected in part the response of producers to previous price increases, has certainly contributed to the fall in commodity prices, the slowing of demand growth from China and emerging Asia has also been an important factor. While the path ahead for commodity prices is, as always, uncertain, declining investment rates in emerging Asia, particularly China, present the prospect of a prolonged decline in the growth rate of commodity demand. And prices could remain low for quite some time, which seems particularly true for metals, such as copper and steel, used heavily in construction and investment. However, for oil, the implications of a shift from investment-led growth to a consumption-led model are less certain. On a per capita basis, China's consumption of oil remains far below that of advanced economies, in line with China's lower rate of car ownership. Per capita oil consumption tends to increase with wealth, such that further income growth in China has the potential to provide strong support for the oil market in the coming years. Indeed, more generally, the world stands to benefit from a transition to more consumption-led growth in emerging Asia. Under a successful transition toward more-balanced growth, emerging Asia can be expected to import a broader array of goods and services both from within the region and globally. Whether a country benefits from or is harmed by emerging Asia's transition is likely to be determined by the flexibility of that country's economy in adapting to shifts in Asian demand away from commodities and inputs for assembly into the region's exports and toward services and goods to meet Asian final demand. To recap, the transition to slower growth in the emerging Asian economies, as well as a shift toward domestic demand and consumption and away from external demand and investment in the region, is likely to have profound implications for the global economy. For one, trade growth is unlikely to resume its rapid pace of recent decades, and the long climb in commodity prices, which has benefited commodity producers, appears to have come to an end. Can India Recharge Growth in Emerging Asia? One source of uncertainty in this outlook, as alluded to earlier, is the prospect for India to provide a new growth engine for Asian development. In principle, India has enormous potential to recharge the Asian growth engine. For one, India is relatively unintegrated into global production-sharing networks. For example, machinery and electrical products, which feature heavily in production-sharing and which make up about half of exports in other emerging Asian economies, account for only 15 percent of India's exports. Foreign direct investment into India is about half the size of similar flows into China as a percentage of GDP, and GDP per capita, at $1,600 in 2014, remains considerably below emerging Asia's average. All told, while the export-led growth model that propelled growth in China and other economies in emerging Asia has matured, pushing down growth rates, India remains at a relatively early stage of its development trajectory. Further capital deepening and the potential for further productivity gains suggest that India could maintain rapid economic growth for a number of years. As mentioned previously, India is also a young country, with a relatively low dependency ratio and a growing workforce. By United Nations estimates, India is set to overtake China during the next decade as the world's most populous nation. In the 1960s and 1970s, the Indian economy grew at around 3 to 4 percent. In subsequent decades the growth rate averaged close to 6 percent, and in the early years of this century it rose further, as can be seen in Table 1. In 2015, growth in India is expected to be 7-1/4 percent, the fastest among large economies, and the IMF expects growth to pick up from this already rapid pace through the end of the decade. Growth has been supported by an improved macroeconomic policy framework, including a strengthening of the framework for conducting monetary policy, as well as legal and regulatory reform. And the authorities have embarked on an ambitious program to improve the business environment. That said, significant roadblocks need to be overcome for India to reach its full potential. The economy continues to suffer from a number of infrastructure bottlenecks that will be alleviated only through a pronounced increase in investment rates, a process that would likely be helped by a relaxation of restrictions on foreign direct investment. Likewise, efforts at difficult reform will have to be sustained. There is much hard work ahead if India is to come closer to fulfilling the potential that it so manifestly has. Concluding Remarks The performance of the Asian economies--notably those of East Asia, particularly China, Japan, and Korea--especially in the past six or seven decades, is an outstanding, if not unique, episode in the history of the global economy. What lies ahead? In the relatively near future probably some major central banks will begin gradually moving away from near-zero interest rates. The question here is whether the emerging market countries of Asia--and, indeed, of the world--are sufficiently prepared for these decisions, to the extent that potential capital flows and market adjustments can take place without major macroeconomic consequences. While we continue to scrutinize incoming data, and no final decisions have been made, we have done everything we can to avoid surprising the markets and governments when we move, to the extent that several emerging market (and other) central bankers have, for some time, been telling the Fed to "just do it." Further ahead lies the answer to the question of whether developments in the global economy will permit the continuation of the export-centered growth strategy that underlies the Asian miracle or whether we will later conclude that this period, the period after the Great Recession and the global financial crisis, marked the beginning of a new phase in the economic history of the modern global economy. 7 Either way, the question of the economic future of India is of major importance not only to the 18 percent of the world's population that lives in India, but also to the other 82 percent of the global population. At a more structural level are three recent developments whose potential importance is currently difficult to assess: the setting up of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank; the likely inclusion of the Chinese yuan in the Special Drawing Rights basket; and the possible establishment of the TPP, a partnership in which China is not expected to be a founding member. 8 These are interesting and potentially important developments. Underlying the answer to the questions of what they portend, is the answer to the basic question of whether the economic center of gravity of the world will continue its shift of recent decades toward Asia--in particular, to China or, perhaps, to China and India. This shift would represent a return in some key respects to the global order of two centuries ago and earlier, before the economic rise of the West. A partial answer to that question is that China is for some time likely to continue to grow faster than the rest of the world and thus to produce an increasing share of global output. Its importance in the global economy is likely to increase, and it is probable that, one way or another, its growth will result in its playing a more decisive role in the international economy and in international economic institutions. Finally, we need to remind ourselves that geopolitical factors will play a critical role in the unfolding of that process. References Brandt, Loren, and Thomas G. Rawski (2008). "China's Great Economic Transformation," in Loren Brandt and Thomas G. Rawski, eds., China's Great Economic Transformation. New York: Cambridge University Press. Haltmaier, Jane T., Shaghil Ahmed, Brahima Coulibaly, Ross Knippenberg, Sylvain Leduc, Mario Marazzi, and Beth Anne Wilson (2007). " The Role of China in Asia: Engine, Conduit, or Steamroller? (PDF) " International Finance Discussion Papers 904. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September. Monetary Authority of Singapore (2007). "Revisiting the US-Asia Decoupling Hypothesis," special feature B, Macroeconomic Review, vol. 6 (October), pp. 72-80. World Bank (1993). The East Asian Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy . Washington: WB, September. Zheng, Kit Wei, Ong Jia Wern, and Kevin Kwan Tai You (2005). " China's Rise as a Manufacturing Powerhouse: Implications for Asia (PDF) ," MAS Staff Paper 42. Singapore: Monetary Authority of Singapore, December. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Joseph Gruber and Jasper Hoek for their contributions to this speech. I also thank Ravi Menon of the Monetary Authority of Singapore and Changyong Rhee, Ratna Sahay, and James Walsh of the International Monetary Fund for their assistance. Return to text 2. With some delay, the Philippines could be added to this group. As production of labor-intensive goods has moved from one group of countries to the next, concerns have been raised about a decrease in "competitiveness" in the relatively more developed Asian economies. These concerns have been particularly pronounced in regard to China, where commentators have questioned whether China's rise has come at the expense of growth in its neighbors or provided an extra impetus to growth. Research studies (see Zheng, Wern, and You (2005) and Haltmaier and others (2007)) have generally found that China's rise has been positive for regional growth, with China's development as an export platform boosting the overall competitiveness of the region's exports. Return to text 3. In addition to integration with the global economy, a number of other factors have also contributed to the East Asian growth miracle. With regard to China, Brandt and Rawski (2008) highlight the importance of incremental reform focused on removing the most binding constraints on economic activity. Of course, reform is not independent of global integration, as the heightened international competition associated with opening an economy likely incentivizes increased reform. Return to text 4. The IMF does not include Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, or Taiwan in its definition of emerging Asia. For the purposes of my discussion, I group these four economies along with China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam as emerging Asia. Return to text 5. In a speech of this length and scope, it is not possible to relate all important developments affecting Asian growth. In particular, I will not address the need for further development of financial systems and infrastructure in Asian emerging economies, which will be important factors in determining future rates of growth. Return to text 6. This point is particularly well made in Monetary Authority of Singapore (2007). Return to text 7. See World Bank (1993) for an early attempt to define the sources of East Asian growth. Return to text 8. At this point, the reader will recall the supposed remark by Chou En-lai that it is too early to assess the importance of the French revolution. The most plausible current version of that story is that Chou was answering a question about the importance of the 1968 student riots in Paris. The countries expected to become members of the TPP are, in alphabetical order, Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, the United States, and Vietnam. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: November 19, 2015 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Financial Stability: Policy Analysis and Data Needs" 2015 Financial Stability Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research, Washington, D.C. Share Watch live I would like to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Office of Financial Research (OFR) for inviting me to address this conference. 1 I have two goals this afternoon. First, I will briefly share my overall assessment of the current state of the vulnerabilities of the financial system. Second, I will outline areas where regulators and researchers can work to fill in gaps in our understanding or in the data available to monitor conditions, especially conditions outside the banking sector. With regard to current conditions, like most who follow financial sector developments, I see financial vulnerabilities in the United States as greatly reduced from a decade ago, on the eve of the beginning of the global financial crisis. But despite this relatively positive overall assessment, the financial system is dynamic and will evolve over time, and the tightening in regulation of the banking sector may push activity to other areas--and things happen. In particular, while current shadow banking activities are much reduced relative to their level in 2007-08, some developments remain hard to track, and interconnections across the financial system are hard to measure. Several steps have been taken to reduce shadow banking risks, including restrictions on the support banks can provide to shadow banking activities and reforms designed to lower the incentives of investors to run on money market mutual funds. But more needs to be done. For example, efforts to limit leverage used to finance securities positions, such as the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) recently finalized standard on minimum and potentially countercyclical haircuts on securities financing transactions, represent a further step in the right direction. As the financial system evolves, we will want, as my colleague Daniel Tarullo emphasized a few weeks ago, "to pursue a policy of case-by-case assessment that permits healthy forms of nonbank intermediation while protecting the financial system." 2 Doing so will require further development of the economic models that we use to understand interconnections across our complex financial system, along with better data. The Current State of the Financial System Factors promoting greater structural resilience Returning to the current state of vulnerabilities, it is well known that a range of structural improvements mandated by the Congress and undertaken by the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies have strengthened financial stability over the past five years. Important changes in regulation and supervision include (1) requirements for more and higher-quality capital and other loss-absorbing capacity at banks; (2) new requirements for liquidity buffers at banks; (3) more stringent capital and liquidity requirements at the largest, most systemically important firms; (4) stress-testing of the largest banks; (5) the shift of the clearing of some derivatives to central counterparties (CCPs); (6) new margin requirements for uncleared derivatives transactions; (7) the designation of systemically important nonbank financial institutions by the Financial Stability Oversight Council; and (8) enhanced sharing of information among regulators and monitoring of risks to financial stability, in which the OFR has played a leading role. 3 This is an impressive list. 4 Cyclical developments Turning to developments in the cyclical behavior of the financial system, at least five factors contribute to financial fragility: (1) high debt burdens at households and firms; (2) elevated leverage and maturity transformation within the financial sector; (3) complexity and interconnectedness in intermediation chains; (4) low risk premiums on assets, especially assets funded with debt; and (5) complacency on the part of investors, supervisors and decisionmakers in the private sector of the financial system. At the Federal Reserve, staff members present their assessment of vulnerabilities to the financial sector in terms of these risk factors and further organize these risk factors along institutional lines--distinguishing among developments within the banking sector and the nonbank sector, with a special focus on nonbank institutions that engage in maturity transformation or deploy notable degrees of leverage. 5 Using this framework, I see overall financial vulnerabilities as moderate--that is, considerably lower than a decade ago. Asset valuations and debt burdens in key markets do not appear outsized. Perhaps most important, house prices, while substantially above their recent lows, do not appear broadly elevated relative to rents or disposable income, in contrast to conditions a decade ago. Moreover, household-sector debt growth has been modest and driven mainly by prime borrowers, although rapid growth in auto and student lending across the credit spectrum may create repayment challenges for some households. However, signs of valuation pressures are emerging in commercial real estate markets, where prices have been rising at a solid clip and lending standards have deteriorated, although debt growth has not yet accelerated notably. In the corporate debt markets, valuation pressures had been high for a while, before risk spreads widened and issuance slowed over the past year. The high issuance of corporate debt in recent years is evident in the near-record-high debt-to-asset ratios at speculative-grade and unrated corporations, making this sector vulnerable to adverse shocks. In addition, increased defaults could lead to sharper-than-expected price declines if concerns that liquidity in corporate bond markets is not as robust as in the past--a topic to which I will return in a few minutes--turn out to be justified. In the financial sector, regulatory capital ratios remain at historically high levels, and liquidity buffers appear sizable in the banking sector. Capital ratios continue to trend upward for both life and property and casualty insurers. A Closer Look at Shadow Banking Still, our view of developments at nonbank firms that have traditionally relied on high leverage and short-term wholesale funding and were at the center of the financial crisis--the shadow banking sector--remains incomplete. 6 One source of information about leverage at nonbanks is the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms (SCOOS), which the Federal Reserve initiated after the crisis. The SCOOS provides information about the availability and terms of credit in securities financing and over-the-counter derivatives markets--for example, on credit granted by dealers to counterparties such as hedge funds or insurers to finance investments in securities like commercial mortgage-backed securities or corporate bonds. In recent years, the SCOOS has suggested relatively stable use of leverage across hedge funds and other counterparties--but this qualitative assessment provides only a high level, and very partial, view. 7 An important risk factor during the mid-2000s was the growth in securitization and the creation of so-called high quality collateral. Currently, the volume of securitization is far below mid-2000s levels, with much of the decline reflecting the collapse in private residential mortgage-backed securities. Further, the low level of activity probably understates the improvement in risk, as pre-crisis securitization was highly reliant on short-term wholesale funding through vehicles such as asset-backed commercial paper programs to finance the highest-rated tranches. More generally, wholesale short-term liabilities have declined across the board. For example, the gross volume of repos (repurchase agreements) fell from its peak of nearly $5 trillion in early 2008 to about $3 trillion by early 2009, while total assets of money market mutual funds contracted from approximately $3.75 trillion at the end of 2008 to about $2.5 trillion in recent years. 8 The decline in the volume of repos is part of a more general pullback from risk among broker-dealers and their clients, and dealer balance sheets are much smaller, on balance, than pre-crisis. Some, perhaps even the lion's share, of the retreat in securitization, money market mutual fund shares, and repos is probably due to investors' memory of the financial crisis. Institutions and individuals burned by runs and losses from fire sale conditions have, at least for the time being, adopted a more prudent stance. But structural changes have also played a role. The largest broker-dealers are now part of bank holding companies and are therefore subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve, which includes regular stress-testing and tighter capital and liquidity requirements. The new liquidity rules for large banks and the capital surcharge for systemically important banks discourage reliance on short-term wholesale funding. And the ability of banks to provide support to structured investment vehicles has been substantially curtailed through both restrictions on the accounting treatment of formerly off-balance-sheet exposures and more stringent capital requirements, including the supplementary leverage ratio applying to on-balance-sheet assets and off-balance-sheet exposures. Indeed, some have asked whether the reduction in broker-dealer activities has gone too far, citing heightened concerns over a possible shortage of bond market liquidity as one example of potentially negative consequences. Most measures of market liquidity in Treasury and corporate bond markets have not shown signs of a deterioration in market functioning in recent years. There are certainly concerns that bond market liquidity may not be as robust as in the past, which could lead to sharper-than-anticipated price movements--of which the bond market events in mid-October 2014 are often cited as an example. However, a review of the evidence does not point clearly to a significant role for the reduction in broker-dealer balance sheets or regulatory changes as being responsible for any shifts in liquidity. 9 Other structural factors, such as the long-term trends toward higher participation of high-frequency trading firms in Treasury markets and greater disclosure of corporate bond trades, have been important. In my view, the reduction in leverage and maturity transformation associated with better regulations leaves the financial system much more resilient--even if such regulations have modestly affected market liquidity. What We Know and What We Do Not Despite my assessment of current vulnerabilities, conditions can change quickly. And important blind spots in our view of the financial system remain, in part owing to data gaps. When it comes to financial stability, what you do not know really can hurt you--and there remains a good bit we do not know. 10 This lack of data can impede the design of regulation. There is a long history of data collection focused on banks, and supervisory data have contributed to our quantitative approach to regulation and supervision. For example, when we examine the likely implications of the failure of an institution's largest counterparty, we learn a great deal about the health of that institution and gain greater insight into its connections, through that counterparty, to other institutions. But data on a range of activities--including securities lending, bilateral repos, and derivatives trading--that create funding and leverage risks remain inadequate and hence could prove destabilizing if sufficiently large or widespread. We gain some insight into these markets through our supervisory relationships with the largest bank holding companies, but the activities of important nonbank market participants, such as asset managers, and the interconnections across institutions remain more opaque. Efforts are under way to deal with these gaps: The Legal Entity Identifier initiative is working to allow regulators and private counterparties to trace activities by institution; the OFR, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Federal Reserve are cooperating with the industry to collect data on bilateral repos; and the FSB has finalized standards for collection of data on securities financing transactions. 11 Regulators in the United States and abroad have begun to require the reporting of detailed derivatives transaction data to trade repositories. Unfortunately, as a recent report shows, inadequate data standards and limitations on authorities' access to trade repository data have prevented the benefits of derivatives trade data reporting from being fully realized. 12 An illustration of the possible interaction between better data and better policies is the potential role of margins in securities financing transactions. The more stringent regulation of the banking sector may push short-term financing activities to less regulated entities. To limit such regulatory arbitrage, the Federal Reserve will be developing regulations that would establish minimum margins for securities financing transactions on a marketwide basis. The margins would apply to all market participants, thereby mitigating the risks associated with regulation along institutional lines. Improved data collection, such as mentioned earlier, would allow a better view of changes in conditions and potentially contribute to the deployment of countercyclical margins, thereby further decreasing the chances of a dynamic that culminates in adverse fire sales. Data Are Not Enough: We Need Theory, Too While the steps to improve data taken so far will help, gaps will remain, especially with regard to unregulated or weakly regulated entities. These gaps impede both market participants' ability to discipline the risks taken by institutions and supervisors' ability to take prompt action. Nonetheless, I would also like to emphasize to this group of researchers that better data, by themselves, are only the start of the journey to better understanding. An important area in need of development is economic modeling on interconnectedness, particularly on the interaction of shadow banking, banks, and the broader financial system. 13 It is instructive to consider the distress at Lehman Brothers and American International Group, Inc. (AIG), in the late summer and fall of 2008 and of Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) in the late summer and fall of 1998. In each case, banking supervisors and market participants appear not to have appreciated--at least until very late--the degree to which these institutions were intertwined with large banks and other financial institutions; in each case, the concerns over the direct connections of these institutions were compounded by uncertainty regarding their positions, the positions of other institutions, and the potential fire sale dynamics that could occur under forced liquidation of their assets. Most obviously, in each case the institution was not a bank, and understanding the implications of their distress required understanding the possibly different implications of their business models from those of banks, their interconnections with banks, and their interconnections with the broader financial system. Of course, many conditions across these episodes were very different, as were their end results in the falls of 1998 and 2008. Because of those differences, distress at LTCM was resolved by a private-sector solution with little discernible effect on the U.S. macroeconomy, while the fall of 2008 culminated in the Great Recession. But the commonalities across episodes illustrate similar data and conceptual gaps. Focusing on the conceptual gaps, the theoretical and empirical literature on interconnectedness sheds only partial light on the issues confronted in each of the highlighted episodes. 14 In addition to direct connections, common exposures and contagion are important sources of interconnectedness and fragility, as emphasized by Bagehot nearly 150 years ago. 15 On the empirical side, researchers have worked to construct networks of banks or broader sets of institutions based on direct connections or common holdings, but incomplete data and modeling challenges have typically implied a focus on only parts of institutions' balance sheets or on a subset of market participants. 16 On the theoretical side, a strand of literature notes that the connections among institutions in each of the previous frameworks may be too small to explain the types of systemic distress witnessed during the crisis, and instead emphasizes that complexity within firms and in interconnections heightens the risk of correlated runs. 17 This insight rings true: The complexity of Lehman's, AIG's, and even LTCM's balance sheets and interactions with other institutions almost surely contributed to market spillovers during their distress. But it is also true that little research has been undertaken that distinguishes between banks and nonbanks, or highlights how their interactions are driven by economic incentives. Such research could guide regulator efforts to collect data and set policies to limit possible instabilities associated with interconnectedness. At one level, this is not surprising: As we all know, models are abstractions; nonetheless, improving the conceptual toolkit with which we gauge interconnectedness along practical dimensions is clearly needed. 18 Summary My current assessment of the risks to financial stability remains tentative and subject to change as we learn more or conditions shift. Policymakers and researchers need better models and data to understand the interconnections between the banking system and nonbank financial institutions. Indeed, one of the themes of this conference is data needs, and the focus on this issue is an important aspect of this conference. History has demonstrated that risks evolve in response to regulatory pressure and the animal spirits that emerge as memories fade, as well as to animal spirits. As a result, the infrastructure needed to learn the things we don't know needs to be put in place. An essential element of that infrastructure is learning the lessons of history – both the lessons of what happened, and the fact that supervisors and regulators will on occasion be surprised. Learning those lessons is not as simple a task as it may sound. But it is certainly a far more important task than it sounds. References Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi (2015). "Systemic Risk and Stability in Financial Networks," American Economic Review, vol. 105 (February), pp. 564-608. Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2013). " Financial Stability Monitoring (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-21. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. Allen, Franklin, Ana Babus, and Elena Carletti (2012). "Asset Commonality, Debt Maturity and Systemic Risk," Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 104 (June), pp. 519-34. Bagehot, Walter ([1873] 1897). Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. Bao, Jack, Josh David, and Song Han (2015). " The Runnables ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 3. Bisias, Dimitrios, Mark Flood, Andrew W. Lo, and Stavros Valavanis (2012). " A Survey of Systemic Risk Analytics (PDF) ," OFR Working Paper 0001. Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research, January. Caballero, Ricardo J., and Alp Simsek (2013). "Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity," Journal of Finance, vol. 68 (December), pp. 2549-87. Duarte, Fernando, and Thomas Eisenbach (2015). " Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 645. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February. Financial Stability Board (2015a). Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2015 (PDF) . Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. -------- (2015b). Thematic Review on OTC Derivatives Trade Reporting: Peer Review Report (PDF) . Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. -------- (2015c). Transforming Shadow Banking into Resilient Market-based Finance: Standards and Processes for Global Securities Financing Data Collection and Aggregation (PDF) . Basel, Switzerland: FSB, November. Fischer, Stanley (2014). " Financial Sector Reform: How Far Are We? " speech delivered at the Martin Feldstein Lecture, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. -------- (2015). " Macroprudential Policy in the U.S. Economy ," speech delivered at "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 2. Flood, Mark D., Victoria L. Lemieux, Margaret Varga, and B.L. William Wong (2015). " The Application of Visual Analytics to Financial Stability Monitoring (PDF) ," OFR Working Paper 14-02c. Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Financial Research, July. Hale, Galina, Tümer Kapan, and Camelia Minoiu (2014). " Crisis Transmission in the Global Banking Network (PDF) ," working paper, December Kara, Gazi, Mary Tian, and Margaret Yellen (2015). " Taxonomy of Studies on Interconnectedness ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 31. Miller, Thomas P. (2009). " What You Don't Know Can Hurt You ," American, May 27. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2015). " Thinking Critically about Nonbank Financial Intermediation ," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, November 17. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015). Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 (PDF) . Washington: Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July. Yellen, Janet L. (2013). " Interconnectedness and Systemic Risk: Lessons from the Financial Crisis and Policy Implications ," speech delivered at the American Economic Association/American Finance Association Joint Luncheon, San Diego, Calif., January 4. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Board, on the Federal Open Market Committee, or in the Federal Reserve System. I am grateful to Michael Kiley and Nellie Liang for their contributions to this speech. Return to text 2. See Tarullo (2015), which also provides a complementary review of the structural changes in shadow banking activities that I will highlight. Return to text 3. The OFR reports its monitoring efforts regularly, including in its annual reports (available on the OFR website at http://financialresearch.gov/annual-reports ). Research by OFR staff members on similar issues includes Flood and others (2015). Return to text 4. For a more comprehensive review of structural changes since the financial crisis, see my Feldstein lecture (Fischer, 2014). Return to text 5. For a discussion organizing vulnerabilities along these lines, see Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013). Return to text 6. I have previously discussed the lines between bank and nonbank activities (Fischer (2015)). The term "shadow banking" has been in use for some time, and I continue to use this term in this speech largely to ensure some connection to discussion in recent years. Recently, discussions of bank-like and other financial activities have begun to draw more clear distinctions regarding potential financial stability risks across activities; see Financial Stability Board (2015a) and the recent discussion in Tarullo (2015). Finally, money market mutual fund (MMMF) shares are not, technically, debt claims. However, the regulatory framework and historical precedent (in which MMMF shares had a fixed net asset value under normal conditions) appear to have led investors to treat such shares similarly to uninsured deposits. Return to text 7. The SCOOS is available on the Board's website . Return to text 8. See Bao, David, and Han (2015). Return to text 9. For a discussion of developments in U.S. Treasury markets on October 15, 2014, see U.S. Treasury and others (2015). Return to text 10. The phrase "what you don't know can't hurt you" is well known. According to the Oxford Dictionary of Proverbs, the oldest written version of this saying comes from 1576, in Petit Palace, by G. Pettie (as noted in Miller (2009)). (I am indebted to Michael Kiley for this reference.) Return to text 11. Information on the cooperative effort to collect data on bilateral repos is available on the OFR website . For details on the FSB's standards for collecting data on securities financing transactions, see Financial Stability Board (2015c). Return to text 12. See Financial Stability Board (2015b). Return to text 13. Then Federal Reserve Board Vice Chair Yellen discussed these issues in January 2013 (Yellen, 2013), in a speech that includes a detailed discussion of possible interactions among financial institutions, along with very clear graphic representations of potential systemic interactions. Return to text 14. For a discussion of various empirical measures outside the network literature, see Bisias and others (2012); and Kara, Tian, and Yellen (2015). Return to text 15. Bagehot (1873 [1897]) has long been viewed as a classic reference describing panics in money markets and the proper response of the central bank to such panics. Return to text 16. Duarte and Eisenbach (2015) examine interconnections associated with fire sales and common exposures. Hale, Kapan, and Minoiu (2014) examine a bank network and discuss related approaches. Return to text 17. Caballero and Simsek (2013) discuss complexity and network stability. Research emphasizing direct connections and common holdings includes Allen, Babus, and Carletti (2012); and Acemoglu, Ozdaglar, and Tahbaz-Salehi (2015). Return to text 18. In a sense, this section has discussed what soon after the collapse of Lehman Brothers began to be called "macroprudential supervision", by which at that stage was meant supervision that focused on the dynamics of the financial system that resulted from interactions among financial institutions, of which the worldwide impact of the Lehman failure was the outstanding example. Over the course of a few years, the term "macroprudential policies" began generally to be used as a description of sector-specific policy instruments that could be used to deal with potential instabilities in a particular sector, usually the housing sector. Return to text Last Update: December 03, 2015 Back to Top
