The Economy and the Question of Inflation Sept. 24, 2020 Tom Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Money Marketeers of New York University Webinar Highlights: Economic activity has rebounded since March and April but remains well below pre-COVID-19 levels. I have heard concerns about future inflation resulting from the fiscal and monetary response to the pandemic. Inflation has actually been running persistently below the Fed’s 2 percent target. Recent revisions to the Fed’s long-run monetary policy framework aim to boost inflation expectations somewhat. I remain focused on unemployment, given the huge gap between where we are today and our target. Should inflation emerge, the Fed has the tools and the will to address it. I thought today I might share some quick perspectives on the economy, and then dig in on a topic generating much interest: the question of inflation. These thoughts are my own and not those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. That frees me up to be as direct as I want, and I’m looking forward to hearing your questions and comments. My background is business, not research, so I hope you find my views and experience relevant. 1 I’d like to start with the big picture before turning to the latest data. Economic activity fell off a cliff in March and April as we shut down, increased rapidly in May and early June as the economy reopened, and then began to flatten in late June and July as the virus resurged. Over the last month, the virus has receded somewhat, though cases remain at elevated levels while the death rate has dropped. Vaccines are becoming more proximate, but their rollout and effectiveness are still hard to predict. Recent data posts, most notably the jobs report, have surprised on the upside. Congress has failed to pass another stimulus measure, creating risks to the less fortunate — though to be fair we haven’t yet seen that impact in the numbers. So where are we then? Given the steepness of the drop, trying to interpret the rebound in growth rates is confusing. I prefer to talk levels not rates: where are we today versus where we were pre-COVID-19. The unemployment rate is 8.4 percent, up from 3.5 percent in February. Nearly 12 million fewer Americans are employed, a drop of 7.6 percent. Spending is coming back faster than employment. Real Personal Consumption Expenditures (PCE) — 68 percent of the economy — is down 4.8 percent from its January peak. Within that, spending on goods is actually up 6.4 percent, but services spending is still down 9.7 percent. Our best proxy for business investment, new orders of nondefense capital goods excluding aircraft, is down 0.5 percent since February, though it was lagging at that time. And of course, government spending is up 53.7 percent as fiscal policy has attempted to bridge the downturn. But today I want to focus on a question I’ve been getting a lot these days: Are we at risk of seeing escalating inflation? If you focus on the data, this question is a bit surprising. The Fed’s inflation target is 2 percent. Over the last 20 years, headline PCE inflation has been 1.8 percent. Over the last 10 years, 1.5 percent. Over the last year, 1.3 percent. Over the last 6 months, 1 percent. It certainly hasn’t been escalating so far. If anything, financial markets seem more concerned about low inflation, not high. TIPS breakevens fell from 2.3 percent in 2007 to 1.6 percent today and were even lower a couple of months ago. Inflation on the Horizon? On the other hand, I can understand why people might expect that higher inflation is on the horizon. Some people worry about the actions the Fed has taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. After declining post the global financial crisis, the size of our balance sheet has surged to unprecedented levels, from $4.5 trillion to $7 trillion. As a result, M2 has expanded. To the casual observer, the actions the Fed has taken in recent months might look like the kind of “money printing” that has historically been associated with inflation. The Fed has also lowered interest rates to near zero and has pledged to keep them there for a long time. As Chair Powell said in a recent press conference, “We’re not even thinking about thinking about raising rates.” Our recent changes to our monetary policy framework and our recent statement support modest overshoots of our target to bolster inflation expectations. While this guidance should help support economic recovery, some might fear that it could de-anchor inflation expectations. Like the Fed, the federal government has also taken unprecedented action in response to the pandemic. Congress passed a $2 trillion stimulus package in March, and lawmakers continue to debate further stimulus. Federal debt has risen to its highest levels since World War II. Fiscal spending could pressure prices, and, at some point, mounting government debt could trigger inflation if investors begin to believe that the Fed will not raise interest rates when necessary. On the consumer side, households have witnessed supply constraints firsthand for food and household items, leading to higher prices at the grocery store, for example. Indeed, according to the University of Michigan’s Survey of Consumers, inflation expectations ticked up from 2.1 percent in April to 3.2 percent in May. While they have declined to 2.7 percent in the preliminary September results, that’s still high relative to the past few years. The core consumer price index has expanded at a 5.1 percent annual rate in the last three months. And one could imagine an inflationary scenario — perhaps with the rollout of an effective vaccine — where demand comes roaring back at a time when supply is still constrained. Even though it was 45 years ago, many of the people I talk to are part of the generation that still remembers the Great Inflation of the 1970s. So I can understand how, with that perspective, all of these things might be alarming. Is This Time Different? That said, I see the recent tick up as just a natural rebound from a deflationary second quarter. And, while it is certainly possible that inflation could escalate in the near future, I have to say I’m less worried about that possibility. In 2008, the Fed began paying interest on the reserves it issues. That change means that a larger balance sheet doesn’t have the inflationary impact that it might have in the past. Instead, think of it as merely a reduction in the maturity of outstanding government debt, as the Fed issues short-term debt in exchange for longer-term debt. That’s quite different than “printing money.” And, our surveys show that banks are tightening standards, so there is little evidence that the increase in reserves is fueling an explosion in loans. On the fiscal side, the saving rate in the second quarter was 26 percent and still 18 percent in July (vs. 8 percent pre-crisis), suggesting that fiscal stimulus isn’t yet overwhelming supply. And recent experience internationally has taught us that our capacity to take on additional debt may be higher than we previously thought. The last global recession was similarly accompanied by fears of inflation from fiscal and unconventional monetary stimulus. Instead, we saw low and stable inflation here, in Europe, and in Japan. What might explain this? In today’s environment of stable inflation expectations, I see moderate inflation driven largely by market power and price transparency. Greater price transparency facilitated by the internet may have increased consumer price elasticity and thereby dampened the responsiveness of inflation to resource pressures. At the same time, the rise of national low-price retailers and nonmarket purchasers, who leverage very aggressive professional purchasing disciplines and global alternatives, has made sellers hesitant to raise prices. Economist Thomas Philippon’s recent book on declining competition in America is compelling, but he really only talks about purchasing power in a labor context. 2 I actually think it has even more impact on the price of goods. Still, if these forces dissipate (say through deglobalization or antitrust) or if inflation does start to rise despite these forces, the Fed has proven effective tools to fight it. We may be limited in lowering rates below zero, but we do not face the same constraint when it comes to raising rates to respond to inflation should it appear. Rethinking Our Approach As you know, the recent focus of our profession has actually been to try to create a little more inflation, not less. And I would count myself among those who think a little more is welcome so that we don’t continue to be persistently below target and perhaps reduce expectations going forward. Our recent revision of our long-run monetary policy framework was in part intended to find ways to boost inflation and inflation expectations a bit. 3 I try to be humble about our ability to impact inflation, given the market forces I’ve described. So, as I evaluated these changes, I always asked myself whether the medicine was worth the pain. While inflation has run below our 2 percent target, as I said earlier, it is not that far-off target; with rounding, you could even call it on target. Moreover, inflation expectations are stable and well anchored. Monetary policy doesn’t operate with precision, so efforts to create a little more inflation do risk de-anchoring expectations and taking us higher than we want to go. That’s why I like where we landed in our new framework, making clear our willingness to have an overshoot — but only a moderate one. Wednesday’s statement reinforces that message. I think that moderation limits the risk of de-anchoring while sending a positive signal on inflation. Of course, our review also considered aggressive versions of makeup strategies where the Fed commits to a formula to make up for periods where inflation has been below target. You’ll note that our language “average ... over time” permits us to look at our longer-term track record, while the Chairman has made clear we are not committing to a precise formula. I’m happy with that balance, as I remain skeptical of formulaic commitments. Such commitments depend heavily on the central bank’s credibility to bind their successors to suboptimal decisions in the future. Unlike Snape’s commitment in Harry Potter, monetary policy doesn’t have an “unbreakable vow.” 4 I also welcome the acknowledgement in our framework that meeting our mandate requires a stable financial system. Holding rates low for a long time also can have negative consequences. It generates “reach for yield” behaviors that can lead to market volatility. It narrows the interest rate spread that so many community banks depend on. It can lead to excess leverage, since borrowing is cheap, which could make future financial contractions more painful. 5 So I don’t see “lower for longer” as “zero forever” and am hoping that we can move toward normalization when the time is right. And if risks arise, last week’s statement gives us freedom to act. Thinking more broadly, I want to emphasize that, for now, I remain focused on unemployment, given the huge gap between where we are today and our target. As we learned from the Fed Listens sessions, the public doesn’t see raising inflation as an urgent concern, and I agree with those who see our new framework as evolution, not revolution. Luckily, at a time when we are missing both targets, there is no conflict in giving maximum stimulus, as we’re doing today. What More Could We Do? I am hopeful our new framework will be of value. As we implement it, I’m personally committed to being opportunistic. When inflation nears or slightly exceeds 2 percent, I hope to celebrate it and not be too hasty to quash it. I’m also committed to being optimistic. Industry takes its cue from us. If we persist in pursuing 2 percent and show confidence in our capabilities, price setters will follow. In contrast, the more we bemoan any lack of success — and remember I remain humble about our capabilities — the more impetus we give them to push purchased prices down. Recognizing the risk that I’m doing just that, I commit to tearing up this speech when we’re done. And for those who continue to worry about whether inflation will explode, I guess I come back to a few key thoughts. It hasn’t yet. It didn’t after the last downturn, despite similar concerns in the United States, Europe, and Japan. Powerful market forces have been helping keep it in check, and I don’t anticipate that they will dissipate anytime soon. And should inflation emerge, the Fed has the tools and the will to address it. Thanks, and I’ll now open it up for questions and comments. 1 Thank you to Tim Sablik for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Philippon, Thomas. The Great Reversal: How America Gave Up on Free Markets . Cambridge, Mass.: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2019. 3 “ Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy .” Federal Open Market Committee, Adopted effective Jan. 24, 2012, as amended effective Aug. 27, 2020. 4 Kydland, Finn E., and Edward C. Prescott. “ Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans .” Journal of Political Economy , June 1977, vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 473-491. Debortoli, Davide, and Aeimit Lakdawala. “" How Credible is the Federal Reserve? A Structural Estimation of Policy Re-Optimizations .” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics , July 2016, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 42-76. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D. M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano. “ Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance .” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , Spring 2012. J.K. Rowling, Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2005. 5 Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. House of Debt: How They (and You) Caused the Great Recession, and How We Can Prevent It from Happening Again . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014. Topics Inflation Economic Growth Monetary Policy Subscribe to News Receive an email notification when News is posted online: Subscribe to News By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice. Email Address Re-enter Email Address I agree to the terms of the privacy policy Thank you for signing up! As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request. If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted. Thank you for signing up! You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email. Subscribe to our other digital publications Contact Us Jim Strader

Early Childhood Education: Now More Than Ever Oct. 13, 2020 Tom Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Virginia Early Childhood Foundation and Virginia Chamber 7th Annual Executive Briefing on the Economics of Early Childhood Highlights: College graduates fare better on a variety of outcomes, but many students who enroll in college do not graduate, particularly low-income and minority students. Research shows that preparation is key to college completion, and that preparation begins with early childhood education. There are disparities in access to high-quality early childhood education that track with disparities in college completion. Pandemic-related child care and school closures risk exacerbating the already-large gaps in educational attainment between children from high- and low-income families. Parents are struggling to balance work, virtual schooling and child care. We’re seeing negative effects on women’s labor force participation, and more parents leaving the workforce could be detrimental to our country’s long-term growth. Another issue is the health of the child care industry itself. We need to figure out how to operate centers safely, effectively and affordably. One idea is to lower costs by broadening shared services models. An intriguing option for making child care more affordable is expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) to provide more support to working parents. Thank you for inviting me to join you, and thank you especially to the Back to Work Task Force, which is doing work that is absolutely critical to the future health and equity of our economy. This group is well aware of how important early childhood education is, but I’ll offer you my perspectives on why. I’ll then talk about why that’s even more true in the context of COVID-19 and some of the risks we face if we don’t get it right. Before I say more, I’ll note that these thoughts are my own and not those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 I’m looking forward to hearing your questions and comments. Why Early Childhood Education Matters To talk about the importance of early childhood education, let me actually start with the other end of the educational system: college. We know that there are large returns to a college degree. On average, graduates tend to earn more money, are more likely to be employed, are more resilient to downturns, and even have better health outcomes. Thirty percent of high school graduates don’t enroll in either two-year or four-year college. 2 And for those that do, going to college doesn’t always mean graduating — and you only get the benefits if you finish. Only around 60 percent of students who enroll in a four-year college graduate within six years. For Hispanic students, the share is 57 percent, and for black students, it’s just 42 percent. 3 Graduation rates for lower-income students are between 10 and 15 percentage points lower than for their higher-income peers. 4 Richmond Fed research finds that the prospect of not completing makes college risky, especially for students of modest means, and deters many others from investing in college altogether, leaving them unable to reap the large rewards that graduates currently earn. 5 Why don’t more students enroll in college, and why is the dropout rate so high? One likely factor is early experiences. Young children’s brains grow at an incredible rate, and we know from a large body of research that early childhood education is critical for building the infrastructure that’s required to learn more complex skills later in life. 6 This is true not only for academic skills, but also for noncognitive or “soft skills.” School and early care settings are an opportunity for children to learn to regulate their emotions, to cooperate, to be on time, to keep trying when a task is challenging — and these soft skills are themselves critical for academic success. 7 But there are large disparities in access to high-quality early childhood education — and where it’s available, it’s often not affordable or it’s not high quality. Sixty percent of rural families and 60 percent of urban families in the lowest-income quartile live in a “child care desert.” 8 And consider that in 28 states and the District of Columbia, center-based infant care costs more than in-state college tuition. 9 Many families may turn to friends and relatives, but these options don’t necessarily offer the same reliability or focused instruction. And programs to subsidize child care in the United States arguably don’t go very far to cover the costs, particularly for low-income families. For example, the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit is nonrefundable, which means that families in the lowest-income quintile, who owe little or no income tax, don’t receive any benefit from the credit. For the 12 percent of American families with kids who do receive a benefit, the credit reduced their taxes by an average of $574 10 — compared to child care costs that may be more than $10,000 per year. Another subsidy is in the form of dependent care flexible spending accounts (FSAs), which allow families to set aside up to $5,000 pretax to pay for child care. As of 2019, just under 40 percent of civilian employees had access to an FSA, but this varies considerably by occupation and income. For example, only 20 percent of workers in service occupations had access to a dependent care FSA. 11 Pandemic Times These issues are all the more important now, when we’re at risk of exacerbating the already-large gap in educational attainment between children from high- and low-income families. Here in Virginia, for example, many lower-income families depend on the public school system to provide preschool for their children. But that system has been closed. Higher-income families have the resources to pay for private pre-K, a tutor, or to hire a teacher to facilitate virtual learning. At the very least, they have computers at home and reliable broadband access. Lower-income families don’t have these same resources, and we should be worried about how far behind their children might fall 12 — a concern that becomes even greater when we think about the number of children in elementary, middle, and high school. We need this system to operate effectively, which includes providing broadband access for all students, so that if virtual learning becomes necessary, no child is at a disadvantage. We also need to be concerned about children’s parents. People are stressed. People are struggling. Balancing work, child care, and virtual learning seems utterly impossible for single parents and workers who can’t work from home. I hear this every day in conversations in our Bank. We’re seeing negative effects on women’s labor force participation rate in particular. Women are one of a few key groups where we have potential to boost the workforce, to help offset an aging population and declining birth rates. Unfortunately, right now we’re seeing things move in the opposite direction. Research from the Minneapolis Fed found that mothers in states with early lockdowns were more than 50 percent more likely to take leave from work than mothers in states with later lockdowns, whereas there was no difference for fathers. 13 At the end of July, almost 1 in 3 mothers ages 25-44 reported they weren’t working because of pandemic-related child care issues, compared to around 1 in 10 fathers. 14 With fall in full swing, the challenges of virtual schooling and prolonged child care closures are putting pressure on working women. In the latest jobs report, prime-age women had a larger drop in labor force participation than men. Women still shoulder more than their fair share at home: They spend 30 percent more time per day than men on household activities and almost twice the number of hours caring for children as fathers. 15 Weighed against the circumstances, it stands to reason that families are making tough decisions. It’s reasonable to be concerned about the longer-term effects on parents’ wages and attachment to the labor force. A recent Brookings analysis found that nationwide, 70 percent of working parents with young children at home — 23.5 million people — are child care dependent, meaning they don’t have another nonworking adult at home to be a primary caregiver. 16 If even half of that group doesn’t return to work, our labor force participation rate would drop 2.5 percentage points. That would be a huge blow to our country’s potential growth. I’m also concerned about the overall health of the child care industry. It’s an essential one, and we don’t have the option of shutting it down or letting firms go out of business. We need to figure out how to operate these businesses safely, effectively and affordably so families can have peace of mind about their children’s care and learning environment. But child care businesses were fragile even before the pandemic. Now they’re under enormous pressure as cleaning costs increase, capacity is challenged, and parents worry about infection risk. Almost half of day care providers reported they are likely to go out of business without further financial assistance. 17 Some predict these closures will be more frequent in lower- and middle-income and rural areas, which could put even more strain on working families. Maybe they will have to drive farther, to pay more, to choose less than ideal care, or to quit working altogether. The Path Forward I read a great quote from an early childhood educator recently. She said, “There is no economic recovery without child care. As a nation we haven’t realized how critical child care is to all facets of our lives.” 18 So a silver lining from this crisis might be that it is forcing us to have a national conversation about just how critical child care and education are, which could lead to greater innovation and investment. The Back to Work Task Force is a great example of how that’s already happening. For example, we can rethink delivery models that increase affordability, such as broadening shared services models for smaller day care providers. This can help them keep overhead down by sharing the costs of services like cleaning, IT and human resources. Employers can play a greater role, and we’ve seen some creative examples so far. For example, I know of an employer in West Virginia who’s offering a proctoring service for its employees’ children. And of course, we know many European countries provide or subsidize child care. One option I find especially intriguing is expanding the earned income tax credit (EITC) to provide more support to working parents to pay for high-quality child care. The EITC is a refundable tax credit available to low- and moderate-income households that is designed to encourage work. Expanding it is an attractive option for several reasons. First, the infrastructure for its delivery already exists. It is a matter of increasing the transfer being made, and we have experience with this already. Second, one key aspect of the EITC is its sensitivity to the presence of dependent children. It treats single wage-earners very differently from those with dependents. And it does this while rewarding work — it is a tax credit on earned income, after all. Also, the EITC-based solution would not require policymakers to make decisions about providing or administrating child care. Of course, this wouldn’t address the issue of supply. But there is some evidence that when child care subsidies decrease, the number of centers goes down as well 19 — so it’s not a stretch to think that if more people could afford child care, the supply would increase. There is still a tremendous amount of uncertainty about what the future holds. But solutions are possible, and they begin with the kind of strategic work this task force is undertaking to explore structural and policy changes for early care and education in Virginia. I’m optimistic that our country will find a way to leverage this moment and address these challenges that have been with us for decades, and I am very grateful for all the people here today working to make that happen. Thank you, and now I’ll open it up for questions and comments. 1 Thank you to Jessica Brooks and Jessie Romero for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Data from the National Center for Education Statistics . 3 Based on the 2012 starting cohort. Data from the National Center for Education Statistics . 4 As measured by Pell Grant eligibility. 5 For example, see Athreya, Kartik B., and Janice Eberly. “ Risk, the College Premium, and Aggregate Human Capital Investment .” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics , forthcoming. 6 For more, visit Harvard University’s Center on the Developing Child and The Heckman Equation . 7 Research has found that individuals in the bottom quartile of measures of noncognitive skills are only one-third as likely to earn a postsecondary degree as those in the top quartile. Diance Whitmore Schanzenback et al. “ Seven Facts on Noncognitive Skills from Education to the Labor Market ,” The Hamilton Project, October 2016. 8 The Center for American Progress defines a “child care desert” as a census tract where there are more than three young children for every licensed child care slot. 9 “ The US and the High Cost of Child Care .” Child Care Aware of America, 2018. 10 “ Key Elements of the U.S. Tax System .” In The Tax Policy Center’s Briefing Book. Urban Institute, Brookings Institution, and individual authors, 2020. 11 Bureau of Labor Statistics. “ Employee Benefits Survey ,” February 21, 2020. 12 Pinto, Santiago, and John Bailey Jones. “ The Long-Term Effects of Educational Disruptions .” Richmond Fed Economic Impact of COVID-19, May 22, 2020. 13 Higgeness, Misty L. “ Why is Mommy So Stressed? Estimating the Immediate Impact of the COVID-19 Shock on Parental Attachment to the Labor Market and the Double Bind of Mothers . Minneapolis Fed Opportunity & Inclusive Growth Institute No. 33, August 2020. 14 Heggeness, Misty L., and Jason M. Fields. “ Working Moms Bear Brunt of Home Schooling While Working During COVID-19 .” U.S. Census Bureau, Aug. 18, 2020. 15 Bureau of Labor Statistics. “ Time spent in detailed primary activities and percent of the civilian population engaging in each activity, averages per day by sex, 2019 annual averages .” American Time Use Survey Table A-1. 16 Bateman, Nicole. “ Working Parents are Key to COVID-19 Recovery .” Brookings, July 8, 2020; American Community Survey, 1-Year 2018 Estimates. 17 “ Holding On Until Help Comes: A Survey Reveals Child Care’s Fight to Survive .” National Association for the Education of Young Children, July 2020. 18 Sisson, Patrick. “ Where Is the American Child Care Bailout? ” Bloomberg CityLab, July 22, 2020. 19 Rasheed Malik et al. “ America’s Child Care Deserts in 2018 .” Center for American Progress, December 6, 2018. Topics Education Workforce Development Subscribe to News Receive an email notification when News is posted online: Subscribe to News By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice. Email Address Re-enter Email Address I agree to the terms of the privacy policy Thank you for signing up! As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request. If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted. Thank you for signing up! You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email. Subscribe to our other digital publications Contact Us Jim Strader

What’s Ahead? Learning From The CFO Survey Oct. 15, 2020 Tom Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Club of New York Highlights: Firms are currently navigating extraordinary uncertainty. The decisions they make about hiring, spending and investment will have implications for GDP growth, employment and inflation. Business sentiment surveys like The CFO Survey help us understand those decisions. The latest survey shows that CFOs are feeling slightly more optimistic than they were last quarter, although they remain concerned about demand and revenue. Firms also remain cautious about investing. The survey also suggests that employment will lag spending. Many firms have streamlined their operations in response to the pandemic, and others report that they are concerned about the “availability and quality of labor” despite high unemployment. CFOs also raised their expectations for wage and price increases in 2021, potentially due to supply chain challenges. If demand were to resurge, we could see pressure on near-term pricing. Thank you for inviting me to join you this afternoon (virtually). I thought today I would share some perspectives on where the economy is and what I look at in thinking about where it might be headed, though I’m very much looking forward to hearing your questions and comments. Before I say more, I have to note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or in the Federal Reserve System. 1 My experience is different than most of those colleagues. Before coming to the Fed nearly three years ago, I was the chief financial officer (CFO) of a $10 billion institution. As I consider the path of the economy, I go back to that experience a lot and try to put myself in the shoes of a firm navigating what has been, and still is, extraordinary uncertainty — around the virus, around fiscal policy and around politics. Earlier this spring, in the immediate wake of the shutdown, I of course would have been thoughtful on hiring and spending. But now, in the midst of developing a budget for next year, how aggressive or conservative would I be on hiring? Or spending? Or capital investments? Would I be pushing to implement a normal January price increase? Would I be stocking the shelves for a strong holiday rebound or trimming inventories to be prudent? Would I be shifting my supply chain out of certain countries? How firms answer these questions has implications for GDP growth, employment and the pace of inflation. But I wear a different hat now. To understand how and what firms are deciding, I’ve been helped greatly by my continual outreach in our district, which spans from Maryland to the Carolinas, and by keeping an eye on business sentiment surveys, particularly the Richmond and Atlanta Fed’s partnership with Duke University’s Fuqua School of Business on The CFO Survey . This quarterly survey has tracked business sentiment for nearly 25 years, surveying CFOs and financial decision-makers across firms of all sizes and in all major industries. It gathers their views on the health of their own firms and of the overall economy. It delves into their expectations for hiring, spending, investment and pricing in real time, which is particularly important given the pace of change during the current economic crisis. Current Results From The CFO Survey We released the results of the latest survey last week. What did it tell us about prospects for the economy? First, CFOs’ expectations are brightening, albeit gradually. Looking at the headline Optimism Index, CFOs are slightly more optimistic about the U.S. economy and their own company’s prospects since our last survey in July. At that time, they estimated GDP growth over the next four quarters would be just 0.6 percent. They anticipate 2.2 percent now. Their expectations for their own revenue growth in 2021 have grown from 7.2 percent to 8.7 percent. Firms are still worried about demand and revenue but a little less so than in the last quarter. In the open text question that asked about firms’ most pressing concerns, the share that cited flagging demand and declining sales revenue was notably lower. Of course, “slightly more optimistic about revenue returning” doesn’t necessarily mean that revenue growth will be quick. Only about 20 percent of firms that responded anticipated being at pre-COVID-19 levels of revenue any time before the middle of 2021. This matches what I hear in conversations every week with business executives. In sectors that have largely reopened, executives tell me they have found a way to operate safely. And with the personal saving rate still elevated — at 26 percent in the second quarter and 14.1 percent in August, compared to the pre-crisis level of around 8.3 percent — executives see significant consumer spending potential that could bolster demand. Second, we heard that firms still remain cautious about investing. More than 50 percent of firms reported a decreased willingness to spend compared to pre-COVID-19. Only about one-third of CFOs had plans to invest in structures over the next six months. And while more than 60 percent were planning to invest in equipment, most reported investing for maintenance. Those who are not investing primarily cited the uncertainty of the economy and a need to preserve cash. This sense of caution is natural given the breadth of potential paths for the virus, for the government response and consequently, for the economy. This uncertainty effectively increases discount rates. Third, CFOs believe employment is likely to lag spending. In July, they expected a 4.2 percent increase in 2021 employment. That has dropped to 2.2 percent despite their increased optimism on revenue. Most businesses, even those less affected by the virus, tell me they have taken the opportunity to streamline their operations. A number of sectors, such as food services, are still operating at less than full capacity. And you’ve seen recently a number of sizable layoff announcements from airlines, theme park operators and even a major insurer. At the same time, hiring is a challenge. Despite the fact that unemployment remains quite elevated at 7.9 percent, there was a large increase in the share of survey respondents citing the “availability and quality of labor” as a pressing concern. This mirrors what I hear in my interviews, particularly in sectors like manufacturing, technology and healthcare. Many of the people who lost their jobs don’t yet have the skills to find employment in a different field. And, at a time when many schools, child care centers and elder care facilities are closed or struggling, we are seeing drops in labor force participation, particularly for prime-age women. Finally, the CFOs in the survey see price pressure as increasingly tangible. Their expectations for 2021 wage increases have escalated from 4.4 percent to 5.4 percent, and their expected price increases rose from 2.9 percent to 4.3 percent. I don’t take a lot of signal from the numbers themselves, but the directionality does support my view that supply chain challenges amidst all this uncertainty could put pressure on certain prices. We saw that with food over the summer and with lumber more recently. When I go to big-box retailers, the shelves look a bit bare. If demand were to resurge, say because of a successful vaccine, while supply chains are still stretched, we could see pressure on near-term pricing. Speaking of pricing, the FOMC recently announced changes to its 2012 statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. We’ve said that in order to anchor inflation expectations at 2 percent, the Committee seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. As you know, it has modestly lagged that target for some time. In his speech announcing the changes, Chair Powell called this flexible average inflation targeting — the flexibility coming from the lack of a specific formula. 2 In addition, the Committee said that it will respond to shortfalls of employment from its maximum level; the previous version referenced deviations of employment. In other words, under the new framework, a low level of unemployment alone would not lead to preemptive increases in interest rates. Finally, the Committee made explicit that meeting our mandate requires a stable financial system. The net of all this is a message that the Fed will aim to keep rates low until we see moderate overshoots of inflation or the development of financial stability risks. Our statement last month reinforced that message, which was supported by our projections in which the median respondent didn’t have a rate increase through 2023. We also continue to engage in significant bond purchases that provide additional accommodation. I remain hopeful that we can put this virus and the related uncertainty behind us. If we can, there is untapped consumption that could give the economy a real lift. My hope then is that reduced uncertainty could get CFOs off the sidelines and propel the virtuous cycle of hiring and investment that moves the economy forward. In the interim, the Fed continues to do what it can to provide support. 1 Thank you to Nina Mantilla, Jessie Romero and Sonya Ravindranath Waddell for assistance preparing these remarks. 2 Powell, Jerome H. “ New Economic Challenges and the Fed’s Monetary Policy Review .” Speech at “Navigating the Decade Ahead: Implications for Monetary Policy,” an economic policy symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 27, 2020. Topics Economic Growth Production and Investment Subscribe to News Receive an email notification when News is posted online: Subscribe to News By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice. Email Address Re-enter Email Address I agree to the terms of the privacy policy Thank you for signing up! As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request. If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted. Thank you for signing up! You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email. Subscribe to our other digital publications Contact Us Jim Strader

Will Americans Go on a Spending Spree? Oct. 21, 2020 Tom Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond One notable feature of the COVID-19 downturn has been an extraordinary rise in the personal saving rate. It spiked to historic levels, from 8.3 percent in February to 33.6 percent in April. While it has come down since then, it is still elevated, at 14.1 percent as of August. That’s $1.1 trillion extra in people’s pockets at a time when the economy, and millions of workers, are struggling. Why have savings increased so dramatically? First, the shutdown of the economy meant certain forms of spending were largely unavailable. Even if they had wanted to, consumers couldn’t buy haircuts, elective surgeries or international vacations. Second, both job loss and concern over health risks created tremendous uncertainty. Consumers may well have chosen to save more money to help bridge to an uncertain future. Net, consumer spending dropped 6.1 percent from March to August versus the same period a year ago. We also saw a significant reduction of outstanding credit card balances. At the same time, consumers received extraordinary levels of government stimulus. Between March and August, at least $712 billion flowed into personal income as a result of COVID-19-related stimulus measures, including direct payments, enhanced unemployment insurance and PPP income to proprietors. These flows helped offset lost wages for furloughed and laid-off workers and lost revenue for small businesses that had to close temporarily. In April, when many economic impact payments were disbursed, total personal income grew 14.1 percent year over year, compared to an average of 3.9 percent year-over-year growth in January and February. When stimulus boosts income at the same time spending drops, naturally savings will rise. But the effects were uneven. The less fortunate received the great majority of the stimulus payments, but they tend to spend a greater percentage of what they make, as they are more likely to live paycheck to paycheck. Researchers found that, in April, the top income quartile accounted for 40 percent of the decline in consumer spending, and high-income spending has still not recovered. In contrast, as of September, low-income spending is exceeding pre-crisis levels. 1 As the saving rate grew, we also saw a significant shift in spending from services to goods. As of August, spending on goods was up 5.8 percent from a year ago, and sectors like residential, automotive and recreational equipment were booming. But with continuing health concerns and capacity limitations, services spending is still down 7.2 percent from a year ago. This is challenging the travel, restaurant and entertainment sectors, among others. Will these increased savings, combined with pent-up demand, fuel consumption that can support the recovery in the coming months? No other spike on record matches the intensity of the current saving rate increase, but there is one other period in which we saw it increase dramatically — during World War II. Right before World War II, the personal saving rate averaged 5 percent. During the war it climbed upward, peaking in 1944 at 27.9 percent, then dropped rapidly. It fell to a three-year average of 7.4 percent from 1947 to 1949. Similar to today, government-imposed restrictions on consumption (both rations and the redirection of resources to the war effort) decreased consumer spending. After the war, pent-up demand lifted the recovery: $24.2 billion was added to consumer spending between 1945 and 1946. 2 Could something like this happen again? If we get a vaccine or compelling virus treatment, could we see a trillion-dollar boost to the economy? Economic theory suggests we temper our optimism. There is a lot of research on how people behave after they receive windfalls. Asset-driven wealth, such as home price appreciation or stock market growth, doesn’t appear to increase spending very much, perhaps because those gains tend to be concentrated among those already wealthy and can be costly to liquidate. Tax transfers often increase spending more, especially for those at lower incomes, but the marginal propensity to consume tax windfalls is still only in the range of 40 percent. And, as I noted earlier, uncertainty matters. People tend to spend gradually to retirement and the higher the uncertainty, the higher the propensity to save. What does all of this mean for today? With service sector capacity still constrained, we should expect any spending to continue to focus on goods. That may mean a healthy holiday season. With additional stimulus not yet forthcoming, we should expect lower-income families to tap the savings they accrued through the stimulus. And if we get a vaccine, one has to imagine that higher-income individuals will want to take a trip or at least go out to a nice dinner. At the same time, we know that the wealthy are less likely to spend their savings, and one only has so many vacation days. In addition, service sector spending is historically steadier than spending on goods — missed haircuts or dental appointments or business trips are unlikely to be made up. In a recent Gallup poll, among Americans who are currently able to save money, 76 percent plan to keep adding to their savings in the next six months. 3 So, while some resurgence is likely, it may well look a lot more like a steady path back to normal than like the celebration of V-J Day. 1 Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, and Michael Stepner, “ Percent Change in All Consumer Spending. ” Opportunity Insights Team, 2020. 2 “ Annual Report of the Council of Economic Advisors, Table C-15 ,” Economic Report of the President, February 1970. 3 Berg, Paul, and Megan Brenan, “Americans Favor Saving Over Spending Until Vaccine,” Gallup, September 9, 2020. Topics Household and Consumer Finance Subscribe to News Receive an email notification when News is posted online: Subscribe to News By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice. Email Address Re-enter Email Address I agree to the terms of the privacy policy Thank you for signing up! As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request. If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted. Thank you for signing up! You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email. Subscribe to our other digital publications Contact Us Jim Strader

Building the Post-COVID Pipeline: Invigorating Community Colleges Nov. 10, 2020 Tom Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond In February, more than 61 percent of the U.S. population was working—the largest share since the Great Recession. In April, the share dropped almost 10 percentage points, to 51.3 percent, with even larger declines for younger workers, women, minorities, and people with less education. While there has been steady recovery, in October the employment-to-population ratio was still 3.7 percentage points lower than before the pandemic. There are 9 million fewer people employed today than in February. With so many people looking for work, how is it possible that so many employers tell us they are struggling to find workers? In October, a survey by the National Federation of Independent Businesses found 33 percent of small-business owners couldn’t fill current openings. In addition, almost 90 percent of the businesses that were trying to hire (55 percent of all the businesses surveyed) reported having a hard time finding qualified applicants for their openings. In our own Fifth District surveys of the manufacturing and service sectors, firms also report that it’s difficult to find workers with the necessary skills. Clearly, there are frictions in the labor market that are preventing the people who are looking for work from connecting with employers who are looking for workers. One friction might be skill mismatch—a displaced waiter can’t get a new job as a nurse or in construction overnight. And some workers might not be interested in switching to new industries right now. Starting over in a new field takes time, can cost money, can feel like taking a step back, and may be uncomfortable for someone who enjoyed what they were doing. There is geographic mismatch as well. For example, we’ve heard from furniture manufacturers in Hickory, N.C, that are overwhelmed. But the great majority of those who have been laid off are in bigger cities with significant leisure and hospitality sectors. Are they ready to move to a smaller town? In the context of these mismatches, I am distressed by the current drop in community college enrollment. Community colleges serve those who have been hit hardest by recent job loss: women, minorities, and young people. They are the first college experience for many low-income students. Community colleges provide the skills people need to land good jobs and can connect students to employers. They also offer certificate programs that can deliver new skills in a relatively short period of time. But enrollment is way down. Relative to last fall, undergraduate enrollment is down 9.4 percent at public two-year schools, compared with only 1.4 percent at public four-year schools. First-time student enrollment at community colleges fell by 22.7 percent. Enrollment is down more for black and Hispanic men than for white men and more for black women than white women. Why is this? In conversations with community college presidents around the Fifth District, we’ve heard several key themes. The first is uncertainty—what will the virus do this fall and winter? Will the businesses that have closed their doors be able to reopen? Will the jobs come back? All this uncertainty makes it tough to commit to a plan for the future. Another theme is child care. Many presidents told us that their typical female student is a single or working mother. With kids at home in virtual school, these women aren’t coming in the door. Cost may also be an issue; about 80 percent of community college students work, but the loss of service sector jobs could be limiting their ability to fund their schooling. And while there are a variety of resources available to help—presidents by and large say they can “fill the gap” for just about any student—potential students who are unfamiliar with the financial aid process might not know those resources are out there or how to apply for them. Finally, particularly for students who just graduated from high school, decisions about the following year were being made last spring, at the height of the pandemic. It’s easy to imagine that in the midst of the shutdown, decisions were delayed and counseling opportunities were missed. And many of these students may not be attracted to remote learning. But research shows that if students don’t start college right out of high school, they are much less likely to ever go back. So how can we help people make the investments in themselves that will lead to long-term inclusive growth? First, businesses can invest through partnerships to fund community college programs that teach the skills they need. We’ve seen a number of successful examples of this in our district. It’s a win for the student, who gets connected to a job, and for the employer, who gets a skilled worker at a time when they remain scarce. States can invest by directing funding to where it’s needed most. Here in Virginia, for example, $30 million in CARES Act funding is being used to provide scholarships for workers who were displaced by COVID-19. They can use the money for workforce credential or community college programs in high-demand fields such as health care, skilled trades, and early childhood education. Schools can invest in making online education work. For example, Germanna Community College, part of the Northern Virginia Community College system, moved very quickly to put everything online, including all student services. Their enrollment is actually up this fall; students knew relatively early on what to expect. And Germanna has been intentional about making sure students have access to wraparound services in partnership with community-based organizations. This lets them address what can be some of the most difficult barriers to education: housing and food insecurity, transportation, technology, child care, and mental health. This program—Germanna Cares—has helped their students connect with $140,000 in benefits, both internal and external. Communities can also invest more in getting information out to high school students about the application and financial aid processes. Many high school guidance programs were already stretched thin, and the pandemic can only be making funding and student access more challenging—so perhaps state or local educators could create and market guides to entrance exams, FAFSA, and the like. The pandemic has disproportionately affected a number of lower-income service sector workers. At the same time, employers in industries like health care and manufacturing are short staffed. Community colleges play a critical connecting role in making the labor market function. It’s important we address the barriers to leveraging them fully. Topics Workforce Development Education Community Colleges Subscribe to News Receive an email notification when News is posted online: Subscribe to News By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice. Email Address Re-enter Email Address I agree to the terms of the privacy policy Thank you for signing up! As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request. If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted. Thank you for signing up! You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email. Subscribe to our other digital publications Contact Us Jim Strader
