Payments and the Pandemic Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Keynote Speech 20th Anniversary Chicago Payments Symposium Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Chicago, IL (via videoconference) September 23, 2020 1 Introduction It is a great pleasure being with you today as part of the 20th Anniversary Chicago Payments Symposium. Over the last two decades, this symposium has established itself as a valuable forum at which those interested in the payments system can gather to learn and share ideas. In recent years, the symposium has fostered important conversations between industry practitioners and policymakers. Those conversations have helped inform the Federal Reserve System’s initiative to improve and modernize the U.S. payments system. That work is ongoing and has reached important milestones this year, despite the pandemic. Today, I will discuss some of the effects the pandemic has had on the U.S. payments system and update you on some of our ongoing efforts to modernize the payments system. As always, the views I’ll express are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. I know I do not need to tell this audience that the payments system is a crucial part of the infrastructure of the U.S. and a well-functioning and secure payments system is vital for a sound economy. As is true of pretty much every aspect of life this year, the pandemic has affected the payments business, including payment patterns and volumes. The most important thing to recognize is that the U.S. payments system has been weathering the pandemic without significant disruptions. This has taken the hard work of many people in both the public sector and the private sector. Many of these workers were deemed to be essential, and we owe them all our deep gratitude for their dedication and public service. Because of the vital role played by the payments system, priorities had to change to meet the challenges posed by the pandemic. At the same time, progress continued on important projects that have longer-run consequences for the payments system. There will be many lessons to take away from the current pandemic situation; two seem particularly relevant to the payments work in which we are all engaged. First, although it is safe to say no one anticipated an event quite like the pandemic, the industry’s forethought, investment, and preparation to 2 ensure that the payments system would be resilient to extreme scenarios has paid off greatly. It has allowed us to avoid a collapse of the payments system – an event that would have made what was already a grave situation much, much worse. One big takeaway is that once we get through the current pandemic, making necessary investments to ensure that the U.S. payments system remains resilient in the face of extreme stress events will need to remain a priority. Another key lesson is that having the right technology in place can make a big difference in being able to address the challenges posed in an environment of rapid change in payments behavior. Industry participants may need to rethink their payments technology investment strategy once we are through the pandemic. The changes we have seen in customers’ payment behavior since February have happened quickly. The spread of COVID-19 heightened the reliance of businesses and individuals on digital services and faster connectivity, as many employees began to work from home and consumers turned to online shopping. This is a global pandemic, and demand for consumer-to-consumer and cross-border payments has risen, as people want to send and receive payments in support of family and friends. Some payments technology is more resilient, scalable, and adaptable to such rapid changes in user behavior and volume. Some industry participants note that cloud technologies are inherently more scalable and adaptable, and early adopters of the cloud are likely better positioned during these times compared to those operating on mainframes.1 It would be wrong to say that the pandemic has been the catalyst for payments system modernization: the Federal Reserve Banks have been assessing our payments technology for some time. We are investing in cloud technology and have platform modernization initiatives at various stages of completion across nearly all of our business lines. However, the pandemic does underscore the need to have a technology strategy that will meet the needs of the future. Industry efforts to replace decades-old core banking systems with more flexible, resilient, and cloud-friendly 1 See Fintech Advisory Group (2020). 3 platforms, and to integrate the old with the new along the way, may need to be accelerated to ensure that we are prepared for the future. Let me review some of the changes we have seen in payments activity during the pandemic. Payments Volume and Mix The coronavirus pandemic and actions taken to contain its spread have had tremendous effects on households, businesses, and communities across America and on economic activity. So it is not surprising that the pandemic has had significant effects on the types and volumes of payments flowing through the payments system. In March, the country took aggressive social-distancing measures to limit the spread of the virus and to buy some time for the healthcare system to increase its capacity to care for the sick, learn more about the virus itself, and develop testing and treatments. In March and April, with stay-at-home orders issued by state and local authorities in full swing, the number of checks processed by the Reserve Banks declined substantially. But at the same time, global demand for U.S. currency notes increased at unprecedented rates in March as currency orders from domestic and international banks spiked dramatically. At times of crisis, people often turn toward safety, and the U.S. dollar is viewed as a stable and safe asset across the world. So it is not unusual that the pandemic has led to a shift toward cash, but the scale has been unprecedented. Adding to that, the fiscal support in the form of economic impact payments issued by the U.S. government to millions of households also likely contributed to the higher demand in the U.S. as many people converted the payments into cash for spending. On the supply side, just as in other industries, the pandemic has affected the supply chain of cash. With the shutdown in full swing earlier this year, currency deposits to the Fed decreased, as retailers had less cash to deposit and banks wanted to maintain higher inventories in their vaults. The Federal Reserve Banks had to adjust their usual cash operations to ensure that cash inventories were maintained and cash was delivered to meet the higher demand. 4 According to a Federal Reserve survey of consumers taken in May of this year, participants reported that, on average, during the pandemic, they had increased their holdings of cash on their person from $69 to $81, a 17 percent increase.2 And the amount of cash stored at home or elsewhere rose even more, nearly 90 percent, from an average of $250 to over $475. Thirty percent of consumers did report they were avoiding using cash to pay for transactions, in favor of debit and credit cards. But even they were holding more cash in May than they were before the pandemic. Now, since May, as states and localities have relaxed stay-at-home restrictions and the economy has entered a reopening phase, the cash volumes at Reserve Banks have begun to return to more normal levels. The pandemic has also caused a disruption to normal patterns of coin circulation. Deposits by banks to the Fed normally account for roughly 80 percent of the coins that the Federal Reserve puts back into circulation, with the remaining 20 percent coming from new coin produced by the U.S. Mint, the issuing authority for U.S. coin. While about $48 billion of coin is already in circulation, because coin-intensive businesses and bank branches have been less accessible during the pandemic, much of that coin has piled up in people’s homes and piggybanks and in businesses that were shuttered by the pandemic.3 This has made it more difficult to recirculate the coin where needed. This temporary supply disruption is likely to dissipate because as the reopening phase continues and more businesses resume normal activity, more coins will flow back into retail and banking channels. Electronic payments have also been affected by the pandemic. Automated Clearing House (ACH) volumes declined in late March and early April, driven by lower payroll processing, business-to-business payments, and online bill payments. Once the federal government’s economic impact payments were disbursed and the Small Business Administration’s payroll protection plan loans were funded, there was a 2 See Kim, et al. (2020) 3 U.S. Coin Task Force (2020). 5 rapid rebound in these types of payments and ACH volume has nearly recovered to its pre-pandemic growth trend. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland is the primary collection agent for the U.S. Treasury, and in late March and early April, our receipts of credit and debit card payments to the Treasury dropped to about half of what they were compared to last year. On the other hand, the use of debit and credit card payments increased for some types of payments. In the Fed survey of consumers, about 20 percent of respondents reported switching to paying online or over the phone for items from restaurants and big-box stores, and nearly two-thirds reported that they had made no in-person payments during the first several weeks of the pandemic.4 Finally, I will note that payments related to securities transactions have increased dramatically during the pandemic amid increased volatility in financial markets, higher levels of government bond issuance, and a surge in mortgage refinancings prompted by low interest rates.5 All in all, the pandemic has had a wide-ranging and uneven impact across firms’ and households’ payment behaviors and patterns. Some of the changes seen early during the pandemic have already reverted to pre-pandemic norms and others are likely to revert as the pandemic recedes. But it is also the case that the changes we have seen for some forms of payment will be longer lasting. A consumer’s decision to use a different form of payment during the pandemic may have been driven by circumstances, but now that the consumer has had experience with it, that payment method may become a more routine choice. Similarly, some of the changes in work and consumption patterns may last after the pandemic has ended, altering payment mix and types of transactions more permanently. 4 See Kim, et al. (2020). 5 Increases in average daily trading volumes for fixed-income municipal, U.S. Treasury, MBS, ABS, and corporate debt for August 2020 year-to-date over the same period a year ago range from 15 percent to 40 percent (SIFMA, September 3, 2020). 6 Federal Reserve Payments Actions Given the importance of the payments system to the U.S. economy and the potential for wide-ranging effects of the pandemic and the actions taken to stem its spread, the Federal Reserve has been focused on mitigating disruptions and preparing for the unexpected. The Fed has established an active inventory management program to coordinate existing stores of cash and coin between Federal Reserve distribution locations. This has allowed us to better serve areas in the country experiencing high demand for cash and to increase the supply of fit notes available to the public. To help address the national coin circulation issues brought on by the pandemic, the Federal Reserve established temporary caps on coin orders in June. These caps, which have risen over time in response to changes in demand and supply conditions, have helped to ensure smooth ordering and fair distribution to financial institutions of all sizes. The Fed has also convened a U.S. Coin Task Force, with representatives from the Fed, the U.S. Mint, and the industry, to identify actions that could be taken to improve coin circulation. The Fed understands that financial institutions have had to cope with several pandemic-related challenges – after all, we have faced similar challenges. So to ease some of the burden, in May through July of this year, the Fed offered a customer assistance package, including some fee concessions on reporting, transactional, and electronic access services, and provided temporary relief from certain operational requirements. We also announced that in 2021 we would hold our prices for most Federal Reserve financial services at their current levels. As fiscal agent to the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Banks also provided service to the Treasury by processing more than 160 million economic impact payments to households and small businesses authorized by the CARES Act to help recipients cope with the financial effects of the pandemic. Payments were disbursed via ACH, check, and debit card in waves between April and August. The payments were made relatively quickly to those recipients whose bank account details were available to the government from prior tax returns or Social Security payments. Recipients whose bank account 7 details were not known by the government could enter their account information on a specially created IRS website. Even so, this experience showed that the quality of recipients’ routing information needs to improve in order to reduce the proportion of payments that cannot be posted automatically to the payee. And when exceptions occur, the processes for handling exceptions need to be sped up in order to avoid delays. It was a much bigger challenge to reach those without a bank account. This is a sizeable group: in 2017, this number was almost 8-1/2 million households, or about 6.5 percent of U.S. households.6 Recipients without bank accounts had to wait much longer for their relief payments to be disbursed by checks or debit cards through the mail, and unfortunately, many of these households tend to be lower income and have the greatest need for speedy financial assistance. The pandemic has underscored the need to ensure that during a crisis, payments can flow quickly and to everyone: those with and those without a bank account.7 As many in this audience know, one of the goals of the Fed’s recent efforts to modernize the U.S. payments system is to speed up the flow of payments between payer and payees. Another goal is to make sure that all Americans have access to the payments system. FedNowSM The Federal Reserve’s FedNow service, which is currently being built, will be an around-the-clock service whereby payments can be originated, cleared, and settled within seconds. The service is expected to provide clear public benefits in the form of safety, efficiency, and accessibility of instant payments. Yesterday, my colleague Ken Montgomery provided an excellent overview of FedNow features and functions, so let me touch upon a few points about how we’ll be rolling the service out. 6 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2017). 7 George (2020). 8 While COVID-19 has affected many parts of the payments system, it has not slowed down our work on FedNow. Our goal is to bring FedNow to market as soon as practicably possible. The target release date remains 2023 or 2024, but we will announce a more specific time frame once additional work is completed. In order to get the service up and running as soon as possible, we are taking a phased approach to its features. We will begin with the most important features and introduce enhancements quickly and iteratively thereafter. To inform the design and to determine which features to include at the start, we have been engaging extensively with stakeholders through focus groups, industry meetings, and the establishment of a stakeholder-wide FedNow community, and through the more formal public comment process. We are working to finalize a technology strategy that will create a flexible infrastructure, one that is scalable and can evolve with the times. In addition to offering secure instant payments, an important goal of FedNow is to establish a nationwide reach for the service so that this new type of payment is broadly accessible to consumers and businesses alike. The Federal Reserve’s payments services have a broad reach, with connections to and customer relationships with more than 10,000 diverse financial institutions across the country. This existing reach will help support a nationwide infrastructure for FedNow instant payments. We are also working closely with private-sector payment providers to explore the best approach to achieve wide accessibility. Thinking ahead, a service like FedNow, coupled with a directory service with accurate information on where to route payments for final distribution to households and businesses, has the potential to solve some of the challenges the government faced when distributing pandemic relief payments. Of course, creating such a directory and ensuring it is kept up-to-date is complex, and several challenges, including data privacy considerations, account information maintenance demands, and business case considerations, would have to be solved. The Federal Reserve understands the potential value of such a service, and has been exploring these issues as it evaluates the features to eventually include in FedNow. 9 Central Bank Digital Currencies The experience with pandemic emergency payments has brought forward an idea that was already gaining increased attention at central banks around the world, that is, central bank digital currency (CBDC). Legislation has proposed that each American have an account at the Fed in which digital dollars could be deposited, as liabilities of the Federal Reserve Banks, which could be used for emergency payments. Other proposals would create a new payments instrument, digital cash, which would be just like the physical currency issued by central banks today, but in a digital form and, potentially, without the anonymity of physical currency. Depending on how these currencies are designed, central banks could support them without the need for commercial bank involvement via direct issuance into the end-users’ digital wallets combined with central-bank-facilitated transfer and redemption services. 8 The demand for and use of such instruments need further consideration in order to evaluate whether such a central bank digital currency would allow for quicker and more ubiquitous payments in times of emergency and more generally. In addition, a range of potential risks and policy issues surrounding central bank digital currency need to be better understood, and the costs and benefits evaluated. The Federal Reserve has been researching issues raised by central bank digital currency for some time. The Board of Governors has a technology lab that has been building and testing a range of distributed ledger platforms to understand their potential benefits and tradeoffs. 9 Staff members from several Reserve Banks, including Cleveland Fed software developers, are contributing to this effort. The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is also engaged in a multiyear effort, working with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to experiment with technologies that could be used for a central bank digital currency. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York has established an innovation center, in partnership with the Bank for International Settlements, to identify and develop in-depth insights into critical trends and financial 8 See Mester (2020) for further discussion. 9 Brainard (2020). 10 technology of relevance to central banks.10 Experimentation like this is an important ingredient in assessing the benefits and costs of a central bank digital currency, but does not signal any decision by the Federal Reserve to adopt such a currency. Issues raised by central bank digital currency related to financial stability, market structure, security, privacy, and monetary policy all need to be better understood. Improving Traditional Federal Reserve Financial Services FedNow and central bank digital currency have to do with the future, but the Fed is also working to enhance our current portfolio of payment services to ensure they meet evolving customer needs. We continue to make investments to modernize the technical platforms for traditional payment services, including the Fedwire Funds Service, FedACH, FedLine access channels, and currency-processing services. We are investigating expanding the operating hours of wholesale payment services to meet the interbank settlement demands of a 24x7x365 world. We are enhancing services to facilitate cross-border payments, including expanding the reach of our FedGlobal ACH service and adopting the ISO 20022 global standard for several of our payment services. We are investigating emerging technical approaches, like APIs, to see whether they can be leveraged to facilitate broader access and efficiency. And, of course, we are doing what needs to be done to enhance the resilience of our platforms so that our services can run efficiently, reliably, and securely every day. Conclusion I hope my remarks today give you some sense of the payments work that has been going on at the Federal Reserve during the pandemic. The pandemic has triggered notable short-term changes to payments 10 Bank for International Settlements (2020). 11 system patterns, practices, and usage. But the Federal Reserve and industry participants have responded to ensure that our payments system, a critical part of the U.S. infrastructure, continues to function well and to meet stakeholder needs. We have all learned a lot during the pandemic. We have seen that we can respond to unforeseen events and that we can be flexible. We have seen the importance of investing in the resilience of our payments system – such resilience helped ensure that the payments system was not disrupted and did not add another challenge to the long list caused by the pandemic. We have seen the important role the payments system can play in an emergency by distributing funds to those in need. There is some uncertainty about the extent to which some of the changes we have seen in consumer and business behavior with respect to their payment choices will continue after the pandemic. But one thing is certain: we must ensure that our payments system remains modern, resilient, and able to adapt to changing customer needs as they evolve. I am confident that by working together, the Fed and the industry will be able to achieve that goal for the benefit of the public. 12 References Bank for International Settlements, “BIS Innovation Hub to Expand to New Locations in Europe and North America,” June 30, 2020. (https://www.bis.org/press/p200630a.htm) Brainard, Lael, “An Update on Digital Currencies,” at the Federal Reserve Board and Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's Innovation Office Hours, San Francisco, CA (via webcast) August 13, 2020. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/brainard20200813a.pdf) Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, “2017 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households,” October 2018. (https://www.fdic.gov/householdsurvey/2017/2017report.pdf) Fintech Advisory Group, “Minutes of the Regular Meeting of the Fintech Advisory Group,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April 8, 2020. (https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/aboutthefed/pdf/ftag-minutes-04082020.pdf) George, Esther, “Pondering Payments: Challenges of Reaching All Americans,” KC Fed Policy Perspectives, June 30, 2020. (https://www.kansascityfed.org/~/media/files/publicat/speeches/2020/policy_perspectives_6_30_20.pdf?l a=en) Kim, Laura, Raynil Kumar, and Shaun O’Brien, “Consumer Payments & the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Supplement to the 2020 Findings from the Diary of Consumer Payment Choice,” Cash Product Office, Federal Reserve System, July 2020. (https://www.frbsf.org/cash/files/consumer-payments-covid-19-pandemic-2020-diary-consumer-payment- choice-supplement.pdf) Mester, Loretta J., “Modernizing Our Payments System,” remarks at the Fourth Annual Financial Literacy Day: Understanding Global Markets and Finance, Global Interdependence Center, University of South Florida Sarasota-Manatee College of Business, Sarasota, FL, February 14, 2020. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20200214-modernizing-our-payments- system) SIFMA, U.S. Fixed Income Trading Volume, statistics, September 3, 2020. (https://www.sifma.org/resources/research/us-fixed-income-trading-volume/) U.S. Coin Task Force, “Statement from the U.S. Coin Task Force on the Coin Circulation Issue,” July 24, 2020. (https://www.aba.com/-/media/documents/email-bulletins/us-coin-task-force-public-statement- 072420#_ga=2.166214334.1890085829.1597941665-539224350.1597941665)

Toward a More Inclusive Economy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Equality Webinar African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania Pittsburgh, PA (via videoconference) September 28, 2020 Page 1 of 17 Introduction I thank Doris Carson Williams and the members of the African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania for the opportunity to speak with you today. As you may know, Doris is a member of the board of directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. In the best of times, the valuable insights provided by Doris, her fellow directors, and all of our contacts help us assess economic conditions and formulate monetary policy. But these are not the best of times. And I cannot overstate the importance of the information that Doris and our other contacts are providing – real-time, on-the-ground reconnaissance on how businesses and households are faring during the evolving pandemic. While the outlook remains uncertain, one thing I am certain of is that we have a better understanding of the economic impacts of the pandemic because of the public service of our directors and contacts. So, thank you, Doris. It is clear that the adverse effects of the pandemic have not been evenly distributed. They have been borne by the most vulnerable in our economy: lower-income and minority workers and communities; those who do not have the opportunity to work from home; those who do not live in areas with reliable telecommunications and internet services or access to adequate healthcare; and the smaller of small businesses.1 Indeed, the results from a recent Fed survey show that between March and July, a larger percentage of low-income workers, less educated workers, and Black and Hispanic workers were laid off compared to higher-income, more educated, and white workers. Rehiring by employers has been slower for lower-income workers than for higher-income workers.2 In addition, from February to April, the 1 In these remarks, I will use the term “race” to refer to race and ethnicity, and “Hispanic” to refer to Hispanic and Latinx. 2 Results from the recently released Board of Governors survey on the economic well-being of households (Table 1, p. 3 of Board of Governors, September 2020) show that between March and July, 28 percent of workers in families making less than $40,000 a year were laid off (including being told not to work any hours), considerably higher than the 13 percent of workers from families with incomes over $100,000 a year. Furthermore, a quarter of workers in low-income families who experienced a layoff reported that they had returned to work for the same employer, while nearly 40 percent of high-income workers did so. Twenty-three percent of workers with a high school diploma or less were laid off between March and July, compared to 13 percent of workers with a college degree or more, and 22 Page 2 of 17 number of active small business owners dropped by 3.3 million, a record 22 percent decline.3 Compared to small firms overall, Black-owned businesses have been twice as likely to close and Hispanic-owned businesses have been one-and-a-half times as likely to close. It is distressing to see the disparate impact of the pandemic, but the differences in economic outcomes did not start with COVID-19. There were already long-standing economic disparities in our economy. In my remarks today, I will step back from the effects of the pandemic per se and examine the differences in economic opportunity that so many in America still experience at every phase of their lives. I will conclude with some thoughts, based on the research, on where we might focus in order to reduce these gaps and promote economic inclusion. As always, the views I will present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Why Economic Inclusion Matters The Federal Reserve System’s mission is to promote a healthy economy and stable financial system in the United States. Our monetary policy decisions, our actions as supervisors and regulators of banks, our role in the payments system, and our efforts to promote community development in low- and moderate- income areas all contribute to achieving a well-functioning economy and financial system in which everyone can participate. Opportunity and inclusion are important for achieving a strong economy, and the recently announced revision to the Fed’s strategy for setting monetary policy explicitly states that we view maximum employment, one part of our statutory mandate, as a broad-based and inclusive goal. percent of Black workers and 23 percent of Hispanic workers were laid off compared to 18 percent of white workers. 3 See Fairlie (2020). Researchers at the New York Fed point to a number of contributing factors, including these firms’ weaker financial cushions, weaker bank relationships, and funding gaps that existed prior to the pandemic, plus less access to federal relief funds. See Mills and Battisto (2020). Page 3 of 17 Unfortunately, today, the U.S. economy does not offer the same opportunities to all. There are racial disparities in educational attainment, labor market outcomes, and access to credit. People born into areas of concentrated poverty or predominantly minority areas are disadvantaged over their entire lifetimes, and so are their children. Unless actions are taken to promote an inclusive economy – one in which people have the chance to move themselves and their families out of poverty, one in which systemic racism does not limit opportunities, and one in which all people can fully participate – the U.S. economy will not be able to live up to its full potential and the country will suffer. Upward Mobility [Figure 1] All parents want to know that their children will be better off financially than they are. An important part of the American Dream is the idea that anyone can climb up the ladder through hard work and perseverance. But upward mobility – the probability that a child will be better off economically than his or her parents – has fallen sharply in the U.S. since World War II. At last year’s Cleveland Fed Policy Summit, Harvard professor Raj Chetty presented some of his seminal research on income mobility.4 Around 90 percent of children born in 1940 earned more at age 30 than their parents did.5 By the mid- 1980s, only about 50 percent did. And, although not shown in the figure, the largest declines have been in the middle class. [Figure 2] Many factors have contributed to this decline. One contributor is rising income inequality, which leads to advantages in terms of education and other social factors for those in the higher-income groups compared to those in the bottom. Since the 1960s, the median level of income, adjusted for inflation, has risen over time, from about $48,000 in 1967 to about $69,000 in 2019. But those in the top 10 percent of the income distribution have enjoyed sharper gains than those in the bottom 10 percent. 4 Chetty and Williams (2019). 5 Chetty, et al. (2017). Page 4 of 17 The U.S. has one of the lowest rates of intergenerational mobility among advanced economies and more pronounced income inequality.6 [Figure 3] To get the full picture, we need to look at disaggregated data.7 Research by Chetty and his co- authors shows that upward mobility depends not only on the family’s characteristics but also on neighborhood characteristics such as neighborhood income, racial integration, the quality of schools, and access to social services.8 On this map, areas of relatively high intergenerational mobility are shown in shades of blue-green. Children who grew up in these places earn higher average income in their mid- thirties than their parents did at the same age. Shades of red indicate areas of low intergenerational mobility: places where children have not progressed very far in terms of income relative to their parents. An important insight is that even areas with fairly good economies in terms of stronger output growth and job growth, like some places in the South, have not necessarily produced high levels of upward mobility for the children growing up there. Strong economic factors certainly help, but they are not a panacea. [Figure 4] In Pittsburgh, mobility differs quite a bit across the city, and if you were to drill down even further, you would see differences even within neighborhoods. In fact, research shows that moving a child from a low-mobility neighborhood to a high-mobility neighborhood can have profound effects on his or her future economic outcomes.9 This is true not only in 6 Corak (2013). 7 Maps showing income mobility at the zip code level for different levels of income, race, and gender are available at https://www.OpportunityAtlas.org, a collaboration between the U.S. Census Bureau and Opportunity Insights. The map shown here is based on the average income at age 35 of a child whose parents earned in the 25th percentile of the income distribution, in other words, in low-income families. 8 See Chetty and Hendren (2018), Chetty, et al. (2018, revised 2020), and Chetty and Williams (2019). 9 The effect is found for children who move by the age of 13; it does not apply to adults. Each year of exposure to a better neighborhood has a greater benefit for the child. See Chetty, et al. (2018, revised 2020) and Chetty and Hendren (2018). Page 5 of 17 the U.S., but also in countries, like Australia, where income inequality is lower than it is here.10 So place matters. But so does race. Research by Chetty and co-authors has found that there is a gap in earnings between Black males and white males even if their parents were at the same income level and they grew up in the same neighborhood.11 [Figure 5] The research also shows that even conditional on where a child grows up, Blacks have a significantly lower chance of moving up in the income distribution than whites or Hispanics and a higher chance of moving down in the distribution. Strikingly, Blacks who happen to have been born to parents in the highest income quintile are almost as likely to move down to the lowest quintile as to stay in the highest one. Gaps in Income and Net Worth [Figure 6] According to the most recent Federal Reserve triennial Survey of Consumer Finances, in 2016, median income for white households was about 1-3/4 times that of Black families and 1-1/2 times that of Hispanic families.12 Earnings are an important driver of family net worth (financial and nonfinancial assets, like homes and autos, minus debt).13 Racial gaps in net worth are much larger than income gaps: the median net worth of white families in 2016 was almost 10 times as high as that of Black families and 10 One study of Australia found that where a child grows up, especially in his or her teenage years, has a causal effect on adult outcomes. See Deutscher (2020). 11 Controlling for parental income, in adulthood, Black males end up having lower earnings than white males in 99 percent of Census tracts in the U.S. For those who grew up in neighborhoods of low poverty and higher rent, both Black and white males have better outcomes, but the gap between them is greater than in high poverty areas. The gap is smaller when fathers are present and when measures of racial bias are lower. See Chetty, et al. (2020). 12 See the Federal Reserve System 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) (2017). In 2016 dollars, the median income in 2016 for white, Black, and Hispanic families were $61,000, $35,000, and $38,000, respectively. 13 For further discussion of racial net worth disparities over time, see Aliprantis, Carroll, and Young (2019). Page 6 of 17 about 8 times as high as that of Hispanic families.14 These gaps are not a recent phenomenon: they have been around for decades. Gaps over the Life Cycle: Early Years [Figure 7] Many factors play a role in these gaps in income and net worth; in fact, if we look over a person’s life, racial gaps exist every step of the way. From the beginning of life, Black children are about twice as likely as either white or Hispanic children to not reach their first birthday. These gaps in infant mortality have existed over many years, and even if you control for the educational level of the mother, the gaps remain. Black and white children tend to grow up in different neighborhoods, and this racial stratification leads to other risks that can affect longer-term economic outcomes. One example is children’s lead toxicity – the amount of lead in one’s bloodstream – which at elevated levels causes brain damage and has significant adverse effects on a child’s ability to learn. A study of Chicago neighborhoods found that even though lead poisoning in children has fallen significantly over time as a result of public health policy, it is still the case that those neighborhoods with the highest levels of toxicity are predominantly Black neighborhoods.15 [Figure 8] While lead poses one significant disadvantage to learning, lack of internet connectivity poses another. Well before the coronavirus pandemic, access to the internet was an important avenue for education, as well as for healthcare and job access. Usage of broadband at home is comparatively higher for whites, those with higher incomes, and those in urban and suburban areas.16 Blacks and Hispanics are 14 According to the SCF data, in 2016 dollars, the median net worth in 2016 of white, Black, and Hispanic families were $171,000, $17,600, and $20,700, respectively. 15 See Sampson and Winter (2016). 16 According to Pew Research Center survey data, in 2019, usage of broadband at home was 79 percent of whites, 66 percent of Blacks, and 61 percent of Hispanics; 92 percent for those earning $75,000 or more per year and 56 Page 7 of 17 less likely to have a computer or broadband at home than whites, and when they do have a computer, they are less likely to have broadband service at home.17 This puts Black and Hispanic families at a disadvantage, especially now, given the pandemic, when remote in-home learning is the norm rather than the exception. [Figure 9] In fact, during the spring, students in lower-income areas completed significantly fewer math courses online than those in higher-income areas.18 If these differences continue, there could be lasting effects on students’ earning potential throughout their lives, leading to further inequality. Gaps over the Life Cycle: College Ages [Figure 10] Indeed, the accumulation of human capital via education is an important path to economic inclusion and opportunity, resulting in better economic outcomes for individuals, households, and the country at large. The median income for families whose head has a college degree is more than twice as high as that of a family whose head has only a high school diploma. Similarly, median net worth is considerably higher for those with a college degree.19 [Figure 11] While our workforce as a whole has become more educated over time, educational attainment differs by race, as does the likelihood of completing a degree. In the Fed’s Survey of Consumer Finances, percent for those earning less than $30,000 per year; 75 percent for those in urban areas, 79 percent for those in suburban areas, and 63 percent for those in rural communities. See Pew Research Center (2019). 17 Estimates for 2019 from the U.S. Census Bureau indicate that about 2 percent of Asian households, 4 percent of white households, 4 percent of Hispanic households, and 7 percent of Black households do not have a computer at home. About 95 percent of Asian households, 90 percent of white households, 88 percent of Hispanic households, and 84 percent of Black households have a computer and broadband at home. See U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Subject Table S2802, 2019 1-year estimates. (Note: These estimates on broadband are higher than those from Pew, cited in footnote 16, which pertain to usage.) 18 See the Zearn math platform data at Opportunity Insights: Economic Tracker, and Chetty, et al. (2020). 19 According to the Federal Reserve System 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances, in 2016, the median income of families whose head has a college degree was $90,000 compared with $40,000 for families whose head had only a high school diploma. See Federal Reserve System (2017). Page 8 of 17 39 percent of white heads of household held a college degree compared to 23 percent of Black heads of household and 17 percent of Hispanic heads of household.20 Cost can be an important barrier to entering college, particularly for those coming from lower-income families. The average cost of tuition and fees at four-year institutions is now over $16,000 a year, and adjusted for inflation, it has more than doubled over the past three decades.21 According to the Fed’s survey on economic well-being, as of late 2019, over 40 percent of those who went to college had taken on debt for their education and about half of those people still owe money on this debt.22 New York Fed analysis shows that compared to borrowers in majority white areas, those in majority Black areas have higher student loan balances and those in majority Black and majority Hispanic areas have higher rates of default on those loans.23 These defaults can follow a person over time, making it harder to access credit in the future. [Figure 12] For those students who do find the financial means to enter college, the likelihood of completing a degree differs by type of institution and by race. The completion rates have remained particularly low at for-profit institutions. At both public and nonprofit private institutions, the graduation rates for whites, Hispanics, and Asians have all risen over time, but those of Blacks remain well below those of these other groups and have shown no progress over time. Satisfaction with college also varies by race. About 70 percent of white recipients of bachelor’s degrees felt that their education was worth the cost, but only slightly more than half of Black recipients did.24 20 See Dettling, et al. (2017). 21 See Digest of Education Statistics. 22 See pp. 43-46, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (May 2020). 23 See Chakrabarti, Nober, and van der Klaauw (2020). 24 See Figure 28, p. 39, in Board of Governors (May 2020). Page 9 of 17 Gaps over the Life Cycle: Earning Years – Labor Markets and Credit Markets [Figure 13] The differences in educational attainment across races follow people as they enter the workforce. There are significant racial disparities in labor market outcomes. Unemployment rates among Blacks and Hispanics have been chronically above those of whites and Asians, and Blacks and Hispanics are more likely to lose their jobs during recessions. Although some progress had been made over the long economic expansion that ended in February, racial disparities remained. Research from Fed economists indicates that while lower educational attainment explains much of the difference in the unemployment experience of Hispanics, this is not true for the Black-white gap. In fact, observable characteristics, like education, age, or marital status, cannot fully account for the higher and more cyclical unemployment of Blacks relative to whites.25 [Figure 14] These long-standing labor market disparities spill over in other ways that limit Black households’ ability to fully participate in the economy. Worse and more volatile labor market outcomes make it harder for nonwhite families to build assets and achieve sound financial health. For those families that are able to get a mortgage, job insecurity makes the household less financially resilient and raises the risk that the household might fall behind on its mortgage or even default, putting the family’s longer-term financial health at risk. Housing continues to be an important way for families to build wealth, but even controlling for income and other factors related to creditworthiness, there is a rising gap between the homeownership rate of whites and Blacks. This indicates that systemic racial differences in access to credit have persisted well after enactment of fair housing and lending legislation in the 1970s meant to address the scourge of redlining and discrimination in credit markets.26,27 25 See Cajner, et al. (2017). 26 See also Choi (2020). 27 For documentation and discussion of the racial gaps in homeownership rates, see Haughwout, et al. (2020). Page 10 of 17 [Figure 15] In terms of access to financial services, Blacks and Hispanics are less likely to have a bank account and more likely to rely on alternative financial services such as money orders and check cashing services than whites. Being unbanked or underbanked makes it harder for these families to build a credit history.28 The use of bank financing by small businesses also varies significantly with the race of the owner. According to the Fed’s Small Business Credit Survey, compared to small firms with white ownership, those with Black ownership were half as likely to have obtained financing from a bank in the past five years, relying more on online lenders, which, according to survey respondents, provide less satisfactory service.29 Much Needs to Be Done to Address Economic Disparities and Promote Economic Inclusion Eliminating racial and economic disparities, which have lasted over generations, is no easy task. It will take concerted action at the individual, professional, and institutional level to change structures and systems that perpetuate these gaps. But this work needs to be done so that all people have the opportunity to fully participate in the U.S. economy. The research I discussed today points to four priorities. Investing in neighborhoods and communities must be a priority. Place matters and at smaller geographical divisions than might be expected. Localized, neighborhood-based community development 28 See Table 11, p. 28, in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (May 2020). Unbanked is defined as not having a checking, savings, or money market account. Underbanked is defined as having a checking, savings, or money market account but having used one of these alternative financial services: money order, check cashing service, pawn shop loan, auto title loan, payday loan, paycheck advance, or tax refund advance. 29 According to the Fed’s most recent Small Business Credit Survey of firms with 1-499 employees, 46 percent of firms with white ownership, 32 percent of firms with Hispanic ownership, and 23 percent of firms with Black ownership had obtained financing from a bank in the past five years; 19 percent of firms with white ownership, 22 percent of firms with Hispanic ownership, and 27 percent of firms with Black ownership had obtained financing from an online lender in the past five years. See Federal Reserve System (2020), p. 9. Page 11 of 17 work and investments aimed at reducing poverty rates, improving school quality and housing choices, and revitalizing neighborhoods can offer families more stability. Focusing on improving neighborhoods can have results. In 2016, the Cleveland Fed convened all those interested in contributing to the efforts of the Lead Safe Cleveland Coalition and the city of Cleveland in preventing lead poisoning in the city.30 And last July, Cleveland City Council passed an important piece of legislation requiring, among other provisions, that landlords pay for private inspections and certifications that their occupied units are lead- safe, with penalties for noncompliance.31 Closing the digital divide must be a priority. Among communities with a population of 100,000 or more, the city of Cleveland has among the lowest home broadband access in the nation.32 Business leaders through the Greater Cleveland Partnership are working with the city’s governmental leaders and other organizations to ensure that all residents in the Greater Cleveland area have access to in-home high- quality broadband and devices to access it. Similar work is being done in Pittsburgh by the Allegheny Conference on Community Development. Increasing access to high-quality education at all levels must be a priority. Education is a significant avenue to economic opportunity. Recognizing that a higher-skilled workforce benefits communities, Ohio has a project underway to try to increase educational attainment.33 Issues with cost and preparation need to be addressed. Respondents to recent Fed surveys said that the cost of college and family 30 See Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland (2016). 31 See Dissell and Zeltner (2019). 32 The data are available in Table GCT2801, U.S. Census American Community Survey (2019). In the city of Cleveland, 69.3 percent of households have a broadband internet subscription. Only Lakewood Township, Ocean County, N.J. has lower internet connectivity, at 58.9 percent. The numbers for the U.S. and for the city of Pittsburgh are 86.4 percent and 86.5 percent, respectively. 33 Ohio Excels, partnering with the Complete to Compete Ohio Coalition, has developed a statewide action plan to increase postsecondary educational attainment in the state. See Ohio Excels (2020) and Wright-McGowan (2020). Page 12 of 17 obligations are among the reasons they did not complete their degree.34 Low grades were also cited as a reason. Adequate preparation for college has an impact on completion rates and likely on satisfaction. Research is increasingly pointing to the fact that children who fall behind have difficulty catching up.35 Tutoring and mentoring throughout a student’s elementary, high school, and college years can support a student through to earning a degree. In addition, financial literacy should be included in elementary and high school curricula. Such courses will give students the skills to evaluate the various options for financing their education, determine which types of educational institutions offer a good return on their investment, and lead to better savings, investment, and credit decisions throughout their lives. The Cleveland Fed actively supports economic and financial literacy programs, and this year we will be hosting the Council of Economic Education’s National Personal Finance Challenge, a competition for high school students that encourages development of financial management skills. Eliminating systemic inequities in access to credit and financial services must be a priority. The racial disparities that still exist in banking and credit markets mean institutions need to reassess their business practices and change those that are found to be sources of such disparities. Similarly, policymakers need to strengthen policies meant to address such inequities. The Federal Reserve is currently working to strengthen the regulations that implement the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). The act, passed in 1977, was intended to help address concerns about disinvestment in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and the impact of illegal practices such as redlining. The CRA reaffirmed that insured depository institutions must serve the communities in which they are chartered to do business. Evidence 34 According to the Fed survey of economic well-being, of those respondents who could not complete their associate’s or bachelor’s degree, among other reasons, 56 percent said it was because it was too expensive, 52 percent said it was because they needed to earn money to take care of their family, and 22 percent said it was because of low grades. Respondents could choose more than one reason. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (May 2020), Table 23, p. 41. 35 See Mester (2015). Page 13 of 17 shows that the CRA has provided tangible benefits to low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. With the many changes in banking since the 1970s, it is time to modernize the regulation so that it can help to address systemic inequities in access to financial services and credit for low- and moderate-income and minority communities and individuals.36 Of course, much more needs to be done. But if we have focus, perseverance, and a shared commitment to eliminating systemic racism and increasing the breadth of economic opportunity, then together we can ensure that instead of being a pipe dream for some, the American Dream is available to all. 36 The Board of Governors issued its Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) to strengthen, clarify, and tailor the CRA regulation, and other materials summarizing the ANPR on September 21, 2020. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (September 21, 2020) and Brainard (2020). Page 14 of 17 References Aliprantis, Dionissi, Daniel R. Carroll, and Eric R. Young, “The Dynamics of the Racial Wealth Gap,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 19-18, October 2019. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/publications/working-papers/2019-working- papers/wp-1918-dynamics-of-the-racial-wealth-gap.aspx. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020,” May 2020. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2019-report-economic-well-being-us-households- 202005.pdf) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Update on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households: July 2020 Results,” September 2020. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2019-report-economic-well-being-us-households- update-202009.pdf) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Federal Reserve Board Issues Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on an Approach to Modernize Regulations That Implement the Community Reinvestment Act,” press release, September 21, 2020. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20200921a.htm) Brainard, Lael, “Strengthening the CRA to Meet the Challenges of Our Time,” remarks at the Urban Institute, Washington, D.C., September 21, 2020. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20200921a.htm) Cajner, Tomaz, Tyler Radler, David Ratner, and Ivan Vidangos, “Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017- 071, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 12, 2017. (https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.071) Chakrabarti, Rajashri, William Nober, and Wilbert van der Klaauw, “Measuring Racial Disparities in Higher Education and Student Debt Outcomes,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics, July 8, 2020. (https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2020/07/measuring-racial-disparities-in-higher-education- and-student-debt-outcomes.html) Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter, “The Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 25147, October 2018, revised February 2020. (http://www.nber.org/papers/w25147) Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and the Opportunity Insights Team, “The Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Evidence from a New Public Database Built from Private Sector Data,” manuscript, September 2020. (https://opportunityinsights.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/tracker_paper.pdf) Chetty, Raj, David Grusky, Maximilian Hell, Nathaniel Hendren, Robert Manduca, and Jimmy Narang, “The Fading American Dream: Trends in Absolute Income Mobility Since 1940,” Science, 356 (April 28 2017), pp. 398-406. (https://science.sciencemag.org/content/356/6336/398) Page 15 of 17 Chetty, Raj, and Nathaniel Hendren, “The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility I: Childhood Exposure Effects,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (August 2018), pp. 1107-1162 (https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjy007) Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Maggie R. Jones, and Sonya R. Porter, “Race and Economic Opportunity in the United States: An Intergenerational Perspective,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135 (May 2020), pp. 711-783. (https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjz042) Chetty, Raj, and David Williams, “Improving Equality of Opportunity: New Insights from Big Data,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Policy Summit, Cincinnati, OH, June 19-21, 2019. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/events/2019/policy- summit/videos.aspx#openingkeynotevideo) Choi, Jung Hyun, “Breaking Down the Black-White Homeownership Gap,” Urban Wire: Housing and Housing Finance (blog), Urban Institute, February 21, 2020. (https://www.urban.org/urban-wire/breaking-down-black-white-homeownership-gap) Corak, Miles, “Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational Mobility,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27 (Summer 2013), pp. 79-102. (https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.27.3.79) Dettling, Lisa J., Joanne W. Hsu, Lindsay Jacobs, Kevin B. Moore, and Jeffrey P. Thompson, “Recent Trends in Wealth-Holding by Race and Ethnicity: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series Notes, September 27, 2017. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/notes/feds-notes/recent-trends-in-wealth-holding-by-race-and- ethnicity-evidence-from-the-survey-of-consumer-finances-20170927.htm) Deutscher, Nathan, “Place, Peers, and the Teenage Years: Long-Run Neighborhood Effects in Australia,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 12 (April 2020), pp. 220-249. (https://doi.org/10.1257/app.20180329) Digest of Education Statistics, Table 330.10, “Average Undergraduate Tuition and Fees and Room and Board Rates Charged for Full-Time Students in Degree-Granting Postsecondary Institutions, by Level and Control of Institution: Selected Years, 1963-64 through 2018-19.” (https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d19/tables/dt19_330.10.asp) Dissell, Rachel, and Brie Zeltner, “Cleveland City Council Passes Historic Lead Poisoning Prevention Law,” The Plain Dealer, July 24, 2019. (https://www.cleveland.com/metro/2019/07/cleveland-city-council-passes-historic-lead-poisoning- prevention-law.html) Fairlie, Robert W., “The Impact of Covid-19 on Small Business Owners: Evidence of Early-Stage Losses from the April 2020 Current Population Survey,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 27309, June 2020. (https://www.nber.org/papers/w27309) Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, “Addressing the Impacts of Lead: Moving Toward Prevention,” November 18, 2016. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/events/2016/addressing-the-impacts-of- lead.aspx) Page 16 of 17 Federal Reserve System, 2016 Survey of Consumer Finances (2017). (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scfindex.htm) Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Small Business Credit Survey: 2020 Report on Employer Firms, 2020. (https://www.fedsmallbusiness.org/medialibrary/FedSmallBusiness/files/2020/2020-sbcs-employer-firms- report) Haughwout, Andrew, Donghoon Lee, Joelle Scally, and Wilbert van der Klaauw, “Inequality in U.S. Homeownership Rates by Race and Ethnicity,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics, July 8, 2020. (https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2020/07/inequality-in-us-homeownership-rates-by-race- and-ethnicity.html) Mester, Loretta J., “Community Development and Human Capital,” remarks at the 2015 Policy Summit on Housing, Human Capital, and Inequality, Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Philadelphia, and Richmond, Pittsburgh, PA, June 19, 2015. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20150619-community- development-and-human-capital.aspx) Mills, Claire Kramer, and Jessica Battisto, “Double Jeopardy: COVID-19’s Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities,” Brief, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020. (https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/smallbusiness/DoubleJeopardy_COVID19andBlackO wnedBusinesses) Ohio Excels, “Bridging Ohio’s Workforce Gap,” August 2020. (https://completetocompeteohio.org/wp-content/uploads/Bridging-Ohios-Workforce-Gap-Attainment- Plan-August-2020.pdf) The Opportunity Atlas. (https://www.OpportunityAtlas.org) Opportunity Insights: Economic Tracker. (https://tracktherecovery.org/) Pew Research Center, “Internet/Broadband Fact Sheet: Who Has Home Broadband?” June 12, 2019. (https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/fact-sheet/internet-broadband/#who-has-home-broadband) Sampson, Robert J., and Alix S. Winter, “The Racial Ecology of Lead Poisoning: Toxic Inequality in Chicago Neighborhoods, 1995-2013,” Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race 13 (Fall 2016), pp. 261-283. (https://doi.org/10.1017/S1742058X16000151) U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Subject Table S2802, “Types of Internet Subscriptions by Selected Characteristics,” 2019 1-Year Estimates. (https://data.census.gov/cedsci/table?q=S2802) U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, Geographic Comparison Table GCT2801, “Percent of Households with a Broadband Internet Subscription,” 2019 1-Year Estimates. (https://www.census.gov/acs/www/data/data-tables-and-tools/geographic-comparison-tables/) Page 17 of 17 Wright-McGowan, Margie, “The Stakes Are High and There're No Second Chances When It Comes to Preparing Students for Success,” remarks at Aim ‘Hire’: Workforce and Education Symposium and Fall Series, Ohio Excels and the Governor's Office of Workforce Transformation, Columbus, OH, September 22, 2020. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20200922-wright-mcgowan.aspx)

An Update on the Effects of the Pandemic on the Economy Loretta J. Mester* President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Greater Cleveland Partnership Annual Meeting (videotaped October 6, 2020) October 14, 2020 * The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Page 1 of 4 It is a pleasure to be with you today. Let me start by congratulating Joe Roman on his upcoming retirement as president and CEO of the Greater Cleveland Partnership. Joe was one of the first civic leaders I met when I moved to Cleveland in 2014. From our very first conversation, it was clear that Joe was passionate about Cleveland. Over his entire career, he has been a strong advocate for our region and a strong adherent to the view that by working together, business, civic, and community leaders can get important things done. I am sure that Joe will show that same dedication and optimism in his new endeavors and I wish him well. Wishing someone well has taken on new meaning this year. The coronavirus pandemic is a global public health crisis that has inflicted pain and hardship on people all over the world. The pandemic was an unprecedented shock to the economy – the largest in most of our lifetimes. In March, all but essential economic activity shut down when the country took aggressive social distancing measures to limit the spread of the virus and to buy some time for the healthcare system to increase its capacity to care for the sick, learn more about the virus itself, and develop testing and treatments. [FIGURE 1. Output and Employment through Q2] In the second quarter of the year, real output declined at a rate of about 31 percent measured on an annual basis. In just the two months of March and April, payroll jobs dropped by 22 million. That is about the same number of jobs that the economy had added over the entire recent expansion that lasted over 10 years. The unemployment rate, which had been at a fifty-year low of 3.5 percent in February, spiked to 14.7 percent in April. And despite supply disruptions, inflation moved down with the drop in demand. Page 2 of 4 In May, as public health statistics began to improve, many parts of the country began to relax some of their stay-at-home restrictions, and the economy began to reopen. Activity, hiring, and inflation picked up – all good news. But there is quite a bit of difference across sectors. Interest-rate-sensitive sectors, like housing and autos, have seen the sharpest rebounds. Other sectors, especially service sectors like travel, hospitality, and leisure, are still very depressed. [Figure 2. Employment and Unemployment] September’s jobs report shows a continued pickup in hiring, although at a slower pace than in the summer. We have made up a little over half of the jobs lost in March and April as people returned to work from temporary furlough. But that still means we are down almost 11 million jobs from February’s level. The unemployment rate fell to just under 8 percent (7.9 percent) in September, better than expected. But part of that drop reflects a drop in labor force participation, which remains well below February’s level. [Figure 3. Re-employment Rates by Income] It is clear that the adverse effects of the pandemic have not been evenly distributed. They have been borne by the most vulnerable in our economy: lower-income and minority workers and communities; those who do not have the opportunity to work from home; those who do not live in areas with reliable telecommunications and internet services or access to adequate healthcare; and the smaller of small businesses. Rehiring by employers has been slower for lower-income workers than for higher-income workers – at the national level and in Cuyahoga county. [Figure 4. Progress on Unemployment by Race/Ethnicity and Educational Attainment] Over the course of the reopening, there has been less progress on reducing the unemployment rate for minorities than for whites and for those with lower levels of education compared with those with higher levels. Page 3 of 4 So while the economy is recovering, it is still in a deep hole. Employment is about where it was in the middle of 2015 – so we’ve lost more than five years of job growth. Even if growth rebounds in the third quarter at the same pace at which it contracted in the second quarter, the level of output will be about where it was at the end of 2017, so the economy will have lost almost three years of output growth. Both monetary policy and fiscal policy reacted swiftly and strongly to support the economy thus far. We have in place very accommodative monetary policy: the fed funds rate is at its effective lower bound, we are purchasing Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, we have a number of liquidity and lending facilities in place to ensure that markets continue to function and that credit continues to flow to businesses and households, and we have temporarily relaxed some of the regulatory requirements on banks so they have greater capacity to lend. Fiscal policy actions have included grants to individuals, certain businesses hit hardest by the pandemic, and states and municipalities; expanded unemployment benefits; and the Paycheck Protection Program, which offered loans to small businesses that became grants for firms maintaining their payrolls. It will take some time to move from the somewhat fragile, disparate recovery we have now to a more sustainable, broader recovery. The path of the recovery is likely to be bumpy, with some fits and starts and uneven progress. It will take time for workers who have lost jobs to find new ones, either at another firm in their current industry or in a new industry after they retrain. The commercial real estate market has been particularly hard hit. There was already a trend toward online shopping and remote work; the pandemic has greatly accelerated that trend. The structural changes in the commercial real estate market will take some time to sort out. Provided we continue to make progress on controlling the virus, activity and hiring will continue to Page 4 of 4 expand. By the end of this year, I expect that output will still be somewhat below its level at the end of last year; that the unemployment rate will remain in the high single digits; and that inflation will be well below our longer-run 2 percent goal. The recovery should continue over the next couple of years provided it is supported by very accommodative monetary policy and further fiscal policy actions. Fiscal policy in the form of aid to households and small businesses most affected by the pandemic and to states and municipal governments, and increased investment in testing, contract tracing, treatment, and vaccine development would provide important support for the recovery. Of course, there is a lot of uncertainty around the forecast. It is highly dependent on the virus and our actions to control its spread. It is easy to think of downside scenarios. Many of our contacts in the region, across all sectors, tell us that uncertainty about the course of the virus and about whether there is going to be additional fiscal support is clouding their outlook and holding back larger investments. But there are upside scenarios as well. Development of a safe and effective vaccine that people have confidence in and that can be widely distributed fairly quickly would be very positive for the outlook. In addition, we should not discount the fact that the pickup in activity we have seen so far has exceeded expectations. It is a good reminder that we should never count out the resiliency of the U.S. economy and the American people. 1 Charts for “An Update on the Effects of the Pandemic on the Economy” * The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Loretta J. Mester* President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Greater Cleveland Partnership Annual Meeting (videotaped October 6, 2020) October 14, 2020 2 Trillions of chain‐weighted 2012 $ Figure 1. The economic expansion ended in February and output and employment plunged Source for GDP: Bureau of Economic Analysis via Haver Analytics, quarterly data Source for Employment: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics, monthly data Level of real GDP through the second quarter of 2020 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Millions of jobs, SA Level of payroll employment through April 2020 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 15 16 17 18 19 20 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 3 Figure 2. Labor market conditions have improved since April Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics, monthly data 125 130 135 140 145 150 155 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Millions of jobs, SA Level of payroll employment through September 2020 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 Percent, SA Unemployment rate through September 2020 4 Figure 3. Employment of low‐income workers remains well below its level in January Source: Opportunity Insights, TracktheRecovery.org based on data from Paychex, Intuit, Earnin, and Kronos, daily data through 7/29/2020 Low wage is approx. < $13/hour, Middle wage is approx. $13‐$29/hour, High wage is approx. > 29/hour ‐40% ‐35% ‐30% ‐25% ‐20% ‐15% ‐10% ‐5% 0% 5% 10% 1/31 3/1 3/31 4/30 5/30 6/29 7/29 Employment level compared to January, by wage quartile: Low wage: bottom quartile, Middle wage: middle two quartiles, High wage: top quartile High wage Middle wage Low wage National –16.1% –5.3% –1.6% ‐40% ‐35% ‐30% ‐25% ‐20% ‐15% ‐10% ‐5% 0% 5% 10% 1/31 3/1 3/31 4/30 5/30 6/29 7/29 High wage Middle wage Low wage –11.5% –4.1% 2.3% Cuyahoga County 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Percentage points Black Hispanic Asian White Figure 4. Unemployment rates remain elevated, especially for minorities and those with less education No high High Some College school school college degree diploma diploma 5 Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics via Haver Analytics Net rise in the unemployment rate between February and September

The Federal Reserve’s New Monetary Policy Strategy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Remarks for the Session, “Monetary Policy Implications” 6th Annual Monetary and Financial Policy Conference Money Macro and Finance Society London, UK (via videoconference) October 21, 2020 1 Introduction I thank Paul Mizen and the Money Macro and Finance Society for the opportunity to speak at your 6th Annual Conference. In my brief remarks today, I will give an overview of the changes to our monetary policy strategy that the Federal Open Market Committee, the monetary policymaking body within the Federal Reserve, recently announced and discuss their implications for monetary policy going forward. As always, the views I will present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Revised Statement on Long-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy In early 2019, the FOMC began a review of our framework for setting monetary policy – the strategy, tools, and communications we use in setting policy in pursuit of the monetary policy goals given to us by the U.S. Congress. These goals are maximum employment, price stability, and moderate long-term interest rates. When prices are stable and the economy is at full employment, long-term interest rates are typically at moderate levels. So it is often said that the U.S. Congress has given the Fed a dual mandate of price stability and maximum employment. The framework review was informed by our experience during and after the Great Recession, by economic theory and empirical analysis, and by consultations with academic researchers and practitioners at research conferences. It was also informed by conversations with the public at large, through a series of Fed Listens events held across the country.1 The main conclusions of the review are captured in our revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which the FOMC approved this August. The framework review was undertaken in light of changes in the economic environment that have emerged since the FOMC’s first strategy statement was published in 2012. One change with important implications for monetary policy is the decline in the U.S. and other advanced economies in the general 1 The revised Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, as well as other materials pertaining to the review, is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy- tools -and-communications.htm. 2 level of interest rates consistent with sustainable growth and price stability. This decline reflects several factors , including the aging of the population, changes in risk preferences, and slower productivity growth. It means that the level of the federal funds rate, the policy rate in the U.S., consistent with maximum employment and price stability is now lower than it has been in the past. This means that during economic downturns, it is now more likely that the fed funds rate will be constrained by its effective lower bound, and the FOMC will have less policy space to support the economy using its traditional policy tool. This constraint, being understood by households, businesses, and financial markets, imparts a downward bias to inflation and inflation expectations, and so increases the downside risks to achieving our policy goals. Another change in the economic environment with implications for monetary policy pertains to inflation dynamics. Resource slack in the labor market and in product markets has become less correlated with actual inflation than in the past, and inflation expectations now play a larger role in determining inflation outcomes. This means it is even more important that inflation expectations remain well anchored at levels consistent with our longer-run inflation goal. If expectations move below these levels, then it is more likely that inflation will run below our goal, which would then result in even less policy space in a low-interest-rate environment. These changes in the economic environment warranted asking ourselves whether there were revisions to our monetary policy strategy that would make it more effective in promoting our policy goals. The review led us to conclude that the answer was yes. And we made changes to our approach to both the inflation goal and the employment goal, which are summarized in our revised strategy statement. Revised Strategy Statement: Inflation Goal Regarding our approach to inflation, the first thing I want to note is something that did not change. The FOMC has reaffirmed the explicit inflation target first announced in 2012, namely, that a longer-run 3 inflation rate of 2 percent is most consistent with our statutory mandate. But our strategy statement is now more explicit about how we will go about achieving this inflation goal. In particular, after periods in which inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, we will likely aim to have inflation run moderately above 2 percent for some time. Doing so will help anchor inflation expectations, a main determinant of actual inflation, at levels consistent with 2 percent inflation. This new language is a stronger statement than we have made in the past as we have struggled to effectively convey that the longer-run goal of 2 percent should not be interpreted as a ceiling. In the past, many of us on the FOMC have indicated that we would be comfortable with inflation running above 2 percent for a time after it has run low for some time – a type of opportunistic reinflation. But now we are going to be deliberate rather than opportunistic. As the revised strategy indicates, after inflation has been running persistently below 2 percent, not only will we tolerate serendipitous shocks that move inflation above 2 percent, but we will likely set policy with the intention of moving inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time. The implication is that monetary policy will be somewhat more accommodative than in the past when inflation has been running persistently low in order to reach our longer-run inflation goal. Revised Strategy Statement: Employment Goal Regarding our employment goal, I view the changes we made in the strategy statement as an acknowledgment of the uncertainty around assessments of the level of maximum employment and a clarification to our approach to achieving this goal. This is consistent with something I have advocated for some time: that policy communications should acknowledge uncertainty.2 In the recent expansion, we saw that employment growth could be stronger and the unemployment rate lower without generating inflation than one would have thought possible based on past decades of experience. Over the expansion, 2 See, e.g., Loretta J. Mester, “Acknowledging Uncertainty,” remarks at the Shadow Open Market Committee Fall Meeting, New York, NY, October 7, 2016. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp- 20161007-acknowledging -uncertainty.aspx) 4 it took time to learn about these structural changes in the economy, and as the FOMC learned, its assessments of the longer-run unemployment rate came down significantly over time. Unfortunately, this time-to-learn, combined with the previous strategy statement’s references to “deviations” of employment from maximum employment, has been misinterpreted by some as suggesting that the FOMC, at times, takes deliberate policy action to bring employment down independently of our inflation goal. This is not the case. The benefits of a strong labor market in fostering economic inclusion are clear. Changes in the economy underscore the difficulties in using the Phillips curve model to forecast inflation or to assess maximum employment in real time. The revised strategy statement clarifies that in the absence of inflationary pressures or risks to financial stability, strong employment is not a concern and monetary policy will not react to it. This approach is consistent with the recent behavior of the FOMC. Estimates of simple monetary policy rules by the Cleveland Fed staff indicate that FOMC participants put less weight on the unemployment rate in determining the appropriate policy path in the last two years of the most recent economic expansion than they did earlier in the expansion.3 An Area for Further Work: Systematic Policymaking and Communications The new strategy statement will guide FOMC monetary policy decisions both during and beyond the pandemic. But bringing the new strategy to bear in our policymaking is a work in progress. So I will end my remarks by discussing two areas for further work: first, systematic policymaking and communications, and second, the nexus between financial stability and monetary policy. 3 See Edward S. Knotek II, “Changing Policy Rule Parameters Implied by the Median SEP Paths,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary Number 2019-06, April 15, 2019. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/economic-commentary/2019-economic- commentaries/ec-201906-changing-policy-rule-parameters) 5 Our September FOMC statement was the first to incorporate the new strategy.4 The statement indicated that because inflation has been running persistently low, we will be aiming to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time and that we expect to maintain the current funds rate target range of 0 to 1/4 percent until labor market conditions have reached levels consistent with our assessment of maximum employment and inflation has risen to 2 percent and is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. As of September, the forecasts of FOMC participants, as indicated in the Summary of Economic Projections, showed that the majority thought it would not be appropriate to raise rates until after 2023.5 However, importantly, the guidance is based on the state of the economy and not on calendar dates. The economy could evolve so that the stipulated inflation and employment conditions are achieved earlier or later than currently projected, in which case, the anticipated policy path would appropriately adjust. I strongly believe that clear policy communications are an important part of effective monetary policymaking. When the public has a better understanding of the goals and rationale for monetary policy decisions, they are better able to hold policymakers accountable for their actions. Clear communication also makes monetary policy itself more effective by providing the public with information about the economic outlook and aligning the public’s expectations about future policy actions. When households, businesses, and investors have a better sense of how monetary policy is likely to change conditional on the outlook, they can make better economic and financial decisions. Even though the September statement incorporated some aspects of the new strategy, Fed watchers and others have asked for more context about what indicators the FOMC would be using to assess whether labor market conditions are consistent with maximum employment, and how far above 2 percent would the FOMC aim for inflation to be and for how long. While the context has changed, similar kinds of 4 The September FOMC meeting statement is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200916a.htm. 5 The September Summary of Economic Projections is available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20200916ep.htm. 6 questions about how the FOMC assessed whether or not its goals had been met were asked when we operated under the previous strategy as well. Work still needs to be done to ensure that our policy decisions are systematically guided by our outlook and risks around the outlook and that our policy communications convey a good sense of the FOMC’s reaction function, especially now under the new strategy. The revised strategy leans heavily on the relationship between inflation expectations, inflation, and the ability of monetary policy to influence both, but there is still much to learn about inflation dynamics and inflation expectations. The benefits of the move to a type of make-up strategy for inflation – that is, running policy to achieve inflation somewhat above 2 percent for a time after it has run persistently low – depend on our ability to communicate that we have shifted to and will pursue this new strategy and our ability to explain clearly how the new strategy differs from the old. Recent research from the Cleveland Fed’s Center for Inflation Research suggests that we may have further to go on this score. Center researchers used the Cleveland Fed’s daily national survey of consumers to examine the effect of Chair Jay Powell’s announcement of the new strategy on households’ understanding of monetary policy and their expectations of inflation.6 They obtained four interesting results. First, while there was a surge in news coverage about monetary policy around the time of the Chair’s speech, there was only a small increase in the number of respondents who reported having heard news about monetary policy; most people did not recall anything. 6 Olivier Coibion, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Edward S. Knotek II, and Raphael Schoenle, “Average Inflation Targeting and Household Expectations,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 20-26, September 18, 2020. (https://doi.org/10.26509/frbc-wp-202026) 7 Second, among the small group who had heard news, there was a sense that something had changed, but little recognition of what had changed in the approach to monetary policy. Third, there is considerable confusion about our goals: when presented with a list of options, more respondents said that the Fed sets monetary policy with the aim of maintaining a strong dollar or keeping interest rates low to reduce the government’s cost of borrowing than said we set policy to promote maximum employment and price stability. Fourth, when some individuals were selected at random and given information about average inflation targeting, their expectations about future inflation over the next five years were no different than those of individuals who were, instead, given information about traditional inflation targeting. Of course, it is important to remember that some of the gains from the new strategy will likely come from the expectations and actions of sophisticated financial market participants who closely follow monetary policy, thereby helping policy to transmit throughout the economy. It is also true that the survey was taken over only a short period following the announcement, and as anyone who has ever taught or been a student knows, it takes time to master new material. Still, the results do suggest that more work needs to be done on policy communications to ensure that households will understand the policy strategy and then incorporate it into their expectations and actions. Another Area for Further Work: Financial Stability and Monetary Policy A second area that needs further work is understanding the nexus between monetary policy and financial stability. Our revised strategy statement explicitly acknowledges that sustainably achieving maximum employment and price stability depends on a stable financial system. As part of its framework review, the FOMC considered the interactions between financial stability and monetary policy, particularly in the 8 current environment of low neutral interest rates.7 While monetary policy that leads to a stable macroeconomy encourages financial stability, it is also possible that in an environment with low neutral rates, a persistently accommodative monetary policy could, in some cases, increase the vulnerabilities of the financial system by encouraging higher levels of borrowing and financial leverage, increased valuation pressures, and search-for-yield behavior. How best to approach the nexus between monetary policy and financial stability in a low-interest-rate world deserves more consideration. As indicated in the minutes of the January 2020 FOMC meeting, in discussing the framework, most FOMC participants agreed that supervisory, regulatory, and macroprudential tools, including the countercyclical capital buffer and stress tests, should be the primary way to address financial stability risks rather than using monetary policy. But in the U.S., there are few countercyclical tools and they are not designed to address vulnerabilities outside of the banking system. Therefore, there may be certain circumstances where monetary policy may need to be adjusted in order to mitigate risks to financial stability. But when and how to do that needs further study. In addition, more study is needed of the tradeoffs and complementarities among our three sets of relevant policies: monetary policy, macroprudential policy, and microprudential policy, which includes tools, such as capital and liquidity requirements, that work throughout the business and financial cycles. As our framework review did with monetary policy, the implications of a low-interest-rate world for both macroprudential policy and microprudential policy should be considered. 7 See a summary of the discussion in the minutes to the January 2020 FOMC meeting at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20200129.htm.

Fintech, Bigtech, and Financial Inclusion Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Fourth Annual Fintech Conference Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Philadelphia, PA (via videoconference) November 9, 2020 1 Introduction I thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia and the other organizers for inviting me to speak at the fourth annual Fintech Conference. I spent most of my career at the Philadelphia Fed, so it is always a pleasure to participate in one of its events. Since the beginning of this conference series, the discussions have consistently been very topical, and the agenda for the next two days does not disappoint on that score. The conference will cover many of the hot issues confronting practitioners, academics, and policymakers as financial system innovation proceeds at a rapid pace. Today I will discuss the implications of digitalization for financial inclusion and some steps that need to be taken to ensure that digitalization helps to foster inclusion rather than promote exclusion. The views I will present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Financial Inclusion Has Benefits It is probably best to start off with a definition of financial inclusion, and the World Bank provides us with a workable one: financial inclusion refers to individuals and businesses having access to useful and affordable financial products and services that meet their needs and that are delivered in a responsible and sustainable way.1 Much of the literature measures financial inclusion as households’ and businesses’ use of formal financial services from banks or other traditional providers, so-called mainstream financial services. With the entry of fintech providers, that definition is expanding because fintech financial services are moving into the mainstream. The World Bank’s Global Findex database provides data on how people in 140 economies access accounts, make payments, save, borrow, and manage risks. It includes data on formal and informal financial services and the use of financial technology to conduct financial transactions.2 The data indicate 1 The World Bank, Financial Inclusion, https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/financialinclusion/overview. 2 World Bank (2017). 2 that across the globe financial inclusion has risen. The share of adults with an account at a financial institution or through a mobile money service rose from 62 percent in 2014 to 69 percent in 2017. Nonetheless, there is still a large portion of the population that does not have access to or use financial services. As of 2017, an estimated 1.7 billion adults around the world are unbanked or underserved. Women lag behind men; the poor lag behind the wealthy; and developing economies lag behind developed economies in the shares having formal accounts. In the U.S., the level of financial inclusion is high: 93 percent of adults have an account at a bank or other type of financial institution or use a mobile money service. But disparities exist: there is a 13 percentage point gap between those in the richest 60 percent of households and those in the poorest 40 percent. Federal Reserve data indicate that, compared to whites, Blacks and Hispanics in the U.S. are less likely to have a bank account and more likely to rely on alternative financial services such as money orders and check cashing services.3 And compared to small firms with white ownership, those with Black ownership were half as likely to have obtained financing from a bank in the past five years, relying more on online lenders, which, according to the survey respondents, provide less satisfactory service.4 To address these types of gaps, many countries have set financial inclusion as a formal target.5 This is reasonable because numerous studies have documented the contribution of a well-functioning financial system and higher levels of financial inclusion to longer-run macroeconomic goals of output and 3 According to a 2020 supplement to the Board of Governors’ Survey of Economic Well-Being, 14 percent of Black adults and 10 percent of Hispanic adults do not have a bank account, compared to 3 percent of white households. (See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (May 2020), Table 11, p. 28.) Unbanked is defined as not having a checking, savings, or money market account. Underbanked is defined as having a checking, savings, or money market account but having used one of these alternative financial services: money order, check cashing service, pawn shop loan, auto title loan, payday loan, paycheck advance, or tax refund advance. 4 According to the Fed’s most recent Small Business Credit Survey of firms with 1-499 employees, 46 percent of firms with white ownership, 32 percent of firms with Hispanic ownership, and 23 percent of firms with Black ownership had obtained financing from a bank in the past five years; 19 percent of firms with white ownership, 22 percent of firms with Hispanic ownership, and 27 percent of firms with Black ownership had obtained financing from an online lender in the past five years. (See Federal Reserve System (2020), p. 9.) 5 Sahay, et al. (2015). 3 productivity growth.6 On the macro level, healthy financial markets and institutions allow for more efficient allocation of capital and better monitoring and broader diversification of risk, which can enable higher levels of overall growth. At the micro level, access to savings and credit via financial intermediaries connects households and businesses to economic opportunities that would not be available otherwise. A sound financial system can spur entrepreneurship and support the competitive forces that drive productivity in the economy. In addition to these benefits, the distributional impacts of finance are worth considering. A body of work has shown that finance can expand economic opportunities for those at the bottom of the income and wealth distributions and does not merely benefit those at the top.7 For example, access to credit allows access to education, which can have profound effects on an individual’s economic well-being, and it also allows households to build wealth through homeownership, which remains the most significant asset on many U.S. families’ balance sheets. Digitalization Is Transforming Financial Services Digitalization of financial services is transforming the industry and expanding the range of financial service providers to include not only fintech lending and payments firms but also so-called bigtech firms, including technology, social media, search platform, and e-commerce companies. Consumer demand is one factor driving the rise in these services. EMarketer estimates that in 2019, 1.9 billion people worldwide purchased goods online.8 In 2020, despite the global pandemic, retail e-commerce sales are estimated to rise to over $3.9 trillion and yearly sales growth has been in the 15 to 25 percent range over the past three years.9 As the costs of computing have declined and the demand for new services that offer 6 Levine (2009). 7 Levine (2009) and Demirgüç-Kunt and Levine (2009). 8 See United Nations (2020) and Lipsman (2019). 9 See Lipsman (2019) and Cramer-Flood (2020). 4 speed and convenience at a lower price has risen, new firms have entered the financial services space. According to the U.S. Treasury, from 2010 to the third quarter of 2017, more than 3,330 new technology- based firms serving the financial services industry have been founded. The global market capitalization of fintech firms grew to $22 billion in 2017, 13 times what it was in 2010. Lending by these firms accounts for over 36 percent of personal loans in the U.S., up from under 1 percent in 2010. New tools and techniques, including machine learning and artificial intelligence, are now routinely being applied in finance. Digitalization Has the Potential to Increase Financial Inclusion Like past financial innovations, digitalization holds the promise of increasing the efficiency, productivity, and inclusiveness of the financial sector, thereby increasing the economic welfare of households and businesses. For example, a wide body of research indicates that tools that increase a household’s savings behavior can have a substantial impact on household welfare.10 Digital tools that give households and small businesses across the income spectrum the ability to track and understand their spending and savings patterns can improve their ability to manage their finances, allow them to avoid more costly sources of credit, and increase their savings rate. There is evidence, reflected in several countries’ experiences, that access to savings accounts not only increases savings but also results in households shifting more of their spending to education and to healthier food.11 Digitalization also provides customers with tools to search for and compare financial services across various vendors to determine which is more likely to meet their specific needs. On the credit side, digital lending platforms hold the potential for more objective credit decisions, helping to guard against personal prejudices influencing those decisions. Bigtech companies have access to large amounts of data, for example, from e-commerce platforms or search engines. Models to assess credit risk 10 Karlan, et al. (2016). 11 Karlan, et al. (2016). 5 based on these alternative data hold the potential to increase credit access for households and small firms that do not necessarily have a long credit history, audited financial statements, or collateral, which are traditionally used to underwrite and monitor credit risk. And there is some research to back this up. A study co-authored by Julapa Jagtiani, one of the organizers of this conference, found that consumer loans made by LendingClub, a large fintech lending platform, reached areas with fewer bank branches and lower-income borrowers.12 Research published by the Bank for International Settlements found that the internal credit scoring model built by and applied to small merchant customers of Mercado Libre, a large e-commerce platform in Latin America now offering financial services, has outperformed (at least in the short run) models based on credit bureau ratings and traditional borrower characteristics.13 And Mercado Libre was able to provide credit to merchants who would have been assessed as high risk by the credit bureau. Innovations in payments services also hold the potential to increase inclusion. Across the globe there is a move toward faster, cashless payment systems, which can lower costs and provide more secure transactions than cash. Early evidence from several countries shows that the move to digital payments has had a positive impact on the well-being of individuals by strengthening their ties to other financial services.14 There is also evidence that the use of digital systems by governments to make transfer payments to individuals can significantly reduce the cost of distribution and the amount of fraud.15 The Federal Reserve’s FedNowSM service, which is currently being built, will be an around-the-clock service whereby payments can be originated, cleared, and settled within seconds.16 The service is 12 Jagtiani and Lemieux (2018). 13 See Bank for International Settlements (2019) and Frost, et al. (2019). 14 Karlan, et al. (2016). 15 Karlan, et al. (2016). 16 More information on FedNow is available on the Fed’s website at https://www.frbservices.org/financial- services/fednow/index.html. 6 expected to provide clear public benefits in the form of safety, efficiency, and accessibility of instant payments. By lowering the cost of making payments in a secure way, FedNow can help promote financial inclusion by drawing more people into the financial system. This service, coupled with a directory service with accurate information on where to route payments for final distribution to households and businesses, could also make distribution of government benefits more efficient and solve some of the challenges the government faced when distributing pandemic relief payments earlier this year. Steps Need to Be Taken So That Digitalization Lives Up to Its Potential While digitalization holds a lot of promise to bring more households and businesses into the financial system, there is no guarantee this will happen. Indeed, digitalization could create more exclusion and increase disparities rather than close the gaps. But steps can be taken to help ensure that digitalization lives up to its potential. Let me discuss five of these. Close the digital divide First, the digital divide in the U.S. needs to close so that more people can take advantage of digital financial services. Among communities with a population of 100,000 or more, the city of Cleveland has among the lowest home broadband access in the nation.17 Only about 69 percent of households have broadband subscriptions compared to over 84 percent in the city of Philadelphia and over 86 percent for the nation as a whole. In the meantime, mobile phone technology, which has wide distribution, could significantly improve financial system access for unbanked adults.18 17 The data are available in Table GCT2801, U.S. Census American Community Survey (2019). In the city of Cleveland, 69.3 percent of households have a broadband internet subscription. Only Lakewood Township, Ocean County, N.J. has lower internet connectivity, at 58.9 percent. The number for the U.S. is 86.4 percent and the number for the city of Philadelphia is 84.2 percent. 18 World Bank data indicate that two-thirds of unbanked adults globally have a mobile phone. See Demirgüç-Kunt, et al. (2018), p. 91. 7 Improve financial literacy Second, steps must also be taken to improve the reach and the effectiveness of financial literacy programs. Digitalization increases the number of financial services providers and the types of services being offered. But to take advantage of these, people need to be able to assess their value. One study of 188 financial literacy programs indicated that they had not, on average, increased financial knowledge or resulted in better financial choices. But the research also suggested that programs that included simple rules-of-thumb were more effective.19 Businesses also have to understand the costs and benefits of credit coming from a fintech firm versus a traditional banking relationship, which may prove to be more stable in an economic downturn. Increasing the ability of the consumers of financial services to evaluate new services will help ensure that these products add value. Build trust Third, in order to increase inclusion, steps must be taken to build trust between potential customers and the financial services industry. One Federal Reserve analysis indicated that one reason people do not have a transaction account is the lack of trust in financial institutions.20 Effective consumer protection regulations encompassing all providers of financial services would give potential customers more confidence to use the services. Trust also depends on providers of financial services adequately protecting their customers’ accounts against cybersecurity breaches, fraud, and data leakage. With the changes in technology and rapid expansion of available data, the methods for protecting the data will need to adapt. The traditional way of keeping data private, by taking away names or otherwise anonymizing it, no longer works in a world rich with multiple data sources that can be cross-referenced to de-anonymize the data and reveal identities.21 New methods have to be evaluated. An example is the technique used to achieve differential privacy by carefully adding some statistical noise to the data to maintain individual 19 Karlan, et al. (2016). 20 Hogarth, et al. (2004), as cited in Raskin (2011). 21 Kearns and Roth (2020) discuss how then-Massachusetts governor William Weld’s medical record was identified by combining the anonymized medical records released by the state with voter registration data. 8 privacy while maintaining statistical accuracy.22 The U.S. Census Bureau plans to apply differential privacy techniques to the statistics released as part of the 2020 census.23 Test the algorithms before deployment Fourth, it must be recognized that just because it is an algorithm does not mean it is immune from producing discriminatory underwriting and pricing decisions. Algorithms should be tested for bias before they are deployed. Credit and pricing models produced by algorithms through machine learning are necessarily complex because they are designed to reveal relationships in the data that are not revealed by standard modeling. But their opacity and complexity – their black-box quality – make it more difficult to identify these relationships and more difficult to uncover statistical discrimination or disparate impact and to enforce fair lending laws.24 Well-meaning algorithms can have unintended effects. Algorithms are trained on past data that may have reflected biased decisions or may not be representative of the entire population. With more pieces of data available, there is more risk that data correlated with race or gender could be used in discriminatory ways. This means machine learning algorithms could exacerbate disparities by reinforcing past decisions. Kearns and Roth point out the need for what they call ethical algorithms, which are built to balance the accuracy of the model, for, say, assessing credit risk, with other desirable goals.25 For example, the developer could build the algorithm so that it has low error rates in identifying creditworthy borrowers and the error rate for one racial group is not disproportionately higher than that for another. At present, much of the auditing of algorithms occurs in an ad hoc way after the algorithm has been put 22 Differential privacy is achieved when no one, regardless of additional data, is able to determine better than random guessing whether any individual’s data were used to construct a data release. See Kearns and Roth (2020). 23 See U.S. Census (2020). 24 Morse and Pence (2020) examine the ways in which technology may augment or deter discrimination in household finance. See also Abuhamad (2019). 25 Kearns and Roth (2019, 2020). 9 into place and has had the opportunity to have a disparate impact.26 A well-known example is the Apple Card: gender discrimination was alleged by some customers about the algorithms used by Goldman Sachs, the issuer of the card, after the card was deployed.27 Who should do the testing is an open question. A report from the Brookings Institution’s Artificial Intelligence and Emerging Technologies Initiative recommends that the developer test the algorithm for disparate impact. Companies that use such algorithms could engage independent third parties to evaluate them, with appropriate restrictions to guard the firms’ intellectual property. Regulators may also have to play a larger role in testing algorithms. Since adequate data sets are needed for testing, the rules pertaining to data collections should be reviewed. The Equal Credit Opportunity Act restricts creditors from discriminating in credit transactions against credit applicants on any prohibited basis, including race and gender. The collection of data on applicants’ personal characteristics for home purchase and refinance loan transactions is required and the data must be publicly disclosed. The Dodd-Frank Act also requires small business lenders to collect and report race and gender data to federal regulators. But for other nonmortgage loans, creditors’ collection of these data is prohibited except for the creditors’ own use to conduct a limited self-test of their compliance with the law.28 The original prohibition was based on the notion that the data might be used in discriminatory ways. But experience with the collection of mortgage data suggests that this has not been the case and that the data have made it easier to monitor compliance and enforce the law. Extending mandatory data collection of personal characteristics for nonmortgage credit applicants may allow for better testing for compliance. But it would also entail costs for creditors that could partially be passed on to borrowers. With more entities offering credit, it is time to undertake a new review of the costs and benefits of data collection for different types of nonmortgage credit.29 26 Kleinberg (2018). 27 MacCarthy (2019). 28 Data collected for such a self-test are not available to government agencies or credit applicants for use in examinations or litigation. See Taylor (2011). 29 The Equal Credit Opportunity Act does not address data collection. In 1995 and again in 1998, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System put out for public comment proposed amendments to Regulation B, which 10 Rethink the regulatory framework Fifth, a rethinking of the regulatory framework is needed to ensure that the financial innovations led by digitalization are a net positive. Such innovations do not reduce the need for risk management, financial regulation and supervision, and good governance, although the form each takes is likely to be different than what has been effective in the past. Existing regulatory and supervisory structures will need to adapt to keep up with the new ways that financial services are being delivered and the new players delivering them. Under the principle, “If it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, it’s a duck,” a regulatory approach that shifts the focus from the type of institution offering the service to the type of activity would likely be more effective in fostering the stability of the financial system and limiting regulatory arbitrage. The extension of some regulations to new service providers is already occurring; for example, bigtech firms’ payments services are subject to know your customer rules. But the entry of fintech and bigtech providers of financial services also raises new issues. Data produced by bigtech firms are what make it attractive for these firms to enter into financial services in the first place. But their ability to control the data also makes it harder for other firms to enter the market, thus limiting competition. There are different approaches to regulating data usage in order to limit the market power of bigtech firm entrants and facilitate market contestability without stifling entry.30 Two examples are the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation and the open banking regulations, which are in place in many countries. Both approaches allow certain data to be shared directly with third parties but place restrictions on the type of data and the kinds of authorizations that need to be garnered in order to allow for data sharing. implements the ECOA, to eliminate the data ban and allow for voluntary collection of personal characteristics of applicants for nonmortgage credit. The final rules did not drop the ban. See Braunstein (2008), Government Accountability Office (2008), Taylor (2011), and Abuhamad (2019). 30 See Frost, et al. (2009) for further discussion. 11 The ability of bigtech firms to produce and to capture the benefits of big data depends on network effects. Benefits to users grow when there are more users of the services, and as the number of users increases, more data are produced that can be garnered for use by the bigtech firm for the development of new services, pricing, and marketing. For example, a firm that may have begun as an e-commerce firm may find it beneficial to offer payment services as an adjunct to generate more e-commerce business, but the transactions data can then be used to offer more services.31 Once a bigtech firm is well established, it becomes more difficult for other firms to enter. This adds concerns about market power to data privacy concerns. Issues of pricing, cross-subsidization, product tying, and other anti-competitive practices that lead to less innovation, not more, deserve increased attention from financial services regulators. With the entry of bigtech and fintech firms into financial services, the public policy approach will need to change to include a more holistic blending of financial regulation, antitrust policy, and data privacy regulation. There will need to be cooperation across these types of regulators within each country, and this may entail creating structures that allow for more formal or systematic coordination across different types of regulators. The growth of digitalization also calls for a modernization of the antitrust laws and policy, which is occurring in several countries.32 The global nature of the bigtech firms entering financial services means that effective international coordination among regulators and supervisors through the Financial Stability Board and other international entities will be critical to ensuring that the benefits can be captured and the risks managed.33 Finally, it is important that regulators and those responsible for enforcing fair lending and consumer protections increase their expertise regarding the technologies being used in the marketplace. This is 31 Bank for International Settlements (2019) provides a nice description of network externalities in bigtech’s entry into financial services. 32 Bank for International Settlements (2019) discusses some of the implications of bigtech for traditional competi ti on policy. 33 The Financial Stability Board designated fintech as a key area of focus in its 2020 work program. See Financial Stability Board (2019). 12 beginning to happen as financial system regulators and supervisors are starting to use big data and data analytics to improve their own assessments of banking and financial stability risks and to understand trends in the industry more generally. Several countries have set up innovation hubs and regulatory sandboxes to encourage innovation in financial services. The Fed has been researching new technologies and innovations in financial services for some time. The System Payments Researchers, co-chaired by Fumiko Hayashi of the Kansas City Fed and Bob Hunt of the Philadelphia Fed, are producing research on fintechs and digital currencies. The Board of Governors has set up a technology lab where researchers across the System are building and testing a range of distributed ledger platforms to understand their potential benefits and tradeoffs.34 The Boston Fed is working with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to experiment with digital currency technologies, and the New York Fed has established an innovation center, in partnership with the Bank for International Settlements, to identify and develop in- depth insights into critical trends and financial technology of relevance to central banks.35 Conclusion In summary, fintech, bigtech, algorithms, machine learning, and digitalization are rapidly transforming the financial services industry. These innovations hold the promise of increasing financial inclusion for the benefit of individuals, businesses, and the overall macroeconomy. But as with past innovations, they also present challenges that will need to be addressed to ensure that the promised benefits are attained and risks are well managed. 34 Brainard (2020). 35 Bank for International Settlements (2020). 13 References Abuhamad, Grace M., “The Fallacy of Equating ‘Blindness’ with Fairness: Ensuring Trust in Machine Learning Applications to Consumer Credit,” Master of Science in Technology and Policy Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, June 2019. (https://dspace.mit.edu/handle/1721.1/122094) Bank for International Settlements, Annual Economic Report, June 2019. (https://www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2019e.htm) Bank for International Settlements, “BIS Innovation Hub to Expand to New Locations in Europe and North America,” June 30, 2020. (https://www.bis.org/press/p200630a.htm) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2019, Featuring Supplemental Data from April 2020,” May 2020. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2019-report-economic-well-being-us-households- 202005.pdf) Brainard, Lael, “An Update on Digital Currencies,” at the Federal Reserve Board and Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's Innovation Office Hours, San Francisco, CA (via webcast) August 13, 2020. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/brainard20200813a.pdf) Braunstein, Sandra F., “Equal Credit Opportunity Act,” testimony before the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, July 17, 2008. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/braunstein20080717a.htm) Cramer-Flood, Ethan, “Global ECommerce 2020,” eMarketer, June 22, 2020. (http://www.emarketer.com/content/global-ecommerce-2020) Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Ross Levine, “Finance and Inequality: Theory and Evidence,” Annual Review of Financial Economics 1 (2009), pp. 287-318. (https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev.financial.050808.114334) Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, Saniya Ansar, and Jake Hess, “The Global Findex Database 2017: Measuring Financial Inclusion and the Fintech Revolution,” World Bank Group, 2018. (https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/29510/211259ov.pdf) Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Small Business Credit Survey: 2020 Report on Employer Firms, 2020. (https://www.fedsmallbusiness.org/medialibrary/FedSmallBusiness/files/2020/2020-sbcs-employer-firms- report) Financial Stability Board, “FSB Work Programme for 2020,” December 17, 2019. (https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P171219.pdf) Frost, Jon, Leonardo Gambacorta, Yi Huang, Hyun Song Shin, and Pablo Zbinden, “BigTech and the Changing Structure of Financial Intermediation,” BIS Working Paper No. 779, April 2019. (https://www.bis.org/publ/work779.htm) Government Accountability Office, “Fair Lending: Race and Gender Data Are Limited for Nonmortgage Lending,” Report to Congressional Requesters, GAO-08-698, June 2008. 14 (https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-08-698) Hogarth, Jeanne M., Chris E. Anguelov, and Jinkook Lee, “Why Don’t Households Have a Checking Account?” Journal of Consumer Affairs 38(1) (2004), pp. 1-34. (https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6606.2004.tb00463.x) Jagtiani, Julapa, and Catharine Lemieux, “Do Fintech Lenders Penetrate Areas That Are Underserved by Traditional Banks?” Journal of Economics and Business 100 (2018), pp. 43-54. (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeconbus.2018.03.001) Karlan, Dean, Jake Kendall, Rebecca Mann, Rohini Pande, Tavneet Suri, and Jonathan Zinman, “Research and Impacts of Digital Financial Services,” NBER Working Paper 22633, September 2016. (http://www.nber.org/papers/w22633) Kearns, Michael, and Aaron Roth, The Ethical Algorithm: The Science of Socially Aware Algorithm Design, Oxford University Press, 2019. (https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-ethical-algorithm-9780190948207?cc=us&lang=en&) Kearns, Michael, and Aaron Roth, “Ethical Algorithm Design Should Guide Technology Regulation,” report from Brookings Institution’s Artificial Intelligence and Emerging Technology Initiative, January 13, 2020. (https://www.brookings.edu/research/ethical-algorithm-design-should-guide-technology-regulation/) Kleinberg, Jon, Jens Ludwig, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Cass R. Sunstein, “Discrimination in the Age of Algorithms,” Journal of Legal Analysis 10 (2018), pp. 113-174. (https://doi.org/10.1093/jla/laz001) Levine, Ross, “Finance, Growth, and Opportunity: Policy Challenges,” paper prepared for the Banco de Mexico’s International Conference, “Challenges and Strategies for Promoting Economic Growth,” October 31, 2009. (https://faculty.haas.berkeley.edu/ross_levine/Papers/2010_Finance_Lessons_mexico.pdf) Lipsman, Andrew, “Global Ecommerce 2019,” EMarketer, June 27, 2019. (http://www.emarketer.com/content/global-ecommerce-2019) MacCarthy, Mark, “Fairness in Algorithmic Decision-Making,” report from Brookings Institution’s Artificial Intelligence and Emerging Technology Initiative, December 6, 2019. (https://www.brookings.edu/research/fairness-in-algorithmic-decision-making/) Morse, Adair, and Karen Pence, “Technological Innovation and Discrimination in Household Finance,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-018, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 2020. (https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2020.018) Raskin, Sarah Bloom, “Economic and Financial Inclusion in 2011: What It Means for Americans and Our Economic Recovery,” remarks at a New America Foundation Forum, Washington, D.C., June 29, 2011. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/raskin20110629a.htm) Sahay, Ratna, Martin Čihák, Papa N’Diaye, Adolfo Barajas, Srobona Mitra, Annette Kyobe, Yen Nian Mooi, and Seyed Reza Yousefi, “Financial Inclusion: Can It Meet Multiple Macroeconomic Goals?” International Monetary Fund Staff Discussion Note No. 15/17, September 2015. 15 (https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Staff-Discussion-Notes/Issues/2016/12/31/Financial-Inclusion-Can- it-Meet-Multiple-Macroeconomic-Goals-43163) Taylor, Winnie, “Proving Racial Discrimination and Monitoring Fair Lending Compliance: The Missing Data Problem in Nonmortgage Credit,” Review of Banking & Financial Law, 31 (2011), p. 199-264. (https://www.bu.edu/rbfl/files/2013/09/ProvingRacialDiscrimination.pdf) United Nations, U.N. Secretary-General’s Task Force on Digital Financing of the Sustainable Development Goals, “People’s Money: Harnessing Digitalization to Finance a Sustainable Future,” August 2020. (https://unsdg.un.org/resources/peoples-money-harnessing-digitalization-finance-sustainable-future) U.S. Census Bureau, “Disclosure Avoidance and the 2020 Census,” 2020. (https://www.census.gov/about/policies/privacy/statistical_safeguards/disclosure-avoidance-2020- census.html) World Bank, The Global Findex Database, 2017. (https://globalfindex.worldbank.org/node)
