1 Presentation to the 2017 Economic Forecast, sponsored by Sacramento Business Review and Sacramento Business Journal, Sacramento, California By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on January 17, 2017 Looking Back, Looking Ahead Good afternoon. It’s great to be back in my hometown of Sacramento, and especially here at CSU Sacramento. My family has strong ties to Sac State going back to its earliest days. My father received his undergraduate degree in 1950 when classes were held in rented space at Sacramento Junior College. My mother worked in the English department for many years. And my brother did both—he earned his business degree here while an employee of the university. I grew up near the campus and fondly recall biking over the Guy West Bridge to take advantage of the tennis and racquetball courts. Today I’ll cover the progress the U.S. economy has made, where I see things headed, and what this means for monetary policy. Before I proceed, I should note that the views I express here are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. With that disclaimer out of the way, I’ll get started. Through the lens of the dual mandate As a Federal Reserve policymaker, I tend to look at virtually everything through the lens of our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability, and I’ll describe economic developments—past, present, and future—through that lens. I’ll begin with maximum employment. Of course, this doesn’t require that every man, woman, and child work 24/7, 365 days of the year. Instead, it means we have a number of jobs consistent with a vibrant, healthy economy. Economists tend to think of this in terms of unemployment, rather than employment. Put in those terms, our goal isn’t to have an 2 unemployment rate of zero. Instead, it’s to be near what economists call the “natural rate” of unemployment, the level where the economy is running neither too hot nor too cold. It’s impossible to know exactly what that magic number is, but it’s generally thought to be between 4¾ and 5 percent today.1 By the way, that’s about the same number that economists typically thought before the recession, so in this one respect the economy hasn’t changed much over the past decade. With the national unemployment rate now at 4.7 percent, we’ve reached that goal. It’s worth pausing a moment to reflect on this accomplishment. We are now in the eighth year of the economic expansion. The unemployment rate peaked at 10 percent in the fall of 2009 in the aftermath of the Great Recession. Since then, it’s fallen by more than half, as the economy added over 15½ million jobs. I’ve been talking about the national economy so far, but the improvement in the Sacramento labor market has also been dramatic. This area was very hard hit by the housing crash and recession and the unemployment rate in the Sacramento metropolitan area soared to 12.5 percent in 2010. Over the past six years, things have improved, with the metro area adding over 120,000 jobs and the unemployment rate dropping to near 5 percent. Despite the progress here and across the country, there has been considerable debate whether the standard unemployment rate accurately reflects the strength of the labor market. In particular, some commentators are concerned that a large number of people are standing on the sidelines of the labor market, neither working nor officially counted as unemployed. They point 1 In the December 2016 Summary of Economic Projections, the central tendency of estimates of the long -run level of the unemployment rate ranged between 4.7 and 5 percent (Board of Governors 2016a). The Congressional Budget Office estimates the natural rate to be 4¾ percent as of August (CBO 2016). The median estimate from the Survey of Professional Forecasters in August 2016 was 4.8 percent (https://www.philadelphiafed.org/research-and- data/real-time-center/survey-of-professional-forecasters/2016/survq316). The Blue Chip Economic Indicators estimate is 4.8 percent as of October 2016. 3 to the sizable decline in the labor force participation rate, which measures the fraction of the population age 16 and over that has a job or is looking for one. The low level of labor force participation raises the possibility that lots of potential workers may still be waiting for the job market to improve further before rejoining the labor market. Closer examination of this question indicates that the low participation rate is mostly explained by long-term trends, such as the wave of baby boomer retirements and young people staying longer in school.2 Staff at the San Francisco Fed along with other researchers have delved deeper into this issue. They took a different tack by treating everybody in the population as potentially in the labor force and constructing a broader unemployment rate—a “non- employment index.”3 This measure incorporates the unemployed and nonparticipants alike, based on their respective tendency to find jobs. For example, many folks who are out of the labor force say they want a job but are not currently looking for various reasons, while others are in school or retired from a career and may return to work later. When one carefully accounts for the availability of nonparticipants this way, the resulting broad non-employment index is consistent with a labor market at full strength. This conclusion is reinforced by survey evidence from regular people—by which I mean not just economists. When asked how hard it is to find a job, households’ responses are currently right in line with, or even a little better than, the signal we’re getting from the unemployment rate.4 That’s great news about the job market, and it means that we won’t need as much job growth going forward as we’ve seen in the past few years. Because we’re at maximum 2 See for example Aaronson et al. (2014), Fujita (2014). 3 Hornstein, Kudlyak, and Lange (2016). 4 Data are from the Conference Board Consumer Confidence Survey (https://www.conference- board.org/data/consumerconfidence.cfm). See Weidner and Williams (2011). 4 employment now, the future is less about creating an ever stronger labor market, and more about maintaining a healthy one. That means creating enough new jobs to keep up with the increase in the size of the labor force. That number depends on things like the number of people retiring this year or graduating from school and entering the workforce. Relative to past decades, labor force growth has slowed substantially due to an aging population, stabilization in women’s participation in the labor force, and other factors. As a result, the number of new jobs we need has dropped as well. I put it at around 80,000 a month currently. Looking ahead, estimates that take account of likely labor force trends imply a range from 50,000 to a little over 100,000.5 Last year job gains averaged about 180,000 a month. That’s more than twice as fast as we need to keep up with the trend in labor force growth and, quite honestly, is unsustainable in the long run. With job gains continuing to outpace labor force growth for some time, I expect the unemployment rate to edge down over the next year, bottoming out around 4½ percent—a very strong labor market by any standard. Looking further into the future, I expect job gains to slow to a pace more in line with the growth in the labor force. I have focused on the labor market so far, so I’ll turn briefly to the outlook for GDP growth. Real (inflation-adjusted) GDP increased by 2 percent last year, and I expect growth this year and next year to slow somewhat to a pace close its trend rate. My estimate of trend GDP growth is between 1½ and 1¾ percent per year, which reflects slowing longer-run trends in labor force and productivity growth.6 Turning to our second mandate of price stability, the Fed’s monetary policy committee— the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC for short—has set a long-run goal of 2 percent 5 Bidder, Mahedy, and Valletta (2016). See also Aaronson, Brave, and Kelley (2016). 6 Fernald (2016). 5 inflation.7 Inflation has been running persistently below that goal for several years. Over the past couple of years, the strengthening of the dollar and declines in energy prices have pushed inflation down, but these influences have been fading. To cut through some of the noise, it’s useful to look at measures of inflation that strip out volatile prices and provide a clearer view of the underlying trend. These suggest that underlying inflation is running about 1¾ percent. So, we’re not quite at our target yet, but we’re getting closer. The combination of fading transitory factors and a strong economy should help us get back to our 2 percent goal in the next couple of years. To sum up, the economic expansion remains on track well into its eighth year. The labor market is strong, the economy has good forward momentum, and inflation is moving towards our goal. There are, of course, risks to the outlook—there always are. No forecaster has a perfect crystal ball. Although much of the discussion of late has been about uncertainty regarding fiscal and other federal policies, there are numerous other factors both domestic and abroad that may cause our economy to do better or worse than currently predicted. But I, like most of my colleagues, view these as both broadly similar in magnitude to the past and roughly balanced between the upside and the downside.8 Monetary policy So, taking this all together, what does it mean for interest rates? As I said at the start, I look at this through the lens of the dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. In the context of a strong economy that has reached our maximum employment goal and with inflation nearing our price stability goal, it makes sense that the FOMC has undertaken a process of raising interest rates from their historical low levels. We’ve made two rate hikes so 7 Board of Governors (2016b). 8 Board of Governors (2016a). 6 far, the most recent at our December FOMC meeting, bringing the target range for the federal funds rate to 50–75 basis points. This rate increase was an appropriate small step in the process of removing monetary stimulus put in place during the recession. Even with the most recent increase in interest rates, the stance of monetary policy continues to support economic growth. Looking ahead, further gradual increases in the target fed funds rate will likely be appropriate to bring monetary policy back to a more normal setting consistent with an economy at full strength. I should be clear: In arguing for gradual increases in interest rates over the next few years, I’m not aiming to stall the economic expansion. In fact, it’s just the opposite: My aim is to keep it on a sound footing so that it can be sustained for as long as possible.9 History teaches us that an economy that runs too hot for too long can generate imbalances, eventually leading to excessive inflation, asset market bubbles, and ultimately economic correction and recession. A gradual process of raising rates reduces the risks of such an outcome. It also allows a smoother, more calibrated process of normalization that gives us space to adjust our responses to any surprise changes in economic conditions. If we wait too long to remove monetary accommodation, we hazard allowing imbalances to grow, requiring us to play catch-up, and not leaving much room to maneuver. Not to mention, a sudden reversal of policy could be disruptive and slow the economy in unintended ways. As I said, my goal is to sustain the economic expansion. The best way to accomplish that is by supporting a pace of growth consistent with the economy’s potential and 2 percent inflation. I fear that if we allow the economy to overshoot this mark by too much, eventually we will need to reverse course to bring the economy back on track. The experience of past business 9 See Williams (2016) for further discussion. 7 cycles shows that this is a hard, if not impossible, act to pull off, and ultimately ends in recession. A gradual process of removing monetary accommodation reduces this risk. Summary Although it has been a long, hard road back from the recession, the American economy is in good shape and headed in the right direction. We’ve reached our employment goal, and inflation is well within sight of and on track to reach our target. Given the progress we have made and signs of continued solid momentum in the economy, and consistent with our agreed- upon monetary policy approach, it makes sense for the Fed to gradually move interest rates toward more normal levels. As always, the actual pace of rate increases will be driven by the evolution of economic conditions and its implications for achieving our dual mandate objectives. Thank you. 8 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher. 2014. “Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197–255. http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/projects/bpea/fall-2014/fall2014bpea_aaronson_et_al.pdf Aaronson, Daniel, Scott A. Brave, and David Kelley. 2016. “Is There Still Slack in the Labor Market?” Chicago Fed Letter 2016(359). https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/chicago-fed-letter/2016/359 Bidder, Rhys, Timothy Mahedy, and Rob Valletta. 2016. “Trend Job Growth: Where’s Normal?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-32, October 24. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2016/october/trend-job-growth-where-is-normal/ Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016a. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 13–14, 2016.” https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20161214.pdf Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016b. “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.” Amended January 26. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_20160126.pdf Congressional Budget Office. 2016. “An Update to the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2016 to 2026.” Report, August. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/51908 Fernald, John. 2016. “What Is the New Normal for U.S. Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-30 (October 11). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2016/october/new-normal-for-gdp-growth/ Fujita, Shigeru. 2014. “On the Causes of Declines in the Labor Force Participation Rate.” Research Rap, Special Report, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, February. https://www.phil.frb.org/- /media/research-and-data/publications/research-rap/2014/on-the-causes-of-declines-in-the-labor- force-participation-rate.pdf Hornstein, Andreas, Marianna Kudlyak, and Fabian Lange. 2016. “Hornstein-Kudlyak-Lange Non- Employment Index.” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, last modified December 9. https://www.richmondfed.org/research/national_economy/non_employment_index Weidner, Justin, and John C. Williams. 2011. “What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-5 (February 14), update November 9, 2016. http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/files/el2011-05-update.pdf Williams, John C. 2016. “Longview: The Economic Outlook.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-24 (August 22). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2016/august/longview- economic-outlook-anchorage-speech/

1 Keeping the Recovery Sustainable: The Essential Role of an Independent Fed Remarks by JOHN C. WILLIAMS President and CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco To The Santa Cruz Chamber of Commerce Santa Cruz, California February 28, 2017 AS PREPARED FOR DELIVERY Thank you Professor Walsh. For those of you who do not know Carl, in addition to being a distinguished economics professor at UCSC, he’s a longtime friend and associate of the San Francisco Fed, having served as a staff economist back in the 1980s and as a visiting scholar since then. I also want to thank everyone at the Chamber for inviting me to join you here, in particular Executive Director Bill Tysseling. Bill, congratulations on your retirement! This is an impressive organization. Your members put about 15,000 of your neighbors to work across the broad spectrum of the business community that you represent. That’s music to the ears of a Fed president who’s tasked with maximizing employment and price stability. I also have a deep-rooted appreciation for how hard your jobs can be. After I graduated from college, I managed a small business called Blondie’s Pizza. I know from first-hand experience and from talking to other local business owners, the daily challenges of running a business. 2 FROM RECESSION TO RECOVERY I always love coming to Santa Cruz. I like to think of myself as connected to Santa Cruz by marriage. You see, my wife is a proud alumna of UCSC, which I guess makes me a “banana-slug-in-law.” Before my wife and I were married – back when we were dating – I used to regularly drive down here to Santa Cruz. I have many fond memories of my visits to the city, the beaches, the boardwalk, and rides on the Giant Dipper. So I was heartbroken for everyone in the community when I saw the devastation from the earthquake in 1989. But, the community came together to rebuild, even as some doubters suggested it would never rise again from the rubble. Just a few short years into the rebuild, Sunset magazine wrote that the region had found its essence again as a quote “lovely and goofy, laid-back but … deeply passionate” community.1 I think that’s a great metaphor for the way our country has rebuilt our economy after the Great Recession. I know this has been a tough journey for a lot of people, and many are still struggling. But putting the economic recovery in perspective, we've come a very long way. Today, the data show an economy that has recovered. As I’ll discuss further in a moment, nationwide, we’ve reached full employment. Inflation is moving toward our 2 percent target. And we’re in the eighth year of the economic expansion. With this in mind, I thought I’d take this opportunity to share some thoughts on the role of the Fed in our country, and where I see the economy and monetary policy going. Now seems like as good a time as ever to note that the views I express are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 1Fish (1995) 3 THE ROLE OF THE FED So who are we at the Fed? The short answer is that we’re an amazingly nerdy group of people who pore over data, computer models, and statistical analysis. The more specific answer is that we’re a unique institution in the government, both in function and in structure. Congress has mandated that our job is to keep the economy stable and on track, with a focus on two big goals: maximum employment and price stability. You may have heard us refer to these goals as our “dual mandate.” Contrary to the popular misconception, we’re not “the feds.” We’re not politicians or fiscal policymakers. We don’t spend money or set taxes. We don’t write legislation. And unlike politicians, we’re not elected. In conducting monetary policy, we base our decisions on what’s best for the long-term health of the economy, without political influence from Congress, the Administration, or others. To my mind, this is the single most important feature of the Fed: the ability to act independently of short-term political influence… which allows us to respond to changing circumstances as needed. Across the world, independent central banks have proven to be more effective at stabilizing inflation and keeping their countries’ economies performing up to their full potential than countries where the central bank is under political control. So what exactly is it that we do? For starters, we – and we alone – set U.S. monetary policy, and we inform our decisions with economic research and real-world input from business and community leaders from across the country. In San Francisco alone, we have over two dozen PhD economists on staff and eight boards and advisory councils that regularly meet and provide me with information about economic and financial conditions across the nine western states that make up the Fed’s 12th District. Despite what you may have heard, we don’t actually print money. The Bureau of Engraving and Printing in the U.S. Treasury does that. We do make cash available throughout the country. We run key parts of the nation’s payments system. And we conduct oversight of banks and other financial institutions. Now, I mentioned that we’re unique – one of the reasons I say this is that the Federal 4 Reserve System was founded, by design, to have a very interesting federated structure. I’m president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, which covers the largest of 12 Federal Reserve Districts. Our region contains 36 percent of the nation’s landmass and about a fifth of the nation’s population. We’re a private institution with our own Board of Directors, to whom I report. Our website is actually a “dot org” – www.frbsf.org. At the same time, we’re also part of the national Federal Reserve System that’s overseen by the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C. The Governors are appointed by the President of the United States and confirmed by the Senate. They’re full government employees, and in case you’re wondering, they’re a “dot gov” – www.federalreserve.gov. It’s my role to be the eyes and ears of what’s happening in our District – your perspectives, your outlook, what keeps you up at night. This part of my job is especially important at meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC for short – the committee that makes monetary policy decisions. GOLDILOCKS ECONOMY Our goal is to attain what I like to call a “Goldilocks economy” – an economy that doesn’t run too hot or too cold. We want the porridge to be just right. Of course, it’s not always easy to achieve that just-right economy. Financial booms and busts such as the dot-com and housing bubbles of the past few decades can cause economic swings despite our efforts to contain them. But carefully designed monetary policy can help smooth out those fluctuations and protect families from economic turmoil. In ordinary times, we focus on affecting interest rates by buying and selling short-term U.S. Treasury bills. Yet, the period since the financial crisis and Great Recession of 2007 through 2009 has been extraordinary. Therefore, to further stimulate the ailing economy, we also purchased long-term Treasury and mortgage-backed securities—you may know this as “quantitative easing” or “QE.” This helped the economy achieve the relatively healthy state that it’s in today.2 2 Williams (2014) and Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015). 5 Again, remember that our goals are to maximize employment and price stability so that anyone who is looking for a job can find one, and the money in your wallet retains its value. CURRENT POLICY As I wrap up, I want to give you a snapshot of where our economy and monetary policy are today. In December, the FOMC nudged rates up and projected that we’d likely raise interest rates gradually in 2017. Specifically, the median projection was for three increases this year. 3 We stood pat after our meeting a month ago, but we’ll meet again in March to assess whether the time is right to raise rates further. In my view, a rate increase is very much on the table for serious consideration at our March meeting. I’ve been publicly supportive of a gradual increase in rates, and I am confident that the economy will continue to grow at a healthy pace even as we raise rates. The aim is to keep the economic expansion on a sound footing – not too hot, not too cold – that can be sustained for as long as possible. The last thing we want is to undermine the hard-won gains we’ve made since the dark days of the recession.4 Now, my wife has warned me to stop using medical analogies. She’s in the health sciences field and she says all my finance friends get them wrong. So I’ll use a tennis analogy: You always want to position yourself for the next shot. Given where we are now, our best position is in the middle of the court, where we can handle shots that come from either direction. I mentioned earlier that we’re currently around full employment. This doesn’t mean that every man, woman, and child is working 24/7, 365 days of the year. That’s not possible or even desirable. Instead, we aim for something economists call the “natural rate” of unemployment – the level where the economy is running neither too hot nor too cold. Goldilocks. It’s impossible to know exactly what the magic number is, but it’s generally thought to be between 4¾ and 5 percent. With the national unemployment rate hovering around 3 Board of Governors (2016). 4 See Williams (2016) for further discussion. 6 that lower number in recent months, we’ve reached that goal. If you’re keeping score at home, that’s less than half of where it was in the immediate aftermath of the Great Recession when it reached 10 percent. That’s not to say that no one is struggling. This economic recovery hasn't been the same for everyone. There are people who were left behind. There are people who were, frankly, left behind even in the best of times. In many ways, Santa Cruz is a microcosm of the dichotomy we see throughout our region and throughout the country. Your area benefits from the influence of the University and a vibrant tourism sector, helping to keep job growth solid in recent years. But there aren’t enough well-paid jobs in growth sectors for everyone, leaving some folks to struggle. While unemployment in Santa Cruz has fallen by more than half from the double digit highs it reached in the aftermath of the recession, the current rate is well above the state as a whole. I know that if you’re struggling, better doesn’t feel good enough. At this point, monetary policy is somewhat limited in what it can do in this regard. Greater investments in education, public and private capital, and research and development are needed to fuel economic growth and raise living standards, and those are the purview of fiscal policymakers and private businesses. Yet, there are things we can do, and are doing at the Fed to be a part of the solution for challenges facing local communities. I’m particularly proud of my team in San Francisco who’ve established our Bank as a leader in Community Development – connecting the various investors, community leaders and other stakeholders in recognition that when communities thrive, it’s good for everyone. I’ve talked quite a bit about the employment side of things. The other side of the dual mandate coin is price stability. The FOMC has set a long run goal of 2-percent inflation and, frankly, we’ve been running persistently below that goal for several years. Much of this is due to the comparative strength of the dollar and a decline in energy prices. Those downward inflation pressures have been fading, however, and our graph lines are moving in the right direction to reach the 2-perent goal over the next year or so. So given where we are in terms of unemployment and inflation, we’re very close to achieving our dual mandate goals. Yet monetary policy essentially still has the pedal to the metal, with interest rates that remain near historical lows. We need to gradually ease our foot off the gas in order to avoid a “too hot” economy that in the end isn’t 7 sustainable. CONCLUSION So what does this all mean for your own businesses and families? There’s a song that says “you say it best when you say nothing at all.” Hopefully that doesn’t apply to my remarks today! In many ways, you feel our impact best when you don’t feel it at all ... when you don’t have to bring suitcases of cash to the gas station to fill your tank … when you can plan for your future around the kitchen table without having to worry about finding a job in double digit unemployment. When you’re not feeling the rug pulled out from under you thanks to a massive economic calamity. Over the past several years, monetary policy has played an essential role in moving our country from recession to recovery. With over seven years of economic expansion, an economy at full employment, and inflation moving toward our 2 percent goal, it has an essential role to play today in keeping this recovery sustainable. And for those who are still left behind, it’s on all of us to do our part, in our own way to help fill in the gaps. Thank you. 8 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2016. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 13–14, 2016.” https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20161214.pdf Engen, Eric M., Thomas T. Laubach, and David Reifschneider. 2015. “The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Monetary Policies.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005, January. http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2015.005 Fish, Peter. “Santa Cruz gets its downtown back.” Sunset, Oct. 1, 1995 Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into Practice.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings. http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2014/01/16-monetary-policy-zero-lower-bound-williams Williams, John C. 2016. “Longview: The Economic Outlook.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-24 (August 22). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2016/august/longview- economic-outlook-anchorage-speech/
