Chair Janet L. Yellen At "Strong Foundations: The Economic Futures of Kids and Communities," the 10th Biennial Federal Reserve System Community Development Research Conference, Washington, D.C. Share Watch Live I would like to welcome all of you and thank you for joining us to discuss a set of topics of considerable importance to our country. This is the Federal Reserve's 10th biennial community development research conference, dedicated as always to issues of significance to people and communities around the country. The conference is cosponsored by, and includes substantive contributions from, the community development offices of all 12 Federal Reserve Banks as well as the Board of Governors. That united effort and level of commitment reflects how consequential we consider these issues to be. This conference is intended to present and highlight rigorous research that I am confident will inform how you think about your own work, whether from the perspective of policymaking, community development practice, or research. Our last conference, two years ago, explored various aspects of economic mobility, largely among adults. This year, we gather to discuss "The Economic Futures of Kids and Communities," and, in part, I see this topic as an extension of that earlier conversation about mobility. Today and tomorrow, we focus on research about the foundation or building blocks for economic success that are laid even before young people enter the workforce and assume responsibility for their own finances. We will hear from leading experts on a range of issues related to how children, youths, and young adults are shaped in ways that may ultimately affect their ability later to productively contribute to the economy and manage their finances. We can learn from what the data and analysis tell us, and our hope is that making use of this information will lead to more effective programs and policies and thus better outcomes. Considerable evidence shows that growing up poor makes it harder to succeed as an adult, and new research by the Fed likewise shows the strong connection between the typical experiences of poverty in childhood and economic challenges later as an adult. The data come from the Board's latest Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), which will be published later this spring. 1 In the most recent survey, we asked some of the younger respondents--aged 25 to 39--to think about their childhoods. We asked those young adults whether, during their childhoods, they found themselves worrying about having enough food to eat, having a stable caregiver, or about their personal safety. About 10 percent said they regularly worried about one or more of these concerns, and an additional 19 percent said they sometimes worried about them. We were then able to compare responses about their experiences in childhood to what these young adults told us about their current circumstances. Some pretty clear patterns emerged. Of those young adults who regularly had one or more of these childhood concerns growing up, more than one-half say that they are currently facing challenges in getting by financially. This fraction compares to just over one-fourth of those who said they never, or only rarely, worried about these concerns as children that now experience this level of financial challenge. Young adults who regularly or sometimes worried when they were children about their care, safety, or having enough to eat are also less likely to be employed, less likely to have consistent income month-to-month, and less likely to be able to pay all of their current monthly bills in full, compared with those who never or rarely worried about these concerns as children. 2 Broadly speaking, children who grow up in insecure circumstances, those often experienced in poverty, seem disproportionately likely to experience financial insecurity as adults. This conference is about understanding what kinds of environments and resources can best help children meet with economic success after they reach adulthood. There has been a lot of discussion in the aftermath of the Great Recession about how to best connect people with steady jobs. But research presented over the next two days makes a compelling case that there is a need to also think longer term about how to prepare people for success in the labor market. In fact, this research underscores the value of starting young to develop basic work habits and skills, like literacy, numeracy, and interpersonal and organizational skills. These habits and skills help prepare people for work, help them enter the labor market sooner, meet with more success over time, and be in a position to develop the more specialized skills and obtain the academic credentials that are strongly correlated with higher and steadier earnings. Indeed, a growing body of economic and education literature has focused on the relative efficiency of addressing workforce development challenges through investments in early childhood development and education compared with interventions later in life. I believe that data, evidence, and research can help policymakers and practitioners think more clearly about the implications for improving economic and life outcomes for everyone. To this end, the speakers at this conference will focus on three broad issues. I would like to briefly mention each, highlighting some of the questions that I believe can be informed by the research that will be presented here. First, this morning's panel will address early childhood development and education. In recent years, medicine and social science has revealed more than we ever have known before about which factors and experiences in childhood can make a difference later in life. However, many questions demand further attention. A fundamental one is how positive developmental outcomes can be promoted among those who were not born into families with socioeconomic advantages. While we do know there are advantages to good quality early childhood education, we should strive to better understand what kind of returns on investment this education provides and how to maximize these returns. The answers to these questions may influence thinking about how programs and interventions meant to assist kids and their families should be structured for maximum effectiveness to help put kids on the road to economic success. Second, researchers have explored the effects of neighborhoods and community conditions on the development of young people. Some presenters at this conference will share their understanding of how physical surroundings influence personal development. For instance, how do the form and quality of community institutions such as schools, community centers, and libraries play a role? What other kinds of community characteristics--such as public safety, transportation, and environmental quality--might help or hinder general education and financial skill development? A particularly important question is how kids' home environments affect them in ways that matter for their future economic success. It is also critically important to ask, what kinds of interventions have proven track records, and are these programs scalable? Third, and finally, other presenters will explore issues around skill development of youths and young adults, workforce outcomes, and the implications for the broader economy. They will ask how we understand which formative experiences most affect the ability of young people to successfully move to the next chapter in their lives, whether that means college, a job, or other paths such as self-employment. What role does a range of programs--starting with early childhood education all the way through youth vocational or apprenticeship training--play in affecting job readiness? How effective are different approaches, and what are the returns on investment? We should also pay attention to how well young people form the sorts of "soft skills"--things like teamwork, communication, and the ability to handle conflict--that are so valued by employers. And, for young people whose paths become difficult, such as those who get caught up in the juvenile justice system, what effect do such experiences have on their futures as workers and consumers, and what are the most promising approaches to foster a course correction? I hope that the data and other evidence presented today and tomorrow are of use to you in your work. Community development professionals attending this conference may consider how the design and implementation of their programs may be improved. Policymakers may look more closely at how kids are affected--purposefully or unintentionally--by public policies. And researchers may encounter ideas that spark new work that can shed further light on these important topics. I think it is important that we better understand these issues, and I applaud you for taking the time to be here to share your knowledge and to learn. Our young people are the future, and we all want them to have the support they need for successful and fulfilling lives. As a central banker, I recognize the benefits to the broader economy when more people are better prepared for work and for managing their finances. In short, ensuring that all of our kids have "strong foundations" will help build a similarly strong foundation for the U.S. economy. 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (forthcoming), 2016 Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (Washington: Board of Governors). Past SHED surveys are available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/communitydev/shed.htm , which is also where the 2016 survey will be posted when completed. Return to text 2. See note 1. Return to text Last Update: March 23, 2017 Back to Top

Chair Janet L. Yellen At "Creating a Just Economy," the 2017 annual conference of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C. Share Thank you for this opportunity to be part of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition's annual conference. It is a pleasure to address a group of organizations committed to improving the lives of low- and moderate-income Americans and strengthening communities. I am especially pleased to be with you in 2017, which marks the 40th anniversary of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). As you know, the CRA requires banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. Since its enactment, the CRA has helped channel capital into communities and, in the process, supported innovative and effective approaches to community development. We at the Federal Reserve take our CRA responsibilities seriously. We evaluate the CRA performance of the state-chartered banks we supervise and make the ratings and written evaluations public. 1 We currently are improving our examination procedures and examiner training. We also work with our fellow bank regulators to continually improve our implementation of the law. And, as many of you know, we recently revised our interagency guidance to clarify how various community development activities are considered in assessing CRA performance, among them workforce development, which is my topic today. 2 Workforce Development Initiatives and Challenges Workforce development is a bit of a catchall phrase encompassing different types of initiatives that help prepare people for jobs by providing them with training, placement assistance, and other support. Organizations dedicated to providing workforce development are interested not just in helping people secure any jobs, but jobs that pay well, provide benefits, offer opportunities for advancement, and are less likely to be eliminated during economic downturns. Significant job market changes in recent years, brought about by global competition and technological advances--and the new and shifting skills that these changes demand--make workforce development more important than ever before. As community development practitioners, you know that good-paying, stable jobs are not only important to workers and their families, but also are the foundation of strong neighborhoods. As part of our CRA responsibilities, the Federal Reserve, together with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, has made it clear that banks will receive CRA recognition for lending to, investing in, and providing services to workforce development initiatives. In fact, two Federal Reserve Banks recently published a framework describing how workforce development initiatives can fit within a bank's broader CRA strategy. 3 While the job market for the United States as a whole has improved markedly since the depths of the financial crisis, the persistently higher unemployment rates in lower-income and minority communities show why workforce development is so essential. For instance, unemployment rates averaged 13 percent in low- and moderate-income communities from 2011 through 2015, compared with 7.3 percent in higher-income communities. 4 The challenges for workers in minority communities are even greater. The average unemployment rate across all census tracts where minorities made up a majority of the population averaged 14.3 percent from 2011 through 2015. Also, a much smaller share of the prime working-age population in these areas is employed--67.7 percent during this period, which is nearly 9 percentage points lower than in communities with smaller minority populations. 5 These elevated unemployment rates and depressed employment-to-population ratios underscore the strong need for effective workforce development options for these communities. Education as a Workforce Development Strategy Probably the most important workforce development strategy is improving the quality of general education. The rapid rise in U.S. education levels in the 20th century, facilitated by the growing availability of high school education in the first part of the century and the rapid expansion of public universities after World War II, contributed enormously to the broad-based economic gains associated with that period. 6 But, unfortunately, for a wide variety of reasons that are beyond the scope of this talk, education levels have historically lagged in low- and moderate-income communities, particularly communities of color. Between 2011 and 2015, the average proportion of adults in low- and moderate-income communities who had dropped out of high school was 23.5 percent, which is more than double the 10.9 percent rate in higher-income communities during that period. 7 When students from low- and moderate-income families do complete high school, they are less likely to pursue a college degree. And when they do attend college, those students are less likely to graduate. 8 Among the reasons for the disparity are a lack of money to pay for college and the burden of family responsibilities. 9 As a result, the proportion of adults in low- and moderate-income communities from 2011 through 2015 who had a four-year college degree or graduate degree was about half the share in higher-income communities--17.6 percent versus 34 percent. 10 This educational disparity matters because, among many reasons, people with less education experience both higher unemployment and lower average earnings. In December 2016, for example, the unemployment rate for people aged 25 and older with a bachelor's or higher degree was only 2.6 percent. However, the rate was nearly double, 5.1 percent, for workers in this age group with only a high school diploma and about triple, 7.9 percent, for those without a high school degree. 11 While high school graduates earn somewhat more than people who did not finish high school, the big payoff comes with a four-year college or advanced degree. 12 The advantages of higher education, evidenced by lower unemployment rates and higher earnings, are clear across the spectrum but are greater for non-Hispanic whites than for African Americans and Hispanics. Improving educational levels in low- and moderate-income communities is a long-term task. At least partially because of a lack of early childhood education and the sometimes lower quality of schools, children in these neighborhoods score substantially lower on standardized tests and drop out of high school at higher rates. 13 Thus, a starting point is to improve access to quality education in early childhood and improve the quality of primary and secondary schooling. We must also recognize and address the barriers faced by low- and moderate-income students trying to attain higher levels of education--barriers not typically faced by their more well-off peers. First, these students often do not have friends or family who have achieved higher educational levels, which matters because students whose parents did not attend college are much less likely to pursue a college degree themselves. 14 Even so, these students can benefit from high school counselors or other mentors who can assist them in choosing schools that provide the financial and counseling support that will help them complete their degrees. And they can benefit from help in picking majors and degrees that lead to higher earnings. 15 Second, lower-income students often pursue their education while working to support themselves and family members. Educational programs that help students balance these competing responsibilities go a long way to improving completion rates. In recognition of this fact, the U.S. Department of Education is offering competitive grants to postsecondary institutions to support or establish campus-based childcare programs primarily serving the needs of low-income students. 16 I want to reiterate that addressing the particular barriers standing in the way of lower-income students attending college and earning a degree requires a long-term strategy. However, not every student wants a two- or four-year degree or will have the financial wherewithal to pursue and complete a postsecondary degree. To support programs aimed at students not bound for college, in 2015, the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta identified occupations with above-average wages for workers without a bachelor's degree in the country's 100 largest metropolitan areas. 17 The Reserve Banks made this information available to workforce development providers online and in workshops. Educational programs and training that lead to better paying and more steady work are crucial for people without college degrees, particularly lower-income workers. Workforce Development Programs in Action In the rest of my remarks, I would like to highlight some examples of successful initiatives that illustrate key features of effective workforce development. 18 As you know, within our community affairs offices, the Federal Reserve devotes considerable effort to studying and promoting effective workforce development, so I am able to draw on the knowledge and experience of our staff. In discussing the examples, I would like to make five points. First, it is crucial for younger workers to establish a solid connection to employment early in their work lives. The Federal Reserve's 2013 Survey of Young Workers found that 18- to 30-year-olds with early work experience were more likely to emerge from the recent recession with a permanent job. 19 Other studies have found that students who worked 20 hours per week in their senior year of high school earned higher wages later in life than those who did not, and that summer youth employment programs improved participants' attitudes toward their communities, raised their academic aspirations, and boosted their job readiness skills. 20 The findings point to some of the reasons that the Boston Fed decided to lend technical support to a pilot program called Pocket Change, which aims to reduce unemployment among low-income 18- to 24-year-olds in Somerville, Massachusetts, through internships, training in job skills, and reinforcement of important soft skills such as punctuality and effective communication. In its first two years, the initiative trained 53 low-income young people and placed 20 of them in jobs. The results of this modest program indicate the promise of efforts that focus on first-time work experiences, and Somerville is now seeking to expand the initiative. 21 My second observation is that career and technical education (CTE) programs, which have seen a revival in recent years, have considerable potential. For some time, vocational education had fallen out of favor or was in decline in the United States, as it was associated with the deleterious practice of "tracking" less advantaged students that denied them the opportunity for the best education. But more recently, CTE has been refined and has made a comeback as an effective way to help non-college-bound workers gain valuable skills and obtain a foothold in a labor market that increasingly requires technical proficiency. These programs teach the skills needed to pursue careers in fields such as construction, manufacturing, health care, information technology, hospitality, and financial services. This point brings me to my third observation, which is that effective CTE programs and other workforce development initiatives are able to match education and training to good-paying jobs when they actively engage employers in the training process. WorkAdvance, a regional sector-specific program, is a good example. It delivers an array of aligned services to meet local business needs and provide jobs for unemployed and low-income adults in multiple cities. 22 An evaluation of the program last year in Tulsa, New York City, and northeast Ohio found it was especially effective because it offered training for in-demand skills and industry-recognized certifications, and it focused on jobs that have clear paths for advancement. 23 A fourth observation is that apprenticeships, which are more common in other countries, could play a larger role for low- and moderate-income individuals in our country as part of broader career and technical education efforts. For instance, a state-run program in South Carolina, Apprenticeship Carolina, helps employers develop apprenticeships at no cost to them. Businesses receive a $1,000 annual tax credit per apprenticeship, and the program assists them with information and technical needs, paperwork, and the integration of classroom learning at local technical colleges. The program has led to sizable job gains at a modest cost to the state. 24 Similarly, Washington State registered apprenticeship programs contributed to substantial long-term increases in employment rates and hourly wages. 25 My fifth and final observation is that promoting entrepreneurship could play a greater role in workforce development. Entrepreneurship is a fundamental strength of the American economy, and owning your own business or working for yourself can offer income, a means of building wealth, and, sometimes, greater flexibility for balancing job and family commitments. Yet we see less self-employment in low- and moderate-income communities. 26 Moreover, when businesses are owned by minorities, they are less likely to have paid employees. 27 These findings speak to the opportunities that could be realized by helping people start their own businesses and then helping them grow their businesses. Programs that equip people with the management skills and knowledge they need to start and operate a successful small business can help. Relevant and effective training can reduce the failure rate of businesses by helping owners make better decisions and avoid costly mistakes. 28 These programs are especially critical in low-income and rural communities where other resources to support small business development may be scarce. As part of their community affairs work, several Federal Reserve Banks have small business development initiatives. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York organized a small business protection and education series last year in partnership with the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce and a local development corporation. Participants learned about capital resources available to small businesses, online credit alternatives for small businesses, and the risks of handling large volumes of cash. In another example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City developed a guide to help rural and smaller metropolitan communities promote conditions favorable to growing local businesses rather than relying only on efforts to attract large companies. 29 Of course, in addition to training, small business owners need financing. But, as many of you know, factors such as lack of a credit history or a poor credit history and limited collateral--for example, home equity--make it difficult for the owners of small enterprises to access traditional business credit. This situation is true for many minority, women, and low-income borrowers. 30 Nontraditional lenders, including more than 1,000 Community Development Financial Institutions around the country, help fill the gap. 31 Conclusion To conclude, while the economy overall is recovering and the job market has improved substantially since the recession, pockets of persistently high unemployment, as well as other challenges, remain. Fortunately, programs such as the ones I have highlighted today can help address these challenges in more targeted ways than the Federal Reserve is equipped to do through monetary policy. I want you to know that we applaud your work, and we thank you for doing all that you do to serve the needs of lower-income communities across the country. Whether you work to provide affordable housing, homeownership counseling, small business credit and technical support, or workforce development, I hope you know that you have a partner in the Federal Reserve. In the ways we can, with the different tools we each have, our aim is the same: to make the economy work for the benefit of all Americans. This goal is of utmost importance, and I am glad to work alongside you in striving to achieve it. 1. CRA information is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/crape/BankRating.aspx . Return to text 2. See the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council's CRA webpage "Interagency Questions and Answers" available at https://www.ffiec.gov/cra/qnadoc.htm . Return to text 3. See Elizabeth Sobel Blum and Steven Shepelwich (2017), Engaging Workforce Development: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations (PDF) , Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and Kansas City (Dallas: FRB Dallas, January). Return to text 4. Low- and moderate-income communities are census tracts with a family median income under 80 percent of the area median income. Higher-income communities are census tracts with median incomes of 80 percent of the area median income or greater. Statistics represent the average of census tract unemployment rates rather than the unemployment rate across all individuals in these tracts combined. Return to text 5. Prime-age workers are those who are aged 25 to 54. Statistics are from the American Community Survey (ACS) data releases from 2011 through 2015, available on the U.S. Census Bureau's website at https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs . Return to text 6. See Claudia Goldin (2001), " The Human-Capital Century and American Leadership: Virtues of the Past ," Journal of Economic History, vol. 61 (June), pp. 263-92. Return to text 7. Adults are defined here as individuals aged 25 and older. Statistics are from the ACS data releases from 2011 through 2015; see note 5. Return to text 8. Following a cohort of high school sophomores in 2002, 96 percent of students from a high socioeconomic-status family pursued at least some higher education and 60 percent completed a bachelor's degree. Among students from a low socioeconomic-status family, 72 percent pursued higher education and 14 percent completed a bachelor's degree. Socioeconomic status is based on family income and parents' education. See National Center for Education Statistics (2015), " Postsecondary Attainment: Differences by Socioeconomic Status (PDF) ," in The Condition of Education 2015 (Washington: NCES). Return to text 9. Many people who did not enroll for or did not complete a degree also gave as a reason that they wanted to work, which may also reflect budget constraints that made pursuing or completing a higher education difficult. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Families in 2015 (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, May). Return to text 10. See note 7. Return to text 11. Moreover, "over 95 percent of jobs created during the recovery have gone to workers with at least some college education, while those with a high school diploma or less are being left behind" (as quoted from the introduction on the webpage for Anthony P. Carnevale, Tamara Jayasundera, and Artem Gulish (2016), America's Divided Recovery: College Haves and Have-Nots (Washington: Georgetown University Center for Education and the Workforce), https://cew.georgetown.edu/cew-reports/americas-divided-recovery ). Also see Bureau of Labor Statistics (2017), " The Employment Situation--February 2017 ," news release, March 10, Table A-4: Employment Status of the Civilian Population 25 Years and over by Educational Attainment; and BLS (2017), " Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey ," March 10, Table A-10: Unemployment Rates by Age, Sex, and Marital Status, Seasonally Adjusted. Return to text 12. The median weekly earnings for men with a high school degree but no college was $779, and for women it was $603. These amounts compare with median weekly earnings of $1,501 for men and $1,117 for women with a bachelor's or higher degree. Return to text 13. See Sean F. Reardon (2016), School District Socioeconomic Status, Race, and Academic Achievement , paper, Stanford Center for Education Policy Analysis (Stanford: Stanford CEPA); Motoko Rich, Amanda Cox, and Matthew Bloch (2016), "Money, Race and Success: How Your School District Compares," New York Times, April 29, http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/04/29/upshot/money-race-and-success-how-your-school-district-compares.html; and Geoffrey T. Wodtke, David J. Harding, and Felix Elwert (2011), "Neighborhood Effects in Temporal Perspective," American Sociological Review, vol.76 (October), pp. 713-36. Return to text 14. For example, 65 percent of young adults (aged 25 to 34) with a parent who received a bachelor's degree completed one themselves, compared with 16 percent of young adults whose parents completed no education beyond high school. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S Households in 2015 (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, May). Return to text 15. See Brad Hershbein and Melissa S. Kearney (2014), Major Decisions: What Graduates Earn over Their Lifetimes , Hamilton Project (Washington: Brookings Institution), figure 2; and Anthony P. Carnevale, Ban Cheah, and Andrew R Hanson (2015), The Economic Value of College Majors (PDF) (Washington: Georgetown University Center on Education and the Workforce). Return to text 16. For more information, see the Department of Education's webpage on its Child Care Access Means Parents in School Program at https://www2.ed.gov/programs/campisp/index.html . Return to text 17. Top occupations noted across all MSAs included the following: registered nurses; first-line supervisors of office and administrative support workers; sales representatives, wholesale and manufacturing; business operations specialists, sales representative services; general and operations managers; computer system analysts; automotive service technicians and mechanics; first-line supervisors of construction trades and extraction work; plumbers, pipefitters, and steamfitters; first-line supervisors of mechanics, installers; and construction laborers. See Keith Wardrip, Kyle Fee, Lisa Nelson, and Stuart Andreason, Identifying Opportunity Occupations in the Nation's Largest Metropolitan Economies, Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Ohio (Cleveland: FSB of Cleveland), available at https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/special-reports/sr-20150909-identifying-opportunity-occupations.aspx . Return to text 18. For a broad summary of recent research and policy issues related to workforce development, see the 2015 publication Transforming U.S. Workforce Development Policies for the 21st Century (available at https://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/community/transformworkforce ) developed by the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta and Kansas City in partnership with the John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University. In addition, all Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors are currently engaged in a System workforce development initiative that will gather up-to-date perspectives from employers and organizations engaged in worker training and education. This initiative will include a series of regional Reserve Bank meetings, a publication on effective investments and outcomes, and a capstone conference in October in Austin, Texas. Return to text 19. The survey found that 82 percent of workers who had worked for pay during high school had a permanent job--4 percentage points higher than for all workers combined. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), In the Shadow of the Great Recession: Experiences and Perspectives of Young Workers (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, November). Return to text 20. Baum and Ruhm (2016) do observe, however, that these gains from employment during the senior year of high school have diminished substantially relative to earlier cohorts. See Charles L. Baum and Christopher J. Ruhm (2016), "The Changing Benefits of Early Work Experience," Southern Economic Journal, vol. 83 (October), pp. 343-63. Return to text 21. For more information on Pocket Change, see the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's Working Cities Challenge webpage at https://www.bostonfed.org/workingcities/massachusetts/round1/cities/somerville.html . Return to text 22. Aligned services may include intensive screening, occupational skills training, job development and placement services, and retention and advancement services. Return to text 23. For more on the WorkAdvance program, see the MDRC website at www.mdrc.org/project/workadvance#overview , and for information on that program in Northeast Ohio, see the Towards Employment website at http://towardsemployment.org/strategic-initiatives/workadvance . Return to text 24. See Harry J. Holzer and Robert I. Lerman (2014), Work-Based Learning to Expand Jobs and Occupational Qualifications for Youth (PDF) (Washington: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, April). Return to text 25. Kevin Hollenbeck and Wei-Jang Huang (2014), " Net Impact and Benefit-Cost Estimates of the Workforce Development System in Washington State ," Upjohn Institute Technical Report 13-029 (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research). Return to text 26. From 2011 through 2015, only 8 percent of households in low- and moderate-income communities reported self-employment income, compared with 11 percent of all households (see ACS data releases in note 5). Return to text 27. Only 4 percent of African American-owned firms and 9 percent of Hispanic-owned firms have paid employees, compared with 22 percent of non-minority-owned firms; see U.S. Department of Commerce, Minority Business Development Agency (2016), " U.S. Minority-Owned Firms (PDF) ," fact sheet (Washington: MBDA, January). Return to text 28. See Glenn Muske and Nancy Stanforth (2000), " The Educational Needs of Small Business Owners: A Look into the Future ," Journal of Extension, vol. 38 (December). Return to text 29. Grow Your Own Guide: Entrepreneurship-Based Economic Development is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's website at https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/community/gyo/gyo-guide.pdf . Return to text 30. See Joyce A. Klein (2017), Bridging the Divide: How Business Ownership Can Help Close the Racial Wealth Gap (Washington: Aspen Institute, January). Return to text 31. To find certified Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) in different geographies, see a list on the CDFI Fund's website available at https://www.cdfifund.gov/programs-training/certification/cdfi/Pages/default.aspx . Return to text Last Update: March 28, 2017 Back to Top

Chair Janet L. Yellen At "125 Years of Women at Brown Conference," sponsored by Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island Share Watch Live Thank you, and let me say what an honor it is, as an alumna of this great university, to be here today and part of this important occasion. As we celebrate the 125th anniversary of women being admitted to Brown, it seems appropriate to reflect on the progress that women have achieved in the intervening years. Since 1891, women have made tremendous strides in their ability to pursue their dreams of education and meaningful work and to support themselves and their families. In pursuing these goals, women have helped improve working conditions for all workers and have been a major factor in America's prosperity over the past century and a quarter. Despite this progress, evidence suggests that many women remain unable to achieve their goals. The gap in earnings between women and men, although smaller than it was years ago, is still significant; women continue to be underrepresented in certain industries and occupations; and too many women struggle to combine aspirations for work and family. Further advancement has been hampered by barriers to equal opportunity and workplace rules and norms that fail to support a reasonable work-life balance. If these obstacles persist, we will squander the potential of many of our citizens and incur a substantial loss to the productive capacity of our economy at a time when the aging of the population and weak productivity growth are already weighing on economic growth. To enliven the history I will present today, I will include the experiences of women graduates of this institution, in most cases in their own words, as related in oral histories preserved by Brown. 1 Among these alumnae, I am proud to say, is a member of my own family who was an early graduate of Pembroke, Elizabeth Stafford Hirschfelder of the Class of 1923. Her career and achievements as a mathematician embody both the opportunities that opened for Pembroke graduates in the decades after she left here and the limitations many women faced and the compromises she, like so many others, was forced to make. A Historical Perspective on Women in the Labor Force From the time that Brown began to accept women and into the 1920s, most women in the United States did not work outside the home, and those who did were primarily young and unmarried. In that era, just 20 percent of all women were "gainful workers," as the Census Bureau then categorized labor force participation outside the home, and only 5 percent of those married were categorized as such. 2 Of course, these statistics somewhat understate the contributions of married women to the economy beyond housekeeping and childrearing, since women's work in the home often included work in family businesses and the home production of goods, such as agricultural products, for sale. Also, the aggregate statistics obscure the differential experience of women by race. African American women were about twice as likely to participate in the labor force as were white women at the time, largely because they were more likely to remain in the labor force after marriage. 3 What was true for women in general was also true of the early graduates of what was then called the Women's College, the large majority of whom got married, raised families, and did not pursue careers. The fact that many women left work upon marriage reflected cultural norms, the nature of the work available to them, and legal strictures. The occupational choices of those young women who did work were severely circumscribed. Most women lacked significant education‑‑only 54 percent of girls aged 5 to 19 were enrolled in school in 1890. 4 And women with little education mostly toiled as piece workers in factories or as domestic workers, jobs that were dirty and often unsafe. Educated women, like those who attended Brown's Women's College, were scarce. Fewer than 2 percent of all 18- to 24-year-olds were enrolled in an institution of higher education, and just one-third of those were women. 5 Such women did not have to perform manual labor, but their choices were likewise constrained. Edna McDonald was a graduate of the Class of 1919, and in her oral history, she summed up the opportunities for her and her classmates: "Let's be frank," she said. "What choices did women have? Teaching. You could teach. You could be a lab technician. Or you could go into office work and be a secretary. Those were the only real choices." Margery Chittenden Leonard graduated from Pembroke in 1929 and went on to earn a J.D. as the only woman in her class at Boston University--after two others withdrew. And with that law degree, her first job was as a secretary, and she continued to struggle to find work as a lawyer. In her oral history, Doris Madeline Hopkins, a 1928 graduate, talked about the opportunity that she had to work, but also about being told she had to leave her job once she got married. Indeed, at the time, marriage bars were widespread. 6 There were notable exceptions, such as, of course, Mary Emma Woolley, a Brown graduate who went on to serve as the president of Mount Holyoke College, and Ethel Robinson, the first black woman to graduate from Brown, who taught English at Howard University. Helen Butts, from the Class of 1928, taught natural sciences at Smith and later zoology at Wellesley, the beginning of a long and productive career as a biological researcher. Another exception was Betty Stafford, the aunt of my husband, George. She grew up in Providence, earned bachelor's and master's degrees at Brown in mathematics and then rather adventurously headed west, teaching at two universities in Texas in the 1920s before completing her Ph.D. and then teaching at the University of Wisconsin. Despite the widespread sentiment against women, particularly married women, working outside the home and with the limited opportunities available to them, women did enter the labor force in greater numbers over this period, with participation rates reaching nearly 50 percent for single women by 1930 and nearly 12 percent for married women. This rise suggests that while the incentive, and in many cases the imperative, remained for women to drop out of the labor market at marriage when they could rely on their husband's income, mores were changing. Indeed, these years overlapped with the so-called first wave of the women's movement, when women came together to agitate for change on a variety of social issues, including suffrage and temperance, and which culminated in the ratification of the 19th amendment in 1920 guaranteeing women the right to vote. Between the 1930s and mid-1970s, women's participation in the economy continued to rise, with the gains primarily owing to an increase in work among married women. By 1970, 50 percent of single women and 40 percent of married women were participating in the labor force. 7 Several factors contributed to this rise. First, with the advent of mass high school education, graduation rates rose substantially. 8 At the same time, new technologies contributed to an increased demand for clerical workers, and these jobs were increasingly taken on by women. Moreover, because these jobs tended to be cleaner and safer, the stigma attached to work for a married woman diminished. And while there were still marriage bars that forced women out of the labor force, these formal barriers were gradually removed over the period following World War II. Another innovation was the introduction in the late 1940s of part-time schedules, which combined with the proliferation of modern appliances to make it more feasible for married women to work outside the home. 9 Over the decades from 1930 to 1970, increasing opportunities also arose for highly educated women, such as the graduates of what was by then called Pembroke College, to work in professions. That said, early in that period, most women still expected to have short careers, and women were still largely viewed as secondary earners whose husbands' careers came first. Thus, while it was becoming more common for women such as Betty Stafford to teach at colleges and universities, their career prospects were not the same as those for men. After earning her Ph.D. at Wisconsin, Betty married a fellow student and over the next decade coauthored five important papers with him and a well-regarded reference work. But, while her husband progressed from instructor to professor at Wisconsin, Betty worked as an instructor on an ad hoc basis. During World War II, while he worked for the government in Washington and New York, Betty stayed in Madison, teaching math to servicemen. When he took a job teaching in California after the war, they divorced, and it was only then that she was a given a position as assistant professor. As time progressed, attitudes about women working and their employment prospects did change. As women gained experience in the labor force, they increasingly saw that they could balance work and family. A new model of the two-income family emerged. 10 Some women began to attend college and graduate school with the expectation of working, whether or not they planned to marry and have families, as did Rita Schorr-Germain, an immigrant who survived Auschwitz, graduated from Pembroke in 1953, and went on to teach European history while her husband also had a successful academic career. In her oral history, Rita says she was encouraged by many Brown professors and never considered the possibility that her gender would stand in the way of an academic career, a shift in outlook that was becoming increasingly common in the 1950s. As did most women's colleges at the time, Pembroke continued to produce nurses, schoolteachers, and social workers, and many women who worked only until they married and had children. But, from the late 1950s on, it also increasingly graduated writers, doctors, lawyers, diplomats, physicians, psychotherapists, and archeologists, and, in 1959, the first female faculty member of Brown University. Among those women fortunate to attend Pembroke in this era of dramatic change was me. I enrolled at Brown fully planning to attend graduate school and have a career, as did many of my classmates in the Class of 1967. By the 1970s, a dramatic change in women's work lives was under way. In the period after World War II, many women had not expected that they would spend as much of their adult lives working as turned out to be the case. By contrast, in the 1970s young women more commonly expected that they would spend a substantial portion of their lives in the labor force, and they prepared for it, increasing their educational attainment and taking courses and college majors that better equipped them for careers as opposed to just jobs. In surveys of young people about their expectations of their futures, young women during this era increasingly placed an emphasis on career success. 11 Susan Graber Slusky of the Class of 1971 said in her oral history that she chose Pembroke for Brown's excellence in chemistry and physics, because she was already planning the career she went on to have as a researcher. Perhaps unsurprisingly, this is also the period in which many all-male colleges admitted women or combined their women's and men's undergraduate schools, as Brown did when it merged Pembroke and Brown College in 1971. These changes in attitudes and expectations were supported by other changes under way in society. Workplace protections were enhanced through the passage of the Pregnancy Discrimination Act in 1978 and the recognition of sexual harassment in the workplace. Access to birth control increased, which allowed married couples greater control over the size of their families and young women the ability to delay marriage and to plan children around their educational and work choices. 12 And in 1974, women gained, for the first time, the right to apply for credit in their own name without a male co-signer. 13 By the early 1990s, the labor force participation rate of prime working-age women--those between the ages of 25 and 54--reached just over 74 percent, compared with roughly 93 percent for prime working-age men. i By then, the share of women going into the traditional fields of teaching, nursing, social work, and clerical work declined, and more women were becoming doctors, lawyers, managers, and, yes, professors. As women increased their education and joined industries and occupations formerly dominated by men, the gap in earnings between women and men began to close significantly. 14 Positive Spillovers from Women's Increased Participation in the Workforce Looking back, the story of the past 125 years is one of slow but steady progress toward women's full participation in the economy and the fulfillment of their career goals. Unfortunately, the success of women has often been seen as coming at the expense of men. Indeed, regularly in the late 19th and 20th centuries there were calls to protect men from women's entry into the labor force. The early female graduates of Brown faced such attitudes from fellow students and even from faculty. Ruth Pederson, a member of the Class of 1919, said some professors did not want to teach women and prohibited women from taking their classes. Margery Leonard remembered one Boston University professor who urged her to drop out of law school. When she refused, this professor punished her by forcing her to recite the details of rape and seduction cases before her jeering, stomping classmates. And it wasn't only men who had this attitude. Among the women who were fighting for better labor standards early in the 20th century, many were heavily influenced by elite cultural standards that viewed a woman's place as in the home and argued that men should be paid a "family wage" that would allow them to support their family singlehandedly--a standard that many working-class families could not afford. Moreover, many of the labor protections promoted to protect women were often based on theories about women's weaker nature, and these protections served to circumscribe their work. 15 During the Great Depression, limiting women's role in the workforce was considered a way to address the high rates of unemployment, although the experience of those years showed the importance of women in supporting their families financially. 16 Similarly, women who had successfully worked during World War II, either as part of the war effort or to support their families while their husbands were fighting, often were pushed out of their jobs to make room for returning soldiers. 17 After the war and then single, my relative, Betty Stafford, remained an assistant professor at the University of Wisconsin despite an enviable body of research. She married another Wisconsin professor, an eminent chemist, and collaborated with him on his research. But, in 1954, she gave up her assistant professorship, she said, to be able to accompany her husband on his frequent international travels. Betty later moved with her husband to California, and after his death, she endowed a graduate fellowship in the sciences and a prize in theoretical chemistry. Although Betty's accomplishments were considerable, against the backdrop of increasing opportunity for women over her lifetime I believe that Betty Stafford Hirschfelder was denied opportunities and greater success simply because she was a woman. Despite the fears of some that women entering into the workforce would crowd out men, the evidence shows that the rise in women's participation has contributed to widespread improvements in the safety and productivity of our workplaces, to the health of families, and to the macroeconomic success that our country has enjoyed over the past 125 years. In the first decades of the 20th century, the struggle to improve the working conditions of young women drawn into factories was a pillar of the overall movement toward improved labor standards. Women's demands for safer factories, humane workweeks, and higher pay, which were often pursued through organizing and striking, contributed substantially to the social upheaval and public debate of that period that eventually led to the passage of stronger labor standards. These efforts also produced generations of women who went on to be leaders in the broader labor movement and in the broader movements for equality. The rise in female labor force participation was an early focus of and helped establish the fields of statistics and labor economics in their modern incarnations. Carroll Wright, the first commissioner of what is now known as the Bureau of Labor Statistics and who established the high standards for data collection and analysis for which the bureau is known, devoted his agency's fourth annual report, for the year 1888, to the topic of Working Women in Large Cities. 18 Moreover, the issues surrounding women's work, such as the minimum wage, pay equity, and maximum workweeks, were topics of great interest to early practitioners of labor economics. 19 It is often said that we should welcome women's presence in the workplace because it allows us to capitalize on the talents of our entire population, and this is certainly true. But it is also good business. A number of studies on how groups perform indicate that workforces that vary on dimensions such as gender, race, and ethnicity produce better decisionmaking processes and better outcomes. 20 Evidence also suggests that women's work has positive spillovers to their family lives and to the success of their children, which in turn benefits all of society. It is a well-established finding in the literature on development that maternal education and work are positively associated with better health and educational outcomes for children. 21 A recent meta-study also suggests that children in the United States with working mothers do as well if not better in school, both academically and behaviorally, than children with mothers that stay home full time. This effect is particularly strong for families that have fewer social and economic resources, including single-parent families. 22 As time goes on, girls with working mothers are more likely to be employed and hold supervisory positions, and they earn somewhat more. In addition, sons raised in families with working mothers assume greater childcare responsibilities as adults than sons whose mothers did not work. 23 This is not to say that children do not need attention from both parents to develop into academically successful and socially well-adjusted adults--they certainly do. Also, as I will discuss, women are making choices that reflect their desire to balance work and family. These findings bear on the question of how best to support women's work through public policies aimed at helping women and men better manage work and family. From a macroeconomic perspective, women's incorporation into the economy contributed importantly to the rapid rise in economic output and well-being over the 20th century. Between 1948 and 1990, the rise in female participation contributed about 1/2 percentage point per year to the potential growth rate of real gross domestic product. 24 And this estimate does not take into account the effect of the increases in women's education and work experience that also occurred over that period and boosted their productivity. In addition, since 1979, women have accounted for a majority of the rise in real household income. In dollar terms, the gains were greatest for households in the top third of the earnings distribution, but without the increase in women's earnings, families in the bottom and middle thirds of the distribution would have experienced declines. 25 Remaining Challenges and Some Possible Solutions I have argued thus far that we, as a country, have reaped great benefits from the increasing role that women have played in the economy. But evidence suggests that barriers to women's continued progress remain. The participation rate for prime working-age women peaked in the late 1990s and currently stands at about 75 percent. 26 Of course, women, particularly those with lower levels of education, have been affected by the same economic forces that have been pushing down participation among men, including technical change and globalization. 27 However, women's participation plateaued at a level well below that of prime working-age men, which stands at over 88 percent. While some married women choose not to work, the size of this disparity should lead us to examine the extent to which structural problems, such as a lack of equal opportunity and challenges to combining work and family, are holding back women's advancement. As I mentioned earlier, the gap in earnings between men and women has narrowed substantially, but progress has slowed lately, and women working full time still earn about 17 percent less than men, on average, each week. 28 Even when we compare men and women in the same or similar occupations who appear nearly identical in background and experience, a gap of about 10 percent typically remains. 29 As such, we cannot rule out that gender-related impediments hold back women, including outright discrimination, attitudes that reduce women's success in the workplace, and an absence of mentors. Recent research has shown that although women now enter professional schools in numbers nearly equal to men, they are still substantially less likely to reach the highest echelons of their professions. 30 For instance, 47 percent of students at top-50 law schools are female, and women obtain 40 percent of M.B.A.'s from top programs. Nonetheless, women are still poorly represented among corporate CEOs, as partners in top law firms, and as executives in finance. 31 Even in my own field of economics, women constitute only about one-third of Ph.D. recipients, a number that has barely budged in two decades. 32 This lack of success in climbing the professional ladder would seem to explain why the wage gap actually remains largest for those at the top of the earnings distribution. 33 One of the primary factors contributing to the failure of these highly skilled women to reach the tops of their professions and earn equal pay is that top jobs in fields such as law and business require longer workweeks and penalize taking time off. This would have a disproportionately large effect on women, who continue to bear the lion's share of domestic and child-rearing responsibilities. 34 Within academia, the short timeframe in which assistant professors have to prove themselves good candidates for tenure by publishing typically overlaps with the period in which many women contemplate starting a family, forcing difficult trade-offs. 35 Employers may require the long hours and short absences for good reasons--for instance, the work may involve relationships with clients or accumulating a significant amount of knowledge about a deal or case in a condensed period of time. If it is costly for employees to share information and split the work, then there would be a high premium, in the form of compensation, for those who can work the long hours. 36 Workplaces where the income of employees depends on the effort of co-workers, such as law partnerships, also have an incentive to require long workweeks. 37 But however sensible such arrangements may be from a business perspective, it can be difficult for women to meet the demands in these fields once they have children. The very fact that these types of jobs require such long hours likely discourages some women--as well as men--from pursuing these career tracks. Advances in technology have facilitated greater work-sharing and flexibility in scheduling, and there are further opportunities in this direction. 38 Economic models also suggest that while it can be difficult for any one employer to move to a model with shorter hours, if many firms were to change their model, they and their workers could all be better off. 39 Of course, most women are not employed in fields that require such long hours or that impose such severe penalties for taking time off. But the difficulty of balancing work and family is a widespread problem. In fact, the recent trend in many occupations is to demand complete scheduling flexibility, which can result in too few hours of work for those with family demands and can make it difficult to schedule childcare. 40 Reforms that encourage companies to provide some predictability in schedules, cross-train workers to perform different tasks, or require a minimum guaranteed number of hours in exchange for flexibility could improve the lives of workers holding such jobs. Another problem is that in most states, childcare is affordable for fewer than half of all families. 41 And just 5 percent of workers with wages in the bottom quarter of the wage distribution have jobs that provide them with paid family leave. 42 This circumstance puts many women in the position of having to choose between caring for a sick family member and keeping their jobs. In this context, it is useful to compare the workforce experiences of American women to those in other advanced economies. In 1990, the labor force participation rate in the United States of prime working-age women, 74 percent, was higher than in all but a few industrialized nations. But in the intervening years, while the participation rate of U.S. women was roughly stable, elsewhere it increased steadily, and by 2010 the United States fell to 17th place out of 22 advanced economies with respect to female labor force participation. 43 A number of studies have examined the role of various public policies in explaining patterns in female labor force participation across countries. These studies find that policy differences--in particular, the expansion of paid leave following childbirth, steps to improve the availability and affordability of childcare, and increased availability of part-time work--go a long way toward explaining the divergence between advanced economies. 44 Evidence suggests that if the United States had policies in place such as those employed in many European countries, female labor force participation could be as high as 82 percent. 45 However, these policies entail tradeoffs. Women in other advanced economies are more likely than women in the United States to be employed part time, which could reflect a greater ease in arranging flexible schedules and more time with family, but it also comes with costs, including a wage penalty and fewer opportunities for training and advancement. Such findings raise the question of whether the policies enacted overseas in recent years have had the unintended consequence of making it more expensive for employers there to hire women into full-time jobs with opportunities for advancement, as women are more likely to be eligible for and to make use of such benefits. 46 This possibility should inform our own thinking about policies to make it easier for women and men to combine their family and career aspirations. For instance, improving access to affordable and good quality childcare would appear to fit the bill, as it has been shown to support full-time employment. 47 Recently, there also seems to be some momentum for providing families with paid leave at the time of childbirth. The experience in Europe suggests picking policies that do not narrowly target childbirth, but instead can be used to meet a variety of the health and caregiving responsibilities. 48 Conclusion The United States faces a number of longer-term economic challenges, including the aging of the population and the low growth rate of productivity. One recent study estimates that increasing the female participation rate to that of men would raise our gross domestic product by 5 percent. 49 And, as I have argued, our workplaces and families, as well as women themselves, would benefit from continued progress. However, a number of factors, which I have only had a chance to touch upon, appear to be holding women back, including the difficulty women currently have in trying to combine their careers with other aspects of their lives, including caregiving. In looking to solutions, we should consider improvements to work environments and policies that benefit not only women, but all workers. Pursuing such a strategy would be in keeping with the story of the rise in women's involvement in the workforce, which, as I have described here, has contributed not only to their own well-being but more broadly to the welfare and prosperity of our country. The title for my remarks today, "So We All Can Succeed," was inspired by Malala Yousafzai, the advocate for girls' and women's education, who said, "We cannot all succeed when half of us are held back." 50 Brown University has played its own role by admitting women 125 years ago, by educating many thousands of women over the decades, and by continuing to be a place that equips men and women with the means to make our nation and the world a better place. References Aaronson, Stephanie, Tomaz Cajner, Bruce Fallick, Felix Galbis-Reig, Christopher Smith, and William Wascher (2014). " Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 197-275. Aguirre, DeAnne, Leila Hoteit, Christine Rupp, and Karim Sabbagh (2012). Empowering the Third Billion: Women and the World of Work in 2012. New York: Strategy&. Akerlof, George (1976). "The Economics of Caste and of the Rat Race and Other Woeful Tales," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 90 (November), pp. 599‑617. Antecol, Heather, Kelly Bedard, and Jenna Stearns (2016). "Equal but Inequitable: Who Benefits from Gender-Neutral Tenure Clock Stopping Policies?" IZA Discussion Paper 9904. Bailey, Martha J. (2010). "Momma's Got the Pill: How Anthony Comstock and Griswold v. Connecticut Shaped U.S. Childbearing," American Economic Review, vol. 100 (March), pp. 98-129. Bayer, Amanda, and Cecilia Elena Rouse (2016). "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 30 (Fall), pp. 221-42. Bertrand, Marianne, Claudia Goldin, and Lawrence Katz (2010). "Dynamics of the Gender Gap for Young Professionals in the Financial and Corporate Sectors," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, vol. 2 (July), pp. 228-55. Bivens, Josh, Emma Garcia, Elise Gould, Elaine Weiss, and Valerie Wilson (2016). It's Time for an Ambitious National Investment in America's Children (PDF) . Washington: Economic Policy Institute, April 6. Blau, Francine D., and Lawrence M. Kahn (2013), " Female Labor Supply: Why Is the U.S. Falling Behind? (PDF)" IZA Discussion Paper Series No. 7140. Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor, January. ------ (2016). " The Gender Wage Gap: Extent, Trends, and Explanations ," NBER Working Paper Series 21913. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January. Boushey, Heather, and Kavya Vaghul (2016). Women Have Made the Difference for Family Economic Security . Washington: Washington Center for Equitable Growth, April 4. Boustan, Leah Platt, and William J. Collins (2013). " The Origins and Persistence of Black-White Differences in Women's Labor Force Participation ," NBER Working Paper Series 19040. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May. Bureau of Labor (1889). Fourth Annual Report of the Commissioner of Labor, 1888: Working Women in Large Cities . Washington: Government Printing Office. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016). National Compensation Survey: Employee Benefits in the United States (PDF) , Table 32: Leave Benefits: Access, Private Industry Workers, March 2016. Washington: BLS, September. Cajner, Tomaz, Dennis Mawhirter, Christopher Nekarda, and David Ratner (2014). " Why Is Involuntary Part-Time Work Elevated? " FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 14. Council of Economic Advisers (2016). The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation. (PDF) Washington: Executive Office of the President of the United States, June. Fernández, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti (2004). "Mothers and Sons: Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 119 (November), pp. 1249-99. Goldin, Claudia (1977). "Female Labor Force Participation: The Origin of Black and White Differences, 1870 and 1880." Journal of Economic History, vol. 37 (March), pp. 87-108. ------ (1990). Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women. New York: Oxford University Press. ------ (2006). "The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and Family," American Economic Review, vol. 96 (May), pp. 1-21. ------ (2014). "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter," American Economic Review, vol. 104 (April), pp. 1091-119. Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz (2002). "The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women's Career and Marriage Decisions," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 110 (August), pp. 730-70. ------ (2008). The Race between Education and Technology. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press. Kessler-Harris, Alice (1982). Out to Work: A History of Wage-Earning Women in the United States. New York: Oxford University Press. Lambert, Susan J., Anna Haley-Lock, and Julia R. Henly (2012). "Schedule Flexibility in Hourly Jobs: Unanticipated Consequences and Promising Directions," Community, Work, and Family, vol. 15 (3), pp. 293-315. Landers, Renée M., James B. Rebitzer, and Lowell J. Taylor (1996). "Rat Race Redux: Adverse Selection in the Determination of Work Hours in Law Firms," American Economic Review, vol. 86 (June), pp. 329-48. Lovell, Vicky (2008). " Health and Family Care Leave for Federal Workers: Using a Short-Term Disability Insurance Model to Support Worker and Family Well-Being, Ensure Competitive Employee Compensation, and Increase Productivity (PDF) ," testimony presented to the Joint Economic Committee and the House Subcommittee on the Federal Workforce, Postal Service, and the District of Columbia at the hearing "Investment in the Future of the Federal Workforce: Paid Parental Leave Improves Recruitment and Retention," Washington, March 6. Lucas-Thompson, Rachel G., Wendy A. Goldberg, and JoAnn Prause (2010). "Maternal Work Early in the Lives of Children and Its Distal Associations with Achievement and Behavior Problems: A Meta-Analysis," Psychological Bulletin, vol. 136 (November), pp. 915-42. Manning, Alan, and Joanna Swaffield (2008). "The Gender Gap in Early-Career Wage Growth," Economic Journal, vol. 118 (July), pp. 983-1024. McGinn, Kathleen L., Mayra Ruiz Castro, and Elizabeth Long Lingo (2015). " Mums the Word! Cross-National Effects of Maternal Employment on Gender Inequalities at Work and at Home ," Harvard Business School Working Paper 15-094. Boston: HBS, June (revised July 2015). Moran, Gwen (2015). "Women Now Make Up 40% of Students at Top MBA Programs," Fortune, November 9. New York City Bar Association (2016). 2015 Diversity Benchmarking Report. (PDF) New York: NYC Bar Association. Noonan, Mary C., Mary E. Corcoran, and Paul N. Courant (2005). "Pay Differences among the Highly Trained: Cohort Differences in the Sex Gap in Lawyers' Earnings," Social Forces, vol. 84 (December), pp. 851-70. Olson, Elizabeth (2016). "More Law Degrees for Women, but Fewer Good Jobs," New York Times, November 30. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2016). " PF2.2: Use of Childbirth-Related Leave by Mothers and Fathers (PDF) ," OECD Family Database, last updated January 3. Thévenon, Olivier (2013). " Drivers of Female Labour Force Participation in the OECD ," OECD Social, Employment, and Migration Working Papers No. 145. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, May 23. U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement, National Center for Education Statistics (1993). 120 Years of American Education: A Statistical Portrait. (PDF) Washington: NCES, January. World Bank (2012). World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development . Washington: World Bank. Yousafzai, Malala (2013). Speech delivered at the Youth Takeover of the United Nations, organized by the president of the U.N. General Assembly, U.N. Special Envoy for Global Education Gordon Brown, and A World at School, an initiative from Theirworld, July 12, http://theirworld.org/explainers/malala-yousafzais-speech-at-the-youth-takeover-of-the-united-nations . 1. I am grateful for the assistance of Brown University staff in facilitating access to Brown Women Speak, the University's oral history project, and particularly the help of archivist Mary Murphy. Return to text 2. My discussion of the history of female labor force participation draws heavily on the pioneering work of Claudia Goldin, including her 2006 Ely Lecture "The Quiet Revolution that Transformed Women's Employment, Education, and Family" to the American Economic Association and her 1990 work Understanding the Gender Gap : An Economic History of American Women, from which the statistics on female labor force participation from the late 19th century until the mid-20th century are drawn. A thorough discussion of the quality of these data and their usefulness in making comparisons over time is included in that work. Return to text 3. The higher participation rates of African American women have been attributed to different cultural norms that developed during slavery and the legacy of slavery, which left blacks impoverished and with low levels of education, making women's wages an important source of family income (Boustan and Collins, 2013; Goldin, 1977). Return to text 4. U.S. Department of Education (1993). Return to text 5. U.S. Department of Education (1993), p. 76. Return to text 6. Goldin (1990), pp. 160-66. Return to text 7. Note that for the 1970s and beyond, the participation rate is calculated as a share of those aged 16 and older, whereas for earlier years it is calculated as a share of those aged 15 and older. Return to text 8. Goldin and Katz (2008). Return to text 9. Goldin (2006), pp. 5-6. Return to text 10. For instance, although many women who had joined the war effort in the 1940s were fired at the end of the war, as the Korean War effort picked up and the demand for the labor of women rose, women, who had learned that they could combine work and family were ready to reenter the labor force, so that by the early 1950s female labor force participation resumed its war-time high (Kessler-Harris, 1982, pp. 302-03). Moreover, evidence suggests that sons whose mothers increased their labor force participation in the wake of World War II had wives who were more likely to work (Fernández, Fogli, and Olivette, 2004). Return to text 11. Interestingly, over this time young men put increasing weight on family. Goldin (2006), pp. 9 and 11. Return to text 12. See, for example, Bailey (2010) and Goldin and Katz (2002). Return to text 13. The Equal Credit Opportunity Act, passed in 1974, prohibited discrimination in the provision of credit on the basis of gender, race, religion, marital status and national origin. It also disallowed credit providers from asking women about their plans for future children. Return to text 14. Blau and Kahn (2016). Return to text 15. Kessler-Harris (1982), pp. 184-85. Return to text 16. Kessler-Harris (1982), pp. 250-58. Return to text 17. Kessler-Harris (1982), pp. 286-87. Return to text 18. Bureau of Labor (1889). Return to text 19. Goldin (2006), p. 4. Return to text 20. See the discussion of this literature on pp. 232-33 of Bayer and Rouse (2016) and the studies cited therein. Return to text 21. See, for example, World Bank (2012). Return to text 22. Lucas-Thompson, Goldberg, and Prause (2010). Return to text 23. McGinn, Ruiz Castro, and Lingo (2015). Return to text 24. Board staff calculation using data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Return to text 25. Boushey and Vaghul (2016). Return to text 26. The labor force participation rate for all women declined from a peak of 60 percent in 1999 and 2000 and now stands a bit below 57 percent. However, as has been documented elsewhere, much of the decline for all women can be explained by the aging of the baby boomers into their retirement years and lower participation among teens and young adults. It is also possible that the labor force participation rate is still being held down a bit by the waning effects of the Great Recession. Aaronson and others (2014). Return to text 27. Aaronson and others (2014). Also see Council of Economic Advisers (2016) and the studies cited therein. Return to text 28. Blau and Kahn (2016). Return to text 29. Manning and Swaffield (2008) find that although men and women enter the British labor force earning the same amount, among those who worked continuously and full time for 10 years, women would still earn 8 percent less than men, even if they have the same personality traits, were childless, and profess no interest in having children. Also see Blau and Kahn (2016) and Noonan, Corcoran, and Courant (2005). Return to text 30. Moran (2015); Olson (2016). Return to text 31. On the status of women in finance and corporations see Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz (2010) and the studies cited therein. For law partnerships, see New York City Bar Association (2016). Return to text 32. Bayer and Rouse (2016), p. 223. Return to text 33. Blau and Kahn (2016). Return to text 34. Bertrand, Goldin, and Katz (2010); Goldin (2014). Return to text 35. Unfortunately, in contrast to some of the successful gender neutral policies I discuss below, efforts to address the tenure problem by giving all new parents extra time before the tenure decision has actually had the effect of reducing female tenure rates and raising those of men. Antecol, Bedrard and Stearns, (2016). Return to text 36. Goldin (2014). Return to text 37. See, for example, Akerlof (1976) and Landers, Rebitzer, and Taylor (1996). Return to text 38. See the discussion in Goldin (2014), p. 117. Return to text 39. Landers, Rebitzer, and Taylor (1996), p. 334. Return to text 40. Cajner and others (2014); Lambert, Haley-Lock, and Henly (2012). Return to text 41. Bivens and others (2016). Return to text 42. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016). Return to text 43. Blau and Kahn (2013). Return to text 44. Note that Blau and Kahn (2013) do not find that improvement in the provision of childcare in other advanced economies relative to the United States explain the divergence in participation since the 1990s; however, Thévenon (2013) finds that the greater provision of childcare has a positive effect on full-time employment. Return to text 45. Blau and Kahn (2013), p. 7. Return to text 46. In most European countries, men are significantly less likely than women to use paid parental leave, although in a few countries, including Sweden and Iceland, over 40 percent of users of parental leave are men (OECD, 2016). Return to text 47. Thévenon (2013), p. 26. Return to text 48. In testimony before the Joint Economic Committee and the House Subcommittee on the Federal Workforce, Postal Service, and the District of Columbia, a breakdown of claims on New Jersey's short-term disability program in 2000 showed that pregnancy and childbirth constituted just 15 percent of all claims (Lovell, 2008). Return to text 49. Aguirre and others (2012). Return to text 50. Yousafzai (2013), paragraph 22. Return to text i. Note: On May 5, 2017, a typo was corrected to change 83 to 93 in the following sentence on page 8: "By the early 1990s, the labor force participation rate of prime working-age women--those between the ages of 25 and 54--reached just over 74 percent, compared with roughly 83 percent for prime working-age men." Return to text Last Update: May 05, 2017 Back to Top
