Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At the HOPE Global Forums Annual Meeting, Atlanta, Georgia Share Good evening. Thank you to John Bryant and Operation HOPE for inviting me today to open the HOPE Global Forums. 1 I commend our hosts for bringing together such an impressive group of speakers and attendees, diverse in their perspectives, yet all of whom share the vital goal of advancing economic opportunity and inclusion. It is fitting that this event is being held on the 50th anniversary of several notable events, including the publication of Dr. Martin Luther King's last book, Where Do We Go from Here: Chaos or Community , which urged unity in order to create equal opportunity, and the enactment of the Fair Housing Act of 1968, which enshrined our nation's commitment to equal access to housing. These milestones remind us of the progress we have made to date as well as the challenges that remain, and inspire us to persist in our efforts. The conference has a robust agenda ahead. Over the next few days, you will be discussing many issues relating to financial inclusion--such as housing, small businesses, workforce participation, and other topics--to which we at the Federal Reserve share a commitment, and that we view as critical to our mission. Our economy is stronger when everyone has a chance to contribute fully and share in our national prosperity. And I personally believe that financial inclusion helps us realize a founding notion of our country--that this is a place where opportunity, innovation, and productivity are encouraged and rewarded. I'm particularly pleased to see on the conference agenda a number of sessions on issues to which we, at the Federal Reserve, devote considerable attention: access to credit and financial inclusion for consumers and small businesses. Conversations like these are enormously important to understanding the challenges Americans face and why a multitude of voices and approaches are needed to address them. In my remarks today, I'd like to focus on the consumer protection and credit accessibility aspects of financial inclusion, and some of the ways that the Federal Reserve promotes a fair and transparent consumer financial services marketplace. In recent speeches, I have emphasized my view that we should aim for an effective safety and soundness regulatory approach that is as efficient, transparent, and simple as feasible. 2 I consider these principles to apply equally to our consumer protection supervision program; that is, we should also strive to promote consumer protection with as much efficiency, transparency, and simplicity as possible. I believe that a commitment to these principles is not only compatible with financial inclusion, but in fact helps promote it. Regulatory burden can make it harder for institutions to serve their customers and communities. This is especially the case for community banks and minority depository institutions (or MDIs), which play an important role in serving the needs of their local communities, including historically underserved populations. I'd also like to share some thoughts on an area to which I have devoted a good portion of my career: the importance of small business access to credit, which is a critical part of financial inclusion and a catalyst for economic growth in local communities. Financial Inclusion Let me start with the foundation of why financial inclusion is important. In broad terms, financial inclusion means access to affordable financial products and services that meet the needs of individuals and businesses and that are delivered in a responsible and sustainable way. 3 At the Federal Reserve, we recognize the influence that financial inclusion has on the broader economic performance of our country. 4 Inclusion is essential to advancing the Federal Reserve's goal of promoting maximum employment, as well as supporting the stability of the financial system. Likewise, we support and share your goal of ensuring a fair and transparent marketplace for financial products and services--including credit--that can provide a pathway toward economic prosperity for all Americans. Overall, our economy is performing well, and unemployment is low. However, many households and communities continue to face financial challenges. 5 Consider that more than two-thirds of white households own their homes as compared to less than half of African Americans and Hispanics. 6 And consider that all important human asset: education. One-third of white adults have at least a bachelor's degree as compared to one in four African Americans and 17 percent of Hispanics. 7 This matters because the advantages of a college degree for accumulating income and wealth are lifelong and inter-generational. 8 We likewise see evidence of financial disparities in the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking and Survey of Consumer Finances. 9 When individuals have unequal or insufficient access to financial products and services, such as credit, they may be deprived of a chance to fund an education, finance a business, or pursue homeownership--opportunities that can provide greater financial security for themselves and their families and future generations. And as a nation, we are deprived of the benefits of their potential contributions to the economy. Consumer Protection In the context of my earlier discussion of financial inclusion, federal consumer protection laws are critical to ensuring consumers are treated fairly when offered financial products and services. Discrimination and deception have no place in a fair and transparent marketplace. These practices can close off opportunities and limit consumers' ability to improve their economic circumstances, including through access to homeownership and education. The Federal Reserve's consumer compliance supervisory program reflects our commitment to promoting financial inclusion and ensuring that the financial institutions under our jurisdiction fully comply with applicable federal consumer protection laws and regulations. Let me give two examples involving the Federal Trade Commission Act's prohibition against unfair or deceptive practices in products and services that will undoubtedly be familiar to the audience--student financial aid and mortgage lending. In the last few years, the Federal Reserve has addressed deceptive practices in these areas through public enforcement actions that have collectively benefited hundreds of thousands of consumers and provided millions of dollars in restitution. In the financial aid context, our actions required restitution for students who were not given full information about the potential fees and limitations associated with opening deposit accounts for their financial aid refunds. 10 And in mortgage lending, our action required restitution by a bank that had given borrowers the option to pay an additional amount to purchase discount points to lower their mortgage interest rate, but that did not actually provide the reduced rate to many of those borrowers. 11 As we mark the 50th anniversary of the Fair Housing Act, the fair lending laws remain critical in fostering vibrant communities and a fair and transparent consumer financial services marketplace. For all state member banks, we enforce the Fair Housing Act, and for banks of $10 billion dollars or less in assets, we also enforce the Equal Credit Opportunity Act. Our examiners evaluate fair lending risk at every consumer compliance exam. While we find that the vast majority of our institutions comply with the fair lending laws, we are committed to identifying and remedying violations when they occur. Pursuant to the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, if we determine that a bank has engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination, we refer the matter to the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ). Federal Reserve referrals have resulted in DOJ public actions in critical areas, such as redlining and mortgage-pricing discrimination. For example, in our redlining referrals, the Federal Reserve found that the banks treated majority-minority areas less favorably than non-minority ones, such as through lending patterns, marketing, and Community Reinvestment Act assessment-area delineations. For our mortgage-pricing discrimination referrals, the Federal Reserve found that the banks charged higher prices to African American or Hispanic borrowers than it charged to non-Hispanic white borrowers and that the higher prices could not be explained by legitimate pricing criteria. 12 Efficiency, Simplicity, and Transparency of Consumer Compliance Supervision Consumers deserve to be treated fairly, regardless of the size of the banking institution. Yet, we can achieve this goal and still reduce regulatory burden through a balanced program of tailored and risk-focused supervision. Accordingly, we continue to seek opportunities to promote efficient, simple, and transparent supervision where possible, so that the institutions we supervise can focus on finding solutions that work for all consumers and communities. In an effort to promote consumer compliance, our community bank supervisory program focuses our examinations on the areas of highest consumer risk. This has improved the efficiency and effectiveness of our examinations and reduced regulatory burden for many community banks. Banks and consumers benefit when supervision is timely and effective. Put simply, our role as supervisors should not be to play "gotcha" with our banks, but to support their compliance efforts. The Interagency Consumer Compliance Ratings System, published in November 2016, is an example of this approach. 13 This guidance provides incentives for institutions to focus on managing their consumer compliance risks, preventing consumer harm, and helping to create a culture that identifies and corrects problems. Another example of how we support our institutions is how we work with MDIs, which as I noted earlier, play an important role in serving the needs of their local communities. We have dedicated Reserve Bank staff who are in frequent contact with MDI leadership. Based on what we've learned in the course of this outreach, we have expanded our Partnership for Progress--a program for outreach and technical assistance to MDIs 14 --to include staff from our Community Development function, and we have enhanced our MDI-related programing. Our commitment to transparency also includes a robust outreach program for banks. This includes Consumer Compliance Outlook , a widely subscribed Federal Reserve System publication focused on consumer compliance issues, and its companion webinar series, Outlook Live . 15 For example, in 2017, we sponsored an interagency webinar on fair lending supervision with almost 6,000 registrants, a substantial share of which were community banks. 16 Small Business Access to Credit At the Federal Reserve, we view small business credit from several perspectives. For the economy, small businesses need adequate and affordable credit in order to form, grow, and succeed; otherwise they may underperform, slowing growth and employment. For many small business owners, personal and business finances are intertwined. A well-functioning housing finance market is vital for small business owners who may draw upon the equity in their homes to fund their businesses. Student loans may be needed to help fund the education that is important for both small business owners and their employees to boost profits and productivity. And, short-term credit matters for day-to-day management of cash flow, while longer-term credit is essential for capital investments. So, entrepreneurs--just like consumers--need access to a variety of credit sources. Recently, I had the pleasure of meeting a group of small businesses from across the country. By "small," I mean some of these companies have just a handful of employees. The group included owners of a catering company from Dallas, a mechanical engineering company from Philadelphia, a marketing consulting firm from Cleveland, a combination bar and bakery from Brooklyn, and a gluten-free bakery from my hometown, Salt Lake City. They shared with me the joys of running their own businesses, of creating jobs, and of providing for their families as well as creating opportunities for their employees. They also spoke of their challenges, which I'm sure are familiar to many of you in this room. For one, the owners wear many hats, including CEO, chief operating officer, chief finance officer, head of sales and marketing, and some--quite literally--chief bottle washer. They also spoke of the day-to-day difficulties of finding, training, and retaining employees. And, they raised the challenges they often face in gaining access to working capital, the lifeblood to sustaining and growing their businesses. The anecdotes I heard touched on three related trends we have been observing in the small business credit environment. First, although lending standards have eased since the recession and the financial condition of businesses has improved, some small business credit needs, especially for the smallest of firms and minority small business owners, continue to go unmet. According to a 2016 Small Business Credit Survey conducted by our 12 Federal Reserve Banks, some small businesses still face persistent credit gaps, even though they often seek credit in small amounts. Of the firms that apply for credit, more than two-thirds apply for less than $100,000, with substantial numbers of these applying for less than $25,000. 17 However, smaller firms often struggle to qualify for bank credit, and among firms that were denied, low credit scores and insufficient credit history were the most frequently cited reasons. In addition, our survey suggests that some low-credit-risk minority- and women-owned firms are less likely than low-risk white-owned and male-owned firms to receive financing; and if they are approved, it is for less than the amount sought. 18 Second, there have been shifts in the composition of commercial bank lending to small businesses. Large banks' share of small business lending has grown, especially among the smallest loans. This represents a change from 20 years ago when small businesses relied more on a relationship with local community banks for access to credit. For loans under $100,000, small banks of less than $1 billion in assets now hold a 19 percent share, down from 60 percent two decades ago. Today, it is the largest banks--those with greater than $50 billion in assets--that account for more than 60 percent. Some of this trend may be due to industry consolidation, which has reduced the number of very small banks. The composition of credit offered also is shifting. Loans entail high fixed costs that are roughly the same regardless of whether a loan is for $100,000 or $1 million, reducing the profitability of smaller-dollar loans. 19 Our data suggest that the growing share of small business lending at larger banks may be partly due to their use of automated underwriting for credit cards. 20 By providing credit cards, banks are expanding credit available to small businesses; however, some small business advocates note that this form of credit is generally more expensive and lacks the flexibility of other products. 21 For example, personal or business credit cards may be suitable for purchasing supplies, but not for payroll. In addition, this automated approach may be more "cookie cutter," meaning that firms that don't meet standard lending criteria may not qualify. 22 These developments have created a space for the third trend we have been observing--the emergence of nonbank online alternative lenders that provide small-dollar business credit. For example, some of the large technology firms are providing credit, at a rapidly growing pace, to their built-in customer base of merchants. Several of the businesses I met with mentioned they had turned to nonbank online lenders after being turned down by banks. Some online lenders obtain access to a prospective borrower's accounting software, merchant accounts, shipping, and payroll data in real time in order to underwrite businesses. Business owners can receive funds in a couple of days or even hours. This emergence of online lenders is part of a broader evolution of financial technology--or "fintech"--as seen in a wide range of products and services for both consumers and small businesses. I'm not surprised to see this important topic on your conference agenda. The use of fintech to expand access to credit has great promise and also associated risks. For example, online origination platforms and more sophisticated algorithms may enable credit to be underwritten and delivered in a manner that is still prudent but with greater efficiency, convenience, and lower processing costs. And as regulators, we do not want to unnecessarily restrict innovations that can benefit consumers and small businesses. At the same time, our interest is in ensuring that banks understand and manage their risks when introducing new technologies or partnering with fintech companies, and that consumers and small businesses remain protected. 23 This is why the Federal Reserve has been engaged in a broad and multidisciplinary effort to develop a robust understanding of the technologies and activities in this space, in order to study fintech's opportunities and risks, and assess policy and supervisory implications. 24 Fintech is also one of the factors driving calls for regulators to modernize the Community Reinvestment Act, or CRA, as technology changes how financial products and services are accessed. As I'm sure most of you know, the CRA is an important law that recognizes banks' affirmative obligation to meet the credit needs of the communities they serve, including low- and moderate-income communities. The CRA promotes financial inclusion by encouraging banks to extend mortgages, small business loans, and other types of credit as well as to provide investments and other services in communities where they take deposits, consistent with safe and sound banking operations. The arrival of new financial technologies, along with significant industry consolidation and other structural changes, has changed the way that financial services are delivered to consumers and the ways in which banks lend in communities. We continue to study these shifts, and share the common goal of improving the current supervisory and regulatory framework for CRA to further the statute's core objective of promoting access to credit and financial inclusion. Conclusion Finally, I'll note that we will continue to learn about issues concerning financial inclusion through our research, such as by collecting new data in our Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking and Survey of Consumer Finances that I mentioned earlier. The information we gather helps us better understand factors affecting consumers and households, including low- and moderate-income and historically underserved populations. We also continue to convene experts and practitioners from industry, academia, and community-based organizations to help provide context on what we are seeing in the data, to identify emerging issues, and to consider where there may be data gaps and opportunities for additional research. In addition to yielding important insights that inform our policymaking, we hope these efforts can support the conversations you are having at conferences like this one. Thank you, again, for inviting me to speak at your conference as we mark the notable anniversaries that this year brings. Together, our work clearly has a great deal of synergy, and I thank you for your efforts. Making the economy work for the benefit of all Americans, including lower-income communities, is of the utmost importance. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See, e.g. Randal K. Quarles, " Early Observations on Improving the Effectiveness of Post-Crisis Regulation " (speech at the American Bar Association Banking Law Committee Annual Meeting, Washington, DC, January 19, 2018). Return to text 3. " Financial Inclusion ," World Bank, last modified April 5, 2017. Return to text 4. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, " Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter to America's Economic Strength " (speech at the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, May 22, 2017); Janet L. Yellen, " Perspectives on Inequality and Opportunity from the Survey of Consumer Finances " (speech at the Conference on Economic Opportunity and Inequality, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA, October 17, 2014); Ben S. Bernanke, " The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being " (speech before the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, NE, February 6, 2007). Return to text 5. The Board's Monetary Policy Report (PDF) has included a discussion of the economic experiences of major demographic groups. See, e.g., "Have the Gains of the Economic Expansion Been Widely Shared?" in Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, June 21, 2016), p. 6. Return to text 6. According to the U.S. Census Bureau's "Quarterly Residential Vacancies and Homeownership" statistics for the fourth quarter of 2017, the homeownership rates by race were 72.7 percent for non-Hispanic white households; 42.1 percent and 46.6 percent for black and Hispanic households, respectively; and 58.2 percent for Asian, Native Hawaiian, and Pacific Islanders. See www.census.gov/housing/hvs/files/currenthvspress.pdf . Return to text 7. U.S. Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2017 Annual Social and Economic Supplement, " Educational Attainment in the United States: 2017 ," December 14, 2017. Return to text 8. William R. Emmons, Ana H. Kent, and Lowell R. Ricketts, The Demographics of Wealth: How Education, Race and Birth Year Shape Financial Outcome (PDF) , Essay No. 1 (St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, February 2018). Return to text 9. For example, data from our Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) show that in 2016, only about half of white households had three months of emergency savings, but this was the case for less than two-fifths of black and Hispanic households. The 2016 SHED is at www.federalreserve.gov/consumerscommunities/shed.htm . See also the Survey of Consumer Finances at www.federalreserve.gov/econres/scfindex.htm . Return to text 10. In the Matter of Cole Taylor Bank , Docket Nos. 14-021-E-SMB, 14-021-CMP-SMB (July 1, 2014); In the Matter of Higher One, Inc. , Docket Nos. 15-026-E-I, 15-026-CMP-I (December 23, 2015); In the Matter of Customers Bank , Docket Nos. 15-027-B-SM, 15-027-CMP-SM (December 6, 2016). Return to text 11. In the Matter of Peoples Bank , Docket No. 17-041-B-SM (November 28, 2017). Return to text 12. See, e.g., DOJ settlements with Midwest BankCentre ; SunTrust Mortgage Inc. ; and Countrywide Financial Corporation . More information about recent referrals to the DOJ can be found in the Federal Reserve's annual report at www.federalreserve.gov/publications/2016-ar-consumer-and-community-affairs.htm#14890 . Return to text 13. See www.ffiec.gov/press/PDF/FFIEC_CCR_SystemFR_Notice.pdf . Return to text 14. See the partnership's website at www.fedpartnership.gov . Return to text 15. See https://consumercomplianceoutlook.org/ and https://consumercomplianceoutlook.org/outlook-live/ . Return to text 16. Federal Reserve System , " 2017 Interagency Fair Lending Hot Topics ," Outlook Live webinar series, November 16, 2017. Return to text 17. While there are many working definitions of "small," figures from the Small Business Credit Survey (SBCS) use firms with less than 500 employees as a proxy for small businesses. Some 28 percent are seeking credit in amounts less than $25,000 and 42 percent reported seeking between $25,000 and $100,000. The SBCS is available at www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/smallbusiness/2016/SBCS-Report-EmployerFirms-2016.pdf . Return to text 18. According to special analyses of the Joint Federal Reserve Banks' Small Business Credit Survey, among low- credit-risk firms, 60 percent of minority firms that were approved received only partial funding, whereas 68 percent of low-risk, non-minority firms were approved for the full amount of financing requested. Women-owned firms also reported a funding gap. Among low-credit-risk firms, 48 percent of women-owned firms received all of the financing requested, compared to 57 percent of men-owned firms. Reports are available at www.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/small-business-credit-survey-employer-firms-2016 . Return to text 19. BAI Banking Strategies, " Making Small Loans Profitably ," July 7, 2015. Return to text 20. Based on Federal Reserve analysis of FR-Y14 data for scored loans and cards (i.e., underwritten by owner's personal credit) for 2007 to 2016. Return to text 21. Record of Meeting (PDF) , Community Advisory Council and the Board of Governors, May 26, 2017, p. 2. Return to text 22. See Rebel A. Cole, Lawrence G. Goldberg, and Lawrence J. White, "Cookie Cutter vs. Character: The Micro Structure of Small Business Lending by Large and Small Banks," Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 39, no. 2 (June 2004): 227–51. Also see Karen Gordon Mills and Brayden McCarthy, " The State of Small Business Lending: Innovation and Technology and the Implications for Regulation ," Working Paper No. 17-042, (Harvard Business School, December 1, 2016), p. 36. Return to text 23. See, e.g., Carol A. Evans, " Keeping Fintech Fair: Thinking about Fair Lending and UDAP Risks ," Consumer Compliance Outlook (Second Issue 2017). Return to text 24. See Lael Brainard, " The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech " (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC, December 2, 2016). Return to text Last Update: March 26, 2018 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Currencies, Capital, and Central Bank Balances: A Policy Conference," a Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, California Share Revised Version: August 3, 2018 Vice Chairman for Supervision Quarles updated his remarks to reflect their publication in Currencies, Capital, and Central Bank Balances . Hoover Institution Press (Forthcoming). The original version of the remarks is available here . Thank you very much to the Hoover Institution for hosting this important conference and to John Taylor and John Cochrane for inviting me to participate. 1 In my capacity as both the Vice Chairman for Supervision at the Board of Governors and a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), part of my job is to consider the intersection of financial regulatory and monetary policy issues, the subject of my discussion today. This topic is both complex and dynamic, especially as both regulation and the implementation of monetary policy continue to evolve. One important issue for us at the Fed, and the one that I will spend some time reflecting on today, is how post-crisis financial regulation, through its incentives for bank behavior, may influence the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet in the long run. Obviously, the whole excessively kaleidoscopic body of financial regulation is admittedly difficult to address in the time we have today, so I will focus on a particular component -- the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR--and its link to banks' demand for U.S. central bank reserve balances. Besides illuminating this particular issue, I hope my discussion will help illustrate the complexities associated with the interconnection of regulatory and monetary policy issues in general. Also, let me emphasize at the outset that I will be touching on some issues that the Board and the FOMC are in the process of observing and evaluating and, in some cases, on which we may be far from reaching any final decisions. As such, my thoughts on these issues are my own and are likely to evolve, benefiting from further discussion and our continued monitoring of bank behavior and financial markets over time. Monetary Policy and the Efficiency of the Financial System Before I delve into the more specific complicated subject of how one type of bank regulation affects the Fed's balance sheet, let me say a few words about financial regulation more generally. As I have said previously, I view promoting the safety, soundness, and efficiency of the financial system as one of the most important roles of the Board. Improving efficiency of the financial system is not an isolated goal. The task is to enhance efficiency while maintaining the system's resiliency. Take, for example, the Board's two most recent and material proposals, the stress capital buffer and the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio (eSLR). The proposal to modify the eSLR, in particular, initially raised questions in the minds of some as to whether it would reduce the ability of the banking system to weather shocks. A closer look at the proposal shows that the opposite is true. The proposed change simply restores the original intent of leverage requirements as a backstop measure to risk-based capital requirements. As we have seen, a leverage requirement that is too high favors high-risk activities and disincentivizes low-risk activities. We had initially calibrated the leverage ratio at a level that caused it to be the binding constraint for a number of our largest banks. As a result, those banks had an incentive to add risk rather than reduce risk in their portfolios because the capital cost of each additional asset was the same whether it was risky or safe, and the riskier assets would produce the higher return. The proposed recalibration eliminates this incentive by returning this leverage ratio to a level that is a backstop rather than the driver of decisions at the margin. Yet, because of the complex way our capital regulations work together--with risk-based constraints and stress tests regulating capital at both the operating and holding company levels--this improvement in incentives is obtained with virtually no change in the overall capital requirements of the affected firms. Federal Reserve staff estimate the proposal would potentially reduce capital requirements across the eight large banks subject to the proposal by $400 million, or 0.04 percent of the $955 billion in capital these banks held as of September 2017. 2 So this recalibration is a win-win: a material realignment of incentives to reduce a regulatory encouragement to take on risk at a time when we want to encourage prudent behavior without any material capital reduction or cost to the system's resiliency. Taken together, I believe these new rules will maintain the resiliency of the financial system and make our regulation simpler and more risk sensitive. Liquidity Regulations Let me now back up to the time just before the financial crisis and briefly describe the genesis of liquidity regulations for banks. Banking organizations play a vital role in the economy in serving the financial needs of U.S. households and businesses. They perform this function in part through the mechanism of maturity transformation--that is, taking in short-term deposits, thereby making a form of short-term, liquid investments available to households and businesses, while providing longer-term credit to these same entities. This role, however, makes banking firms vulnerable to the potential for rapid, broad-based outflows of their funding (a so-called run), and these institutions must therefore balance the extent of their profitable maturity transformation against the associated liquidity risks. 3 Leading up to the 2007-09 financial crisis, some large firms were overly reliant on certain types of short-term funding and overly confident in their ability to replenish their funding when it came due. Thus, during the crisis, some large banks did not have sufficient liquidity, and liquidity risk management at a broader set of institutions proved inadequate at anticipating and compensating for potential outflows, especially when those outflows occurred rapidly. 4 In the wake of the crisis, central banks and regulators around the world implemented a combination of regulatory reforms and stronger supervision to promote increased resilience in the financial sector. With regard to liquidity, the prudential regulations and supervisory programs of the U.S. banking agencies have resulted in significant increases in the liquidity positions and changes in the risk management of our largest institutions. And, working closely with other jurisdictions, we have also implemented global liquidity standards for the first time. These standards seek to limit the effect of short-term outflows and extended overall funding mismatches, thus improving banks' liquidity resilience. One particular liquidity requirement for large banking organizations is the Liquidity Coverage Ratio, or LCR, which the U.S. federal banking agencies adopted in 2014. 5 The LCR rule requires covered firms to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets (HQLA)‑‑in terms of both quantity and quality‑‑to cover potential outflows over a 30-day period of liquidity stress. The LCR rule allows firms to meet this requirement with a range of cash and securities and does not apply a haircut to reserve balances or Treasury securities based on the estimated liquidity value of those instruments in times of stress. Further, firms are required to demonstrate that they can monetize HQLA in a stress event without adversely affecting the firm's reputation or franchise. The rules have resulted in some changes in the behavior of large banks and in market dynamics. Large banks have adjusted their funding profiles by shifting to more stable funding sources. Indeed, taken together, the covered banks have reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale funding from about 50 percent of total assets in the years before the financial crisis to about 30 percent in recent years, and they have also reduced their reliance on contingent funding sources. Meanwhile, covered banks have also adjusted their asset profiles, materially increasing their holdings of cash and other highly liquid assets. In fact, these banks' holdings of HQLA have increased significantly, from fairly low levels at some firms in the lead-up to the crisis to an average of about 15 to 20 percent of total assets today. 6 A sizable portion of these assets currently consists of U.S. central bank reserve balances, in part because reserve balances, unlike other types of highly liquid assets, do not need to be monetized, but also, importantly, because of the conduct of the Fed's monetary policy, a topic to which I will next turn. How Does the LCR Interact with the Size of the Fed's Balance Sheet? With this backdrop, a relevant question for monetary policymakers is, what quantity of central bank reserve balances will banks likely want to hold, and, hence, how might the LCR affect banks' reserve demand and thereby the longer-run size of the Fed's balance sheet? Let me emphasize that policymakers have long been aware of the potential influence that regulations may have on reserve demand and thus the longer-run size of the Fed's balance sheet. And, of course, regulatory influences on banks' behavior, my focus today, is just one of many factors that could affect policymakers' decisions regarding the appropriate long-run size of the Fed's balance sheet. 7 In particular, in augmenting its Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, the FOMC stated in June 2017 that it "currently anticipates reducing the quantity of reserve balances, over time, to a level appreciably below that seen in recent years but larger than before the financial crisis" and went on to note that "the level will reflect the banking system's demand for reserve balances and the Committee's decisions about how to implement monetary policy most efficiently and effectively in the future." 8 With that said, it is useful to begin by examining banks' current reserve holdings. Figure 1 plots the aggregate level of reserve balances in the U.S. banking system, starting well before the financial crisis. As you can see, the current level of reserves‑‑at around $2 trillion‑‑is many orders of magnitude higher than the level that prevailed before the financial crisis, a result of the Fed's large-scale asset purchase programs or "quantitative easing." The vertical lines in the figure show key dates in the implementation of the LCR, including the initial Basel III international introduction of the regulation followed by its two-step introduction in the United States. A key takeaway from this figure is that the Fed was in the process of adding substantial quantities of reserve balances to the banking system while the LCR was being implemented‑‑and these two changes largely happened simultaneously. As a result, banks, in aggregate, are currently using reserve balances to meet a significant portion of their LCR requirements. In addition, because these changes happened together, it is reasonable to conclude that the current environment is likely not very informative about banks' underlying demand for reserve balances. But now the situation is changing, albeit very slowly. Last October, the Fed began to gradually and predictably reduce the size of its balance sheet. 9 The Fed is doing so by reinvesting the principal payments it receives on its securities holdings only to the extent that they exceed gradually increasing caps‑‑that is, the Fed is allowing securities to roll off its portfolio each month up to a specific maximum amount. This policy is also reducing reserve balances. So far, after the first seven months of the program, the Fed has shed about $120 billion of its securities holdings, which is a fairly modest amount when compared with the remaining size of its balance sheet. Consequently, the level of reserves in the banking system is still quite abundant. So, how many more reserve balances can be drained, and how small will the Fed's balance sheet get? Let me emphasize that this question is highly speculative‑‑we have not decided ex ante the desired long-run size of the Fed's balance sheet, nor, as I noted earlier, do we have a definitive handle on banks' long-run demand for reserve balances. Indeed, the FOMC has said that it "expects to learn more about the underlying demand for reserves during the process of balance sheet normalization." 10 Nonetheless, let me spend a little time reflecting on this challenging question. How banks respond to the Fed's reduction in reserve balances could, in theory, take a few different forms. One could envision that as the Fed reduces its securities holdings, a large share of which consists of Treasury securities, banks would easily replace any reduction in reserve balances with Treasury holdings, thereby keeping their LCRs roughly unchanged. According to this line of thought, because central bank reserve balances and Treasury securities are treated identically by the LCR, banks should be largely indifferent to holding either asset to meet the regulation. In that case, the reduction in reserves and corresponding increase in Treasury holdings might occur with relatively little adjustment in their relative rates of return. Alternatively, one could argue that banks may have particular preferences about the composition of their liquid assets. And since banks are profit-maximizing entities, they will likely compare rates of return across various HQLA-eligible assets in determining how many reserves to hold. If relative asset returns are a key driver of reserve demand, then interest rates across various types of HQLA will adjust on an ongoing basis until banks are satisfied holding the aggregate quantity of reserves that is available. Recent research by the Board staff shows that banks currently display a significant degree of heterogeneity in their approaches to meeting their LCR requirements, including in their chosen volumes of reserve balances. 11 Figure 2 shows a subset of this research to illustrate this point. The top and bottom panels represent estimates of how two large banks have been meeting their HQLA requirements over time. In each panel, the blue portions of the bars denote the share of HQLA met by reserve balances, while the red, yellow, and brown slices of the bars represent the share met by Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities, and other HQLA-eligible assets, respectively. Despite holding roughly similarly amounts of HQLA, the two banks exhibit very different HQLA compositions, with the bank depicted in the top panel consistently holding a much larger share of HQLA in the form of reserve balances than the bank shown in the bottom panel. This finding suggests that there likely is no single "representative bank" behavioral model that can capture all we might want to know about banks' demand for central bank reserve balances. Some of the differences we see in bank behavior likely relate to banks' individual liquidity needs and preferences. Indeed, banks manage their balance sheets in part by taking into account their internal liquidity targets, which are determined by the interaction between the specific needs of their various business lines and bank management's preferences. In any case, this picture illustrates the complexities that are inherent in understanding banks' underlying demand for reserve balances, a topic for which more research would be quite valuable to policymakers. So, what does this finding say about the longer-run level of reserve balances demanded by banks? The answer is that there is a large degree of uncertainty. In fact, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York surveyed primary dealers and market participants last December to solicit their views about the level of reserves they expect to prevail in 2025. 12 A few features of the survey responses stand out. All respondents thought that the longer-run level of reserve balances would be substantially lower than the current level of more than $2 trillion. In addition, there appeared to be a widely held view that the longer-run level of reserves will be significantly above the level that prevailed before the financial crisis. But even so, the respondents did not agree about what that longer-run level will be, with about half expecting a level ranging between $400 billion and $750 billion. It is also important to point out that the Fed's balance sheet will remain larger than it was before the crisis even after abstracting from the issue of banks' longer-run demand for reserve balances. The reason is that the ultimate size of the Fed's balance sheet also depends on developments across a broader set of Fed liabilities. One such liability is the outstanding amount of Federal Reserve notes in circulation‑‑that is, paper money‑‑which has doubled over the past decade to a volume of more than $1.6 trillion, growing at a rate that generally reflects the pace of expansion of economic activity in nominal terms. When I left my position in the Bush Treasury in 2006, by contrast, the total amount of paper currency outstanding was not quite $800 billion. Other nonreserve liabilities have also grown since the crisis, including the Treasury Department's account at the Fed, known as the Treasury's General Account. Recent growth in such items means that the longer-run size of the Fed's balance sheet will be noticeably larger than before the crisis regardless of the volume of reserve balances that might ultimately prevail. Putting the various pieces together, figure 3 illustrates how the overall size of the Fed's balance sheet may evolve. Given the uncertainties I have described, I have chosen to show three different scenarios, drawn from the most recent annual report released by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which was published last month. 13 These scenarios highlight the degree to which the longer-run size of the Fed's domestic securities portfolio‑‑also known as the System Open Market Account, or SOMA, which accounts for the vast majority of the Fed's assets‑‑will be affected by choices about the future level of reserve balances and the evolution of nonreserve liabilities. The assumptions underlying the scenarios are based on the distribution of responses from the surveys I described earlier, as those surveys also asked respondents to forecast the likely longer-run levels of several liabilities on the Fed's balance sheet other than reserves. The "median" scenario, represented by the red (middle) line in the figure, is based on the 50 th percentile of survey responses, while the "larger" and the "smaller" scenarios, denoted by the gold dashed (top) and blue dotted (bottom) lines, are based on the 75th and 25th percentiles, respectively. The figure illustrates that the Fed's securities holdings are projected to decline about $400 billion this year and another $460 billion next year as Treasury and agency securities continue to roll off gradually from the Fed's portfolio. The kink in each curve captures what the FOMC has referred to as the point of "normalization" of the size of the Fed's balance sheet‑‑that is, the point at which the balance sheet will begin to expand again to support the underlying growth in liabilities items such as Federal Reserve notes in circulation. All else being equal, greater longer-run demand for currency, reserve balances, or other liabilities implies an earlier timing of balance sheet normalization and a higher longer-run size of the balance sheet, as illustrated by the top line. And the converse--smaller demand for these liabilities and a later timing of normalization, illustrated by the bottom line--is also possible. In the three scenarios shown, the size of the Fed's securities portfolio normalizes sometime between 2020 and 2022. That is quite a range of time, so as the balance sheet normalization program continues, the Fed will be closely monitoring developments for clues about banks' underlying demand for reserves. What will the Fed be monitoring as reserves are drained and the balance sheet shrinks? I would first like to emphasize that the Fed regularly monitors financial markets for a number of reasons, so I do not mean to imply that we will be doing anything that is very much different for our normal practice. As reserves continue to be drained, we will want to gauge how banks are managing their balance sheets in continuing to meet their LCRs, watching in particular how the distribution of reserve balances across the banking system evolves as well as monitoring any large-scale changes in banks' holdings of other HQLA-eligible assets, including Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities. And on the liabilities side of banks' books, we will be keeping our eye on both the volume and the composition of deposits, as there are reasons why banks may take steps, over time, to hold onto certain types of deposits more than others. In particular, retail deposits may be especially desired by banks going forward because they receive the most favorable treatment under the LCR and also tend to be relatively low cost. Retail deposits have grown quite a bit since the crisis, especially in light of the prolonged period of broad-based low interest rates and accommodative monetary policy, limiting the need for banks to compete for this most stable form of deposits. However, the combination of rising interest rates and the Fed's shrinking balance sheet, together with banks' ongoing need to meet the LCR, may alter these competitive dynamics. Of course, importantly, deposits will not necessarily decline one-for-one with reserve balances as the Fed's balance sheet shrinks. The overall effects of the decline in the Fed's balance sheet will depend both on who ultimately ends up holding the securities in place of the Fed and on the full range of portfolio adjustments that other economic agents ultimately make as a result. 14 We will also be monitoring movements in interest rates. In part, we will be tracking how the yields and spreads on the various assets that banks use to meet their LCR requirements evolve. For example, to the extent that some banks will wish to keep meeting a significant portion of their LCR requirements with reserves, the reduction in the Fed's balance sheet and the associated drop in aggregate reserves could eventually result in some upward pressure on the effective federal funds rate and on yields of Treasury securities. This situation could occur if some banks eventually find that they are holding fewer reserves than desired at a given constellation of interest rates and, in response, begin to bid for more federal funds while selling Treasury securities or other assets. Interest rates will adjust up until banks are indifferent with regard to holding the relatively smaller volume of reserves available in the banking system. Overall, we will be monitoring to make sure that the level of reserves the Fed supplies to the banking sector, which influences the composition of assets and liabilities on banks' balance sheets as well as market interest rates, provides the desired stance of monetary policy to achieve our dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices. Of course, we will need to be very careful to understand the precise factors that underlie any significant movements in these areas, because factors that are unrelated to the Fed's balance sheet policies might also cause such adjustments. Conclusion To conclude, I would like to reemphasize that I have touched on some highly uncertain issues today--issues that, I would like to stress again, have not been decided by the FOMC. One such issue that closely relates to my remarks today, and one I believe the upcoming panel will likely address, is which policy implementation framework the Fed should use in the long run. That is, broadly speaking, should the Fed continue to use an operational framework that is characterized by having relatively abundant reserves and operate in what is termed a "floor regime," or should it use one in which the supply of reserves is managed so that it is much closer to banks' underlying demand for reserves as in a "corridor regime"? Of course, a host of complex issues underlie this decision, so I would just like to emphasize two general points. First, a wide range of quantities of reserve balances--and thus overall sizes of the Fed's balance sheet--could be consistent with either type of framework. Second, while U.S. liquidity regulations likely influence banks' demand for reserves, the Fed is not constrained by such regulations in deciding its operational framework, because U.S. banks will be readily able to meet their regulatory liquidity requirements using the range of available high-quality liquid assets, of which reserve balances is one type. Importantly, additional experience with the Federal Reserve's policy of gradually reducing its balance sheet will help inform policymakers' future deliberations regarding issues related to the long-run size of the Fed's balance sheet, issues that will not need to be decided for some time. The final and most general point is simply to underscore the premise with which I began these remarks: Financial regulation and monetary policy are, in important respects, connected. Thus, it will always be important for the Federal Reserve to maintain its integral role in the regulation of the financial system not only for the visibility this provides into the economy, but precisely in order to calibrate the sorts of relationships we have been talking about today. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Required capital at the bank subsidiaries of these firms would be reduced by larger amounts--and would only allow the firm to move that capital to different subsidiaries within the firm--but, more importantly, the overall capital regime prevents this capital from being distributed out of the banking organization as a whole except in this de minimis amount. Thus, the overall organization retains the same capital levels without the structure of capital regulation creating an incentive to add risk to the system. Return to text 3. While deposit insurance helps mitigate the incentive for many depositors to run, it cannot fully eliminate this risk. For a discussion of this vulnerability, see Douglas W. Diamond and Philip H. Dybvig (1983), "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91 (June), pp. 401-19. Return to text 4. See Senior Supervisors Group (2009), Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of 2008 (PDF) (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October). Return to text 5. For a full description of the U.S. LCR, including which banks are covered, see Regulation WW--Liquidity Risk Management Standards , 12 C.F.R. pt. 249 (2017). Return to text 6. See Jane Ihrig, Edward Kim, Ashish Kumbhat, Cindy M. Vojtech, and Gretchen C. Weinbach (2017), " How Have Banks Been Managing the Composition of High-Quality Liquid Assets? (PDF) " Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-092 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August; revised February 2018). Return to text 7. For example, a separate factor that is relevant for policymakers in this regard is the FOMC's choice of long-run framework for monetary policy implementation. For policymakers' discussions of this factor, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 26-27, 2016 ," press release, August 17; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, November 1-2, 2016 ," press release, November 23, Return to text 8. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), " FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans ," press release, June 14, paragraph 6. Return to text 9. The FOMC announced this change to its balance sheet policy in its September 2017 postmeeting statement; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, September 20. Return to text 10. See Board of Governors, "FOMC Issues Addendum," paragraph 6, in note 7. Return to text 11. See Ihrig and others, "Managing the Composition of High-Quality Liquid Assets," in note 5. Return to text 12. The December 2017 Survey of Primary Dealers is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/survey/2017/dec-2017-spd-results.pdf . The December 2017 Survey of Market Participants is available at https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/survey/2017/dec-2017-smp-results.pdf . Return to text 13. See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2018), Open Market Operations during 2017 (New York: FRBNY, April), available at https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/annual_reports.html . Among other things, the report reviews the conduct of open market operations and other developments that influenced the System Open Market Account of the Federal Reserve in 2017. Return to text 14. For a discussion of the overall effects of the decline in the Fed's balance sheet, see Jane Ihrig, Lawrence Mize, and Gretchen C. Weinbach (2017), " How Does the Fed Adjust Its Securities Holdings and Who Is Affected? (PDF) " Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-099 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: October 10, 2018 Back to Top

Vice Chairman for Supervision Randal K. Quarles At "Ring-Fencing the Global Banking System: The Shift towards Financial Regulatory Protectionism" Symposium sponsored by Harvard Law School Program on International Financial Systems, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts Share Thank you to Professor Scott for inviting me to join this discussion on cross-border resolution and risks of fragmentation. Like many of my international counterparts in the audience, I maintain a deep commitment to cross-border banking and efficient movement of capital and liquidity, which are important contributors to long-term economic growth. And it is with that commitment in mind that I have considered the topic of today's conference: "ring-fencing," beginning with some reflections on what the term means. Many here use the term to describe local capital and liquidity requirements, which are imposed ex ante on local subsidiaries and designed to protect those entities and their creditors from losses. The term is also used to refer to disruptive actions taken by host regulators to seize assets in the moment of crisis. 1 This type of ring-fencing occurs suddenly and unilaterally. Both uses of the term are associated with the risk arising from the stress or failure of a global financial institution; however, whether ring-fencing as I first defined it--prepositioning--is helpful or harmful in minimizing this risk depends on one's perspective. The views of different stakeholders tend to vary depending on whether one is seeking to maximize efficient allocation of resources in good times or minimize losses in stress and, importantly, whether one is a home or host regulator. Before the financial crisis, much of our collective orientation was on maximizing the efficient flow of capital across the globe. This should remain a paramount goal. Yet in the wake of the financial crisis, global regulators have understandably also focused on minimizing the cost of the failure of a global financial institution by mitigating the impediments to cross-border resolution. The single-point-of-entry (SPOE) and bail-in concepts hold particular promise for most large global firms. However, a successful SPOE resolution of a large global firm has not yet been attempted and will require close cooperation among a large number of stakeholders, including both home and host country regulators. This cooperation will be based on an understanding of separate and mutual interests, not on trust alone. So while SPOE creates a potentially workable framework for resolution, setting the conditions for cooperation is critical. I grew up among the ranches of the American West, where we lived by the motto taught to me as a young child: trust everyone, but brand your cattle. This is a theme that will run throughout my remarks today. In addition to setting the stage for effective cooperation, I will focus specifically on the type of ring-fencing that will almost certainly undermine the successful execution of an SPOE resolution--namely the disruptive seizure of assets by host regulators in the moment of stress. As with other elements of our regime, I have been considering whether our current prepositioning requirements for domestic and foreign firms operating in the United States are both minimizing this risk and functioning in an efficient and transparent manner, and I will share some thoughts in that regard. Our vantage point in the United States as a large home and host regulator would counsel that it is sensible to find a middle ground and fine tune our approach as we learn more and global conditions evolve. Resolution Considerations of a Home and Host Regulator To enable cooperation and avoid a destabilizing seizure of assets by host regulators, I would submit that all jurisdictions must find a balance of flexibility for the parent bank and certainty for local stakeholders. Flexibility, or the ability to allocate capital and liquidity to different parts of the group on an as-needed basis, helps to meet unexpected demands on resources and reduces the risk of misallocation and inefficient use of resources. Certainty, or the local prepositioning of capital and liquidity to ensure a firm can satisfy local claimants under stressful conditions, helps to promote cooperation in the context of a cross-border resolution and avoid incentives for more drastic action by host authorities. One's assessment of the optimal balance, as I alluded to earlier, can depend significantly on where one sits in the regulatory constellation. The home regulator, by nature, will logically prefer flexibility in a resolution; consolidated capital and liquidity requirements are most effective if resources can be freely allocated around the consolidated firm where and when they are needed. Flexibility also helps offset the uncertainty in forecasting the location within the consolidated firm where stress may arise. Yet I would also argue that home regulators should recognize host jurisdictions may take action to restrict the flow of resources, or worse yet, demand resources in the moment of crisis, even if the stress does not originally emanate from their location. Such actions tend to both limit the flexibility of the home regulator and undermine cooperation in times of stress. The host regulator, by nature, will prefer the certainty that resources will be available to satisfy local customers and counterparties under stressful conditions. This is particularly the case if the risk of default or the potential local loss given default of a foreign firm is high, and the tolerance for a government-assisted intervention for foreign banks is low. However, the host regulator should also recognize that it is ultimately in its interest for the SPOE resolution of the foreign bank to be successful and, given the uncertainty of the circumstances or location of losses that emerge in an actual stress, adequate flexibility for the parent to deploy resources where needed is likewise in the host regulator's interest. A global bank has other stakeholders who have preferences regarding flexibility or certainty and can take actions that can potentially destabilize the firm. For instance, parent company debt and equity holders may prefer less prepositioning, while local creditors and financial market utilities may prefer more. These other stakeholders can act in ways that can be destabilizing. Building a system that is transparent and is perceived by stakeholders as allocating losses fairly is key in this regard. Finally, I would like to note that the considerations of policymakers in determining the right balance of flexibility and certainty may differ depending on whether the resource at issue is capital or liquidity. In resolution, the most important difference between capital and liquidity is the speed with which financial stress can appear. Liquidity needs are sudden and tend to manifest in all areas of the organization, and the consequences of not meeting liquidity demand--an immediate default on an obligation--can be grave. Capital needs, however, may be more localized and slower to evolve but are foundational to the execution of an SPOE resolution. It is unlikely that host regulators would be comfortable cooperating in an SPOE resolution strategy without some confidence in the viability of the entities in their jurisdictions. U.S. Approach Historically, the United States and the United Kingdom have been in a unique position of having large interests as both home country and host country regulators of internationally active banks. Soon, the European Union is likely to assume this privilege as well. We understand that any requirements we impose on foreign banks operating in the United States may well be imposed on U.S. firms operating abroad. In addition, we are operating under a veil of ignorance, as we don't know whether the next firm in distress will be a U.S. firm operating globally or a foreign firm with U.S. operations. This provides us with strong incentives to view the risks from both sides. As the home regulator to U.S. global systemically important banking organizations (G-SIBs), we and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) have used the living wills process to set the expectation that a firm appropriately balance prepositioned and centrally managed resources. 2 This expectation is based on the premise that the optimal balance will depend on factors such as the firm's structure and the host jurisdictions in which the firm operates. As such, the Board and the FDIC have asked U.S. G-SIBs to analyze and anticipate capital and liquidity resources needed to ensure the continued operation of material entities in resolution. Regarding capital, the positioning of a U.S. G-SIB's internal total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) should reflect a balance of certainty--prepositioning internal TLAC directly at material entities--and flexibility--holding recapitalization resources at the parent, known as contributable resources--to meet unanticipated losses at material entities. 3 Regarding liquidity, the Board and FDIC expect a U.S. G-SIB to appropriately estimate and maintain sufficient liquidity for material entities, an expectation known as Resolution Liquidity Adequacy and Positioning, or RLAP. 4 RLAP expectations are intended to be designed so that liquidity is not "double counted" among home and host jurisdictions, to provide transparency into the location of liquidity across the firm's material entities, and to ensure that liquidity can flow where needed with minimal potential disruption. The RLAP approach is aimed at ensuring that surpluses in one host jurisdiction generally are not relied upon to meet deficits in another host jurisdiction, given the confusion and vulnerabilities such reliance can cause in an actual stress. Specifically, a firm should be able to measure the stand-alone liquidity position of each material entity and ensure that liquidity is readily available either at the parent or at that entity to meet any deficits. 5 As with capital, firms are expected to have a balance of prepositioned and centrally managed liquidity--specifically, by balancing the certainty associated with holding liquidity directly at material entities against the flexibility provided by holding high-quality liquid assets at the parent available to meet unanticipated outflows at material entities. As a host regulator, our approach to local capital and liquidity regulations of foreign banks with large U.S. operations is motivated by the lessons of the recent financial crisis, where many foreign banks operating in the United States suffered severe stress and survived only with extraordinary support from the United States and their home country governments. In addition to increasing the resiliency of the U.S. operations of foreign banks, our approach also reflects both resolution and competitive equity considerations. From a resolution perspective, our rules seek to ensure that there are sufficient resources in the United States today to ensure that we, as a host regulator, are well positioned to cooperate with a home country authority in the event a firm experiences material stress or failure. Our rules also ensure that we do not have a strong incentive to limit flows or seek additional resources in the moment of crisis, which could be highly destabilizing in a stress event. From a competitive equity standpoint, we believe that U.S. subsidiaries of foreign banks should operate on a level playing field with their domestic counterparts. This is generally consistent with the long-standing treatment of large and complex bank and nonbank subsidiaries around the world. As such, our rules subject a large foreign bank to the same capital and liquidity requirements as domestic bank holding companies by requiring the foreign bank to hold its U.S. subsidiaries through a U.S. intermediate holding company (IHC) and imposing capital and liquidity requirements to the IHC. At the same time, we have adjusted our approach for the U.S. branches of a foreign bank with a large U.S. presence in recognition that branches are subject to a narrower set of permissible activities and operate as a direct extension of the parent bank. For these U.S. branches, we have imposed local liquidity requirements in light of the liquidity vulnerabilities that many U.S. branches of foreign banks experienced in the crisis, but no separate capital requirements. For IHCs that are subsidiaries of foreign-owned G-SIBs, the Federal Reserve requires such a firm to issue a minimum amount of loss-absorbing instruments to its foreign parent, known as internal TLAC, including a minimum amount of unsecured long-term debt. 6 In the event that an IHC was experiencing significant financial distress, the internal TLAC could be used to replenish the IHC's equity and maintain its solvency. The U.S. implementation of internal TLAC is modeled on the internal TLAC framework developed by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which includes a calibration of the amount of loss-absorbing resources that should be prepositioned in a given jurisdiction. 7 Specifically, the FSB contemplates that internal TLAC requirements of a subsidiary of a foreign bank expected to be resolved through SPOE would be calibrated at 75 to 90 percent of the external TLAC requirement that would apply to the subsidiary if it were to be separately resolved. In implementing the TLAC standards in the United States, the Board calibrated the internal TLAC requirement for IHCs of foreign-owned G-SIBs at the high end of the FSB range, at around 90 percent. Adjustments to the Current Regime There are two principal points I have been making today. The first is that some amount of local capital and liquidity prepositioning can reduce the incentives for damaging and unpredictable seizures of resources by local regulators during times of stress--thus actually reducing the likelihood that improvised, beggar-thy-neighbor ring-fencing would frustrate completion of a successful SPOE resolution in the future. As we learned long ago out West, the branding of cattle creates the possibility of trust. The second point, however, is equally important: the best prepositioning structure is not an eternal verity mathematically deducible from first principles, but it is instead a practical balance designed to promote cooperation among humans, and any such balance is likely to be improvable with experience, reflection, and debate. We are interested in views from the firms and the public on how the regimes can be improved, and we expect to invite public comment on our living will guidance for U.S. and foreign firms in the near future. In addition, we are currently weighing the costs and benefits of our current approach of directing firms to determine the appropriate amount of prepositioned capital and liquidity. We are also considering whether formalizing resolution capital and liquidity requirements through a rulemaking process would improve the predictability and transparency of our approach. We continue to believe that the IHC and attendant requirements are appropriate for foreign banks with large U.S. operations. However, in light of our experience with these structures, I believe we should consider whether the internal TLAC calibration for IHCs could be adjusted to reflect the practice of other regulators without adversely affecting resolvability and U.S. financial stability. The current calibration is at the top end of the scale set forth by the FSB, and willingness by the United States to reconsider its calibration may prompt other jurisdictions to do the same, which could better the prospects of successful resolution for both foreign G-SIBs operating in the United States, and for U.S. G-SIBs operating abroad. Alternatively, it may be possible to streamline the elements of our resolution loss absorbency regime, which include both TLAC and long-term debt requirements. I will be recommending to my colleagues that we look closely at these possibilities in the coming weeks and seek comment on ways to further improve this framework. Conclusion We are committed to working with other jurisdictions to continue to build the foundation of the SPOE resolution framework. In addition to finding the appropriate balance of flexibility and certainty that I have discussed, we continue to advocate for increasing the standardization in the global implementation of the regulatory capital rules, improving host supervisors' transparency into the global liquidity and capital positions of a G-SIB on a consolidated and deconsolidated basis, and addressing impediments to a successful SPOE resolution. As with all regulations, we will be open to considering adjustments that would improve transparency and efficiency and will continue to reassess our regime as we make advancements in developing the cross-border resolution framework. 1. "Home regulator" refers to the prudential regulatory agency of the parent bank, and "host regulator" refers to the prudential regulatory agency of a foreign branch or subsidiary of the parent bank. Return to text 2. Section 165(d) of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires a large firm to submit an annual resolution plan, or living will, that describes the company's strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under bankruptcy in the event of material financial distress or failure of the company. If the Federal Reserve and the FDIC determine that a firm's resolution plan is not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, the agencies, acting jointly, may impose more stringent prudential requirements on the firm until it remediates identified deficiencies. Return to text 3. Guidance for 2017 section 165(d) Annual Resolution Plan Submissions by Domestic Covered Companies that Submitted Resolution Plans in July 2015, available at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20160413a1.pdf . Return to text 4. Id. Return to text 5. The liquidity position of an entity reflects high-quality liquid assets at the material entity less stressed net outflows to third parties and affiliates. Return to text 6. 12 CFR part 252, subpart G. Return to text 7. Financial Stability Board, "Principles on Loss-Absorbing and Recapitalisation of G-SIBs in Resolution" and "Total Loss-absorbing Capacity (TLAC) Term Sheet" (November 9, 2015), available at www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/TLAC-Principles-and-Term-Sheet-for-publication-final.pdf . Return to text Last Update: May 16, 2018 Back to Top
