Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Yale University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, Connecticut Share Watch Live Supervisory stress testing has become a cornerstone of post-crisis prudential regulation. Stress testing, unlike traditional capital requirements, provides a forward-looking assessment of losses that would be suffered under adverse economic scenarios. The simultaneous testing of the largest firms lends a perspective on a large part of the banking system and facilitates identification of common exposures and risks. During the financial crisis, the success of an ad hoc stress test in assessing the capital needs of, and restoring confidence in, the nation's largest financial institutions encouraged Congress to make stress testing a required and regular feature of large firm prudential regulation. 1 The Federal Reserve has, in the succeeding years, substantially refined its supervisory stress test. Moreover, the stress test has been integrated into our Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), which both ties the results of the test into the banks' capital distribution practices and evaluates their risk management and capital planning capacities. Today I want to share with you the results of an extensive review of the statutory stress test and CCAR programs, which we began following the end of the 2015 cycle. Before turning to the reasons for that review and some ideas for changing these programs that have arisen from it, I will take a few moments to summarize the characteristics and purposes of the programs as they have evolved to this point. Stress Testing and CCAR Today As we have implemented the requirement mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) for stress testing--which the Federal Reserve denominates as the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test (DFAST)--that exercise includes four main steps. 2 (1) The firms subject to DFAST provide the Federal Reserve with detailed, significantly standardized data on their loans, securities holdings, trading positions, counterparty exposures, revenue, expenses, and balance sheets. (2) The Federal Reserve specifies hypothetical macroeconomic and financial market scenarios--including an "adverse" and a "severely adverse" scenario. (3) The Federal Reserve inputs the data from the firms into its own supervisory models to project each firm's losses, revenues, and capital over a nine-quarter planning horizon under the specified scenarios. (4) The results of the exercise, including the capital positions of the firms following the hypothesized stress scenarios, are disclosed to the public. As DFAST has evolved, it has become an increasingly valuable tool for evaluating whether the largest financial firms are holding sufficient capital to continue providing credit in the event of significant macroeconomic and financial stress. However, in itself DFAST does not set any capital ratios or limit any capital actions by the firms. Those functions are implemented through the CCAR program, which was created through the regulatory process by the Federal Reserve. 3 In CCAR, the Federal Reserve assesses the overall capital adequacy of the firms--including evaluations of whether each firm's capital provides an adequate buffer for the losses that would be incurred during the stress scenarios, whether its risk management and capital planning processes are appropriately well-developed and governed, and how its plans to distribute capital through dividends or share repurchases could affect its ability to remain a viable financial intermediary in the hypothesized scenarios. Given how central these considerations are to effective risk management and the soundness of these firms, we are progressively integrating the qualitative elements of CCAR into our year-round supervisory program for the largest banking organizations. Under CCAR, the Federal Reserve may object to a firm's capital plan on either quantitative or qualitative grounds. A quantitative objection is made when the stress test reveals that a firm would not be able to maintain its post-stress capital ratios above the regulatory minimum levels over the planning horizon, taking into account its planned capital distributions. We have taken planned distributions into account because, as the run-up to the financial crisis revealed, firms may be reluctant to cut their distributions--particularly dividends--even in a period of growing stress. Thus, CCAR included what has been called a "pre-funding" requirement. The Federal Reserve may object on qualitative grounds if it finds that the firm's capital planning processes are not sufficiently reliable. The qualitative assessment includes the assumptions and analyses underlying each firm's capital plan, its controls and governance processes, and whether previously identified weaknesses in management and operations have been corrected. If the Federal Reserve objects on quantitative or qualitative grounds, the firm may not make any capital distributions without our permission. In practice, in the case of a qualitative objection, we have generally permitted distributions at the previous year's level but no increases. This practice, however, has been in the context of distributions rising from generally low levels coming out of the crisis; there has been no guarantee that a similar practice would prevail as distributions continue rising. The quantitative component of CCAR, based as it is on the DFAST stress tests, has contributed to the continued strengthening of the capital levels of the largest financial institutions that began after the original stress test in the winter of 2009. 4 While, understandably, many focus on the quantitative side and its implications for capital distributions, the importance of the qualitative component has been perhaps underappreciated. We saw during the 2009 stress test that many large financial institutions were unable to marshal the data necessary to gauge their own exposures accurately or to project the adverse effects they would suffer in a tail event, as opposed to a more ordinary cyclical downturn. CCAR has required the firms to steadily improve their risk management and capital planning processes. Indeed, some of the firms--particularly the less complex banks within the CCAR cohort--are now meeting, or are close to meeting, our supervisory expectations across a range of risk management and capital planning processes. The CCAR Review Clearly, then, we regard the stress testing and CCAR programs to have made substantial contributions to protecting the safety and soundness of the nation's largest financial firms and to promoting the stability of the financial system as a whole. But, equally clearly, if a stress testing regime is to continue to play this role, it must be dynamic. The hypothesized scenarios must change to take account of new economic and financial risks. The supervisory model may, in some circumstances, need to be changed to take account of evolving economic conditions and bank portfolio characteristics. Additionally, we have been refining the stress testing and CCAR processes in what is, of course, still a relatively new regulatory and supervisory tool. Changes of all these kinds have been, and will continue to be, made from year to year. After five years of post-crisis stress testing, however, we believed it was important for us to conduct a more thorough assessment of the program. Taking advantage of the shift in timing of the annual stress tests following the 2015 cycle, we undertook an overall review. 5 We knew there were several areas to which attention was needed. These included the imperfect alignment of CCAR with the regulatory capital requirements as they had evolved since we began stress testing, the desire for additional macroprudential elements in the stress test, and the qualitative component of CCAR as it applied to less complex firms. But we also wanted to hear what others thought. Accordingly, we met with bank officials, debt and equity-side market analysts, public interest groups, and academics--both to solicit their views on the topics I noted a moment ago and to hear their overall evaluation of, and recommendations for, our stress testing and CCAR exercises. As you can imagine, we received a wide range of suggestions, at least some of which were inconsistent with one another. In the main, though, these discussions reflected strong support for stress testing, reinforced our going-in view of the key issues for consideration, and presented us with some other areas for possible change. Before describing the package of potential changes that is emerging from our review, let me explain a bit more about each of the key topics. First is the fact that CCAR has been adjusted to align with some, but not all, of the important changes made in our regulatory capital rules over the past six years. 6 One might decide that the regulatory capital rules and CCAR should be different, complementary capital measures, roughly the way that a leverage ratio requirement and risk-weighted capital requirements are complementary. In some particulars, though, CCAR sits a bit uneasily alongside the ongoing capital requirements. The most notable example is that CCAR assumes that a firm will continue to make its planned capital distributions during a stress period even though the regulatory capital rules now include a capital conservation buffer to limit such distributions. Another is that, to this point, CCAR has not reflected the firm-specific capital surcharge we have adopted for global systemically important banks (GSIBs). Our second key topic was the macroprudential dimension of the stress testing and CCAR regimes. One of the most important lessons of the financial crisis was that prudential regulation, including capital regulation, had been dominantly microprudential in nature, even for the largest firms. That is, the regulation was designed and applied with a view mostly to the idiosyncratic risks faced by a bank in isolation, without regard to the interaction of the bank and the financial system as a whole. Thus, for example, capital regulation did not take account of fire sale effects--the reduction in portfolio values for one bank by other banks selling certain types of assets in order to enhance their own solvency or to counter a reduction in funding availability. Similarly, microprudential capital regulation allows a bank to meet its capital ratios by reducing lending--that is, by reducing the denominator of its ratio--as well as by increasing capital. If many banks were to follow this strategy, even creditworthy borrowers would be adversely affected, thereby exacerbating an economic downturn. Our stress testing and CCAR regimes do have some macroprudential elements, which have been modestly enhanced over the past few years. By conducting the stress tests for all large banks at the same time under common scenarios, we can evaluate the collective losses that may be borne by a major part of the industry in the stress scenario. We vary scenario design to take account of a variety of risks to the financial system and in a way that reduces procyclical effects. 7 We vary the market shock over time to reduce the incentive for firms to correlate their asset holdings or adopt correlated hedging strategies that are treated relatively favorably under one particular market shock scenario. And we do not allow firms to plan on a reduction in their balance sheets as a way to meet capital ratio requirements under stress. Still, as currently conceived and implemented, our stress testing regime emphasizes the direct risks to bank capital from a severe recession and associated market dislocation via the usual channels of reduced operating revenues combined with credit, market, counterparty, and operational losses. However, as noted by some academics and policy analysts, a fully developed macroprudential dimension to stress testing would incorporate indirect risks to bank capital through channels such as market-wide funding and liquidity disruptions, fire sales, and so on. 8 These amplification effects are obviously particularly important for firms that have relatively larger trading books or that rely relatively more on short-term funding, or both. Indeed, many of the academics with whom we discussed stress testing during our review emphasized the importance of building out the macroprudential elements of our stress testing program. The third topic we had identified for review was the nature of the qualitative assessment as it applied to the relatively smaller, less complex firms within the CCAR exercise. While we had always explicitly differentiated our risk management and capital planning expectations for these firms, our supervisors had observed that many such firms seemed uncertain of whether they would nonetheless be held to the more stringent standards intended for the largest, most complex firms. In the course of our review, comments from these smaller, less complex firms confirmed this observation. Officials from these banks expressed the view that the CCAR qualitative assessment was unduly burdensome because it created pressure to develop complex processes, extensive documentation, and sophisticated stress test models that mirrored those in use at the largest, most complex firms, in order to avoid the possibility of a public objection to their capital plan. Since our intention had never been to create an incentive for firms with a relatively small systemic footprint to invest in stress testing processes appropriate only for larger or more complex firms, we knew we needed to address this problem. Results of the Review After more than a year of discussions and analysis, we have developed ideas for changes to the stress testing and CCAR regimes that would address these three key issues, along with some related matters that arose during the course of our review. Some of these changes would need to be pursued through rulemakings, including the usual notice-and-comment process. Others can be implemented through nonregulatory changes, though some will need further elaboration in moving from idea to concrete practice. Thus, there is a necessarily provisional character to the package set forth here. Except for the relief from the qualitative requirements for smaller, less complex CCAR firms--which I will describe a bit later--we do not contemplate proposing regulations to implement these ideas until early next year. Thus, any such changes would not apply to the coming 2017 DFAST/CCAR cycle. Better Alignment of CCAR with the new regulatory capital rules As I noted earlier, there have been significant additions to regulatory capital requirements since the first CCAR exercise began in late 2010. While some--such as revised risk-weighted asset calculation methodologies and definitions of capital--have been integrated into the stress testing program, other important additions have not. Most significant are the various capital buffer requirements that sit atop the regulatory minimum levels. These include a uniform 2.5-percent capital conservation buffer (CCB), the GSIB surcharge, and a countercyclical buffer that can expand the CCB for a broad range of firms in times of increasing financial vulnerabilities. 9 Firms that do not hold capital sufficient to meet or exceed this combined buffer level are subject to restrictions on their capital distributions and bonus payments to executives, which become progressively stricter as their capital level falls deeper into the buffer. To better align CCAR with the regulatory capital rules as they now stand, we will be considering adoption of a "stress capital buffer" (SCB) approach to setting post-stress capital requirements that would further integrate our capital rules with our stress test and CCAR frameworks. The simplest way to describe it is that the SCB would replace the existing 2.5 percent CCB as a component in each CCAR firm's point-in-time capital requirements. The SCB would be risk-sensitive and vary across firms, based on the results of the annual stress test. Specifically, it would be set equal to the maximum decline in a firm's common equity tier 1 capital ratio under the severely adverse scenario of the supervisory stress test before the inclusion of the firm's planned capital distributions, a simplification from the current practice of calculating the capital positions of the firm separately for each quarter in the scenario horizon. As is now the case with the CCB and other applicable capital buffers, a firm would be subject to restrictions on its capital distributions whenever its capital levels fall below the combined regulatory minima and buffers. Although it is likely that the stress test losses will continue to exceed 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets for most GSIBs, the SCB would have a specified floor at this current CCB level to avoid any reduction in the stringency of the regulatory capital rules. A firm's buffer requirement would be recalculated after each year's stress test, and its capital plan would not be approved in CCAR if the plan indicated that the firm would fall into the buffer under the stress test's baseline projections. Let me use a hypothetical example to illustrate how the SCB would work. Assuming that a firm's common equity tier 1 capital ratio declines in CCAR's severely adverse scenario from 13 percent to 8 percent, that firm's SCB would be the greater of 2.5 percent or the 5 percent decline--thus, 5 percent. Assuming further that this firm is a GSIB with a surcharge of 3 percent and that the countercyclical buffer is not in effect, the firm would be constrained in making capital distributions that would bring its common equity tier 1 capital ratio under 12.5 percent. The 12.5 percent figure is the sum of the 4.5 percent minimum common equity tier 1 risk-weighted capital requirement, the 3 percent surcharge, and the 5 percent stress loss as calculated in annual stress test. 10 Because the GSIB capital surcharge already exists as an additional buffer requirement in the regulatory capital rules, the stress capital buffer approach would effectively add the GSIB capital surcharge to our estimates of the amount of capital needed under stress. This would generally result in a significant increase in capital requirements applicable to the GSIBs, for most of which CCAR has been their binding capital constraint. But having both the stress loss buffer and the capital surcharge included in our capital requirements is wholly consistent with the reasons for having a capital surcharge in the first place. Indeed, not having the two together has actually been an anomaly that arose from the sequencing of the various capital strengthening measures we have undertaken. The Board adopted the GSIB surcharge requirement as part of its implementation of section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which established the important macroprudential principle that financial firms should be subject to increasingly stringent regulation as their systemic importance increases. As explained in more detail in the white paper that accompanied the Board's final GSIB risk-based capital surcharge rule, 11 the material distress or failure of a GSIB would have an adverse impact on the financial system as a whole that is far greater than the impact on the financial system of the distress or failure of a non-GSIB banking firm. Accordingly, GSIBs should face capital surcharges to compel internalization of those external costs. This should reduce the probability of a GSIB's failure enough below that of a non-GSIB that the expected impact on the system of a GSIB and a non-GSIB failure are more comparable. Because the difference in the external costs of the distress or failure of a GSIB as compared to a non-GSIB is likely to be at least as high during times of macroeconomic and financial market stress as during ordinary times, there is no reason why the GSIB surcharge should not be a part of the post-stress capital regime. A complementary point is that the extra buffer required by the GSIB surcharge also reflects the fact that even the best-conceived annual stress scenarios cannot capture all tail risks in the financial system. The integration of capital rules and the stress test thus advances our second aim in initiating our CCAR review--the incorporation of more macroprudential elements. As some of you may know, Chair Yellen and I have, on a number of occasions over the past year or so, indicated publicly that we would be considering the effective incorporation of the surcharge into post-stress capital expectations. Some industry representatives have subsequently argued that this step is not warranted. While we will of course address these and other comments as our rulemaking process moves forward, I want to comment now on a couple of arguments, since they seem to reflect a misunderstanding of our stress testing program or of the regulatory structure established by the Dodd-Frank Act. One such argument is that it is duplicative to include both the anticipated losses under stress and the GSIB surcharge in a firm's capital requirement because two elements of our current stress test, the global market shock and the counterparty default shock, only apply to GSIB firms. However, these additional scenario components capture direct losses to which any firm engaged in material trading activity is exposed. The market shock measures the trading mark-to-market losses associated with sudden changes in asset prices. The large counterparty default measures the losses associated with repricing counterparty exposures based on the market shock, and then assuming the default of the counterparty that represents the largest net exposure. These components of the stress test do not capture the adverse impact of a GSIB failure on the financial system as a whole--the risks that are the basis for the GSIB surcharge. These components of our stress test currently apply only to GSIBs because GSIBs are the only firms currently in CCAR for which these exposures are material. Non-GSIBs currently do not have material trading activities and so would suffer only small direct trading losses as a result of severely stressed market conditions or the failure of a major derivatives or repurchase agreement (repo) counterparty. As the U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign banks with more material trading businesses in their U.S. operations are added to CCAR, we intend to revisit whether the global market shock and counterparty default component should be applied to firms beyond the U.S. GSIBs. Another argument offered against inclusion of the surcharge as an element of post-stress capital expectations is that the material distress or failure of a GSIB no longer poses a significant threat to financial stability due to the regulations and supervisory programs that are designed to improve GSIB resolvability. These measures include, among others, the proposed total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) rule, the proposed qualifying financial contracts early termination rule and related International Swap and Derivatives Association (ISDA) protocols, and efforts to ensure firms engage in strong recovery and resolution planning. It is true that these efforts have improved GSIB resolvability in recent years. But these efforts are ongoing, rather than complete. More importantly, while there is certainly a relationship between the goals of strengthening the resiliency of the most systemically important firms and making them more readily resolvable should they nonetheless fail, those are still separate regulatory aims. The demise of a very large financial institution would cause substantial damage to the economy and the financial system even if it was not so disorderly as to threaten the system entirely. Note, in this regard, that the Dodd-Frank Act requires both more stringent prudential standards for systemically important firms and a process for promoting the orderly resolution of these same firms. While the complementarity of these and other elements of a regulatory program always warrant consideration, and while adjustments in all aspects of the program should be made as conditions and practices evolve, current work on orderly resolution is surely no argument against the promotion of systemic stability and macroprudential aims by integrating the surcharge requirement with CCAR. Changes to the treatment of planned dividends and share repurchases The shift to a stress capital buffer approach would provide a mechanism for addressing two issues related to capital distribution limitations under CCAR. The first is the arguable inconsistency between, on the one hand, the existing CCAR assumption that all planned dividends and share repurchases would proceed during the two-year planning horizon, regardless of how much stress the bank was under and, on the other, the concept of a capital conservation buffer above minimum capital requirements as it has been added to the capital rules. The second is a soft limitation on dividends put in place by the Board at the inception of CCAR. Both of these features of CCAR reflected supervisory concerns with the fact that, even as the financial crisis was clearly unfolding, some of the largest banks continued to repurchase shares and pay dividends to shareholders and, thereby, depleted capital that proved to be needed later. 12 The SCB approach addresses the first of these issues by providing a continuous constraint on any planned distributions that would bring capital levels below the sum of the minimum 4.5 percent of risk-weighted assets plus the firm-specific SCB, plus any applicable GSIB surcharge. 13 However, because declines in observed and reported capital levels usually occur with a lag, and the historical evidence that dividends are less likely to be curtailed than share repurchases, 14 we would assume a firm will maintain its dividends for one year while reducing its repurchases. This would have the effect of requiring a firm to hold capital to meet its stress losses and fund its planned dividends over the next year. The switch to an SCB approach would also give us an opportunity to address a second issue, the soft limit on dividends in CCAR. Since its inception, our policy statements on CCAR have indicated that a capital plan with a planned dividend payout ratio above 30 percent would be subjected to particularly close scrutiny. When this policy was adopted in late 2010, we expected that it would be a useful guideline during a period when most of the CCAR banks would need to continue increasing capital levels for some time but also recognized that at some point we would need to revisit it. Since the new approach of adding one year's planned dividends to a firm's capital buffer should act as a disincentive for imprudent or unsustainable levels of dividends, the notion of extra scrutiny on planned dividends may no longer be useful. And we would, in any case, be reluctant to substitute a higher payout ratio for the original 30 percent ratio because it may end up being an implicit target for banks to try to reach. However, firms planning higher dividends should be aware that the operation of the SCB is such that, if a firm planned to pay out all of its earnings in the form of dividends and things did not go as well as expected for the firm, it could end up having to cut its dividend. Balance sheet and risk-weighted asset assumptions Beyond requiring that large banks have the resiliency to weather a period of serious financial stress, an important macroprudential aim of stress testing is to ensure that they can provide credit to households and businesses that remain creditworthy even in such a period. If banks maintain their capital ratios under stress by reducing their balance sheets through asset sales, or reductions in new lending, this crucial intermediation function will be compromised across the economy. The result could be a credit crunch, likely resulting in a more severe or longer-lasting recession. In the first few years of CCAR, we used the banks' own projections where many banks planned on balance sheet declines as part of their strategy for remaining sufficiently capitalized. 15 In the 2014 CCAR cycle, we replaced banks' projections with our own model, adding a requirement that banks would not restrict the supply of loans during the severely adverse scenario. To date, the model has actually operated to project an increase in the balance sheets of the CCAR banks during the severely adverse scenario, with varying impacts on different portfolios. This assumption, and its somewhat complicated implementation, was designed to be fairly conservative, in a manner not dissimilar to the assumptions about capital distributions. Numerous banks have attempted to show why some of these portfolios or business lines would not be increasing under any reasonable assumptions, and thus that even macroprudential goals do not justify ignoring the likelihood that those portfolios would decline. During our review of CCAR, some banks proposed ways to distinguish among business lines so as to relax what they argued to be an unrealistic assumption, even one with a macroprudential purpose. The complexities of trying to differentiate across idiosyncratic business lines seem to us considerable. We are instead considering replacing this feature of our model with a simple assumption that balance sheets and risk-weighted assets remain constant over the severely adverse scenario horizon. Given that some decline in demand by creditworthy borrowers for loans is inevitable in a serious recession, this simpler assumption would still achieve the macroprudential policy objective that any such decline in lending during a recession is attributable to the impact of the recession, rather than to capital constraints at the large banks. This change would also make the treatment of balance sheets and risk-weighted assets simpler and more transparent. Toward a more macroprudential stress testing regime The second major objective in our stress testing review was to integrate more macroprudential elements into the program. Of course, combining the GSIB surcharge with the SCB approach promotes an important macroprudential aim, since the surcharges are calibrated to force large, interconnected banks to internalize the additional costs their distress would impose on the financial system. The surcharges are thus at least a partial surrogate for inclusion of various macroprudential features in the stress test. We are also considering a couple of relatively modest revisions we are considering to the Board's "Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing" 16 that are motivated by the macroprudential consideration of reducing procyclicality. The first would be to make the severity of the change in the unemployment rate less severe during downturns. The second would be to replace the current judgmental approach to setting the hypothesized path of house prices by tying this variable to disposable personal income. The result would be a more countercyclical path of house prices and increased transparency into how we determine the severity of this very important element of the scenario. Beyond these steps, we heard many ideas during our review on how we might pursue our macroprudential objective by adding new features to the stress test, especially from official sector representatives and academics. We also reviewed the growing academic literature on this topic. We concluded that, to this point, even the most conceptually promising of the ideas are a good ways from being realized in specific and well-supported elements of our economic models. Many macroprudential risks involve the spread of stress from one firm or market to others. As such, macroprudential elements of stress tests often must estimate not just first-round losses, but also the knock-on effects, which depend significantly on the vulnerabilities and responses of all other major actors in the financial system, including many that we do not regulate. Modelling these effects requires information about the behavior of those actors that may not be observable either to a firm or to us. Notwithstanding these and other practical challenges, many of the suggestions we received have focused on important potential risks that bear further inquiry by regulators. Hence we will be undertaking a research program to pursue these ideas in order to better understand the quantitative consequences of new risks and business activities, potential amplification channels such as fire sales by which stress could migrate from the large banks to the rest of the financial system, and important dynamics between capital and liquidity positions. At a minimum, this research should inform scenario design and the overall regulatory and financial stability functions of the Board. And at least some of the ideas might eventually be translated into features of the stress testing regime. Over the medium term we view three related areas as the highest priorities: funding shocks, liquidity shocks, and spillovers from the default of common counterparties. Funding shocks Funding stresses are a natural starting point. As banks incur losses and their capital base erodes, some of their creditors will demand additional compensation and bank funding costs will increase. This kind of "direct" funding shock is really microprudential because the resulting losses depend largely on the bank's own decisions about its capital base, asset risk, and reliance on short-term wholesale funding. As such, it should be more straightforward to integrate direct funding shocks into our main stress testing framework than to integrate systemwide effects, and we will consider whether, and how, to do so in the relatively near term. In a "systemic" funding shock, by contrast, each bank's cost of funds depends on the capital position of the system as a whole. By taking the overall solvency of the system into account, this element captures a key amplification channel evident during the last financial crisis. As the banking system experienced capital losses, the cost of funding increased and some wholesale funding markets shut down even for relatively healthy banks. The potential for this kind of funding shock means that the presence of a poorly capitalized bank might increase funding costs for all banks--a classic kind of macroprudential concern. Liquidity shocks and fire sale dynamics As we saw during the last financial crisis, repo and other funding markets can simply close to distressed institutions, which are then unable to access certain kinds of funds at any price. Such a firm may then be forced to make up the funding shortfall by turning to market sources of liquidity by selling assets--both high-quality liquid assets like Treasury securities and less liquid assets. During the financial crisis, distressed firms sold large amounts of securities as quickly as possible. The fire sale price discounts required for such rapid execution in turn imposed mark-to-market losses on other firms with similar holdings. To understand better this channel of financial contagion, we intend to continue our work on the ability of markets to handle large quantities of asset sales under stress, the capacity and willingness of firms to tap their buffers of high-quality assets, and the susceptibility of bank capital to mark-to-market losses from fire sales. Many commentators have drawn attention to these concerns, and some have advocated an integrated approach to capital and liquidity stress testing. We may or may not be able to achieve this end point. At a minimum, though, research in this area will allow us to move in this direction, perhaps by using the conclusions reached in the annual stress test as a starting point for our annual Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review (CLAR), or vice versa. The results could also shed light on the current calibration of our liquidity rules. Default of a common counterparty and the reaction of central counterparties Currently, the annual stress test incorporates a counterparty default scenario component for the eight G-SIBs that measures direct credit loss. However, this component does not consider the potentially large second-round effects of the default of a major financial institution, including an increase in the probability of default of other counterparties as a result of the initial default and requirements for larger margins from derivatives counterparties. Of particular interest is the role of central counterparties (CCPs) in alleviating or transmitting stress from the default of one of their members. By regulatory design, CCPs have increased in prominence in the post-crisis environment because they can lead to greater efficiency and transparency in trading. But this increased role makes it important to understand the impact they may have in stressed conditions. For example, CCPs collect prefunded resources that can mitigate the impact of a default, but also can call on surviving clearing members for additional financial resources if those pre-funded resources are exhausted. Promoting transparency Transparency has played an important role in making stress testing such a key part of post-crisis prudential regulation. Transparency of the scenarios and results gives investors and analysts valuable information about the condition of the tested banks, thereby contributing to market discipline. It also allows the public to evaluate the job that the Federal Reserve is doing. For example, analysts can compare our loss estimates for specified portfolios under specified stress conditions with their own evaluations--an exercise that can inform both the analysts and us. There are three areas in which transparency considerations need to be applied. First is the set of scenarios applied in the annual exercise. We release essentially all details of the scenarios and, further, have published a policy statement exploring the aims and factors relevant to development of the scenarios. 18 Second is the set of results of the DFAST and CCAR exercises themselves. Right from the start--during the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) in 2009--we adopted what was then the controversial practice of publishing post-stress capital ratio results for each participating firm, along with a breakdown of the projected losses by loan type. Since then, we have substantially increased the breadth of the disclosed results, including a summary of the reasons for any qualitative objection or conditional non-objection to firms' capital plans. During the course of our review, suggestions were made for more granular disclosures, such as providing more details on different components of projected net revenues. We will make this change, and possibly a few others, over the course of the next cycle or two of stress testing. 19 The third area for transparency involves the supervisory models used in the stress tests. Banks involved in DFAST/CCAR have regularly requested more disclosures so that they can better understand the likely impact on their firms. One argument has been that banks will have a difficult time in their capital planning if they cannot predict how loss functions and other model features will affect their stress losses. In part to remove the possibility that a bank would receive a quantitative objection to its capital plan because of a large gap between their loss estimates and those produced by the supervisory model, a few years ago we began allowing banks to revise their capital distribution requests following receipt of their DFAST results. Under the SCB approach, a bank could also adjust its planned capital distributions after receiving the stress test results to avoid having its baseline capital distribution projections fall into the buffer. We have already taken a number of steps to respond to these requests. We currently publish descriptions of all models used in the stress test, including the key risk drivers and scenario variables for each key modeling area. We host an annual conference about modelling practices. We disclose a description of the most material changes to stress test models before each stress test. We are considering further steps, such as disclosing descriptions of changes well in advance of the stress test, and phasing in the most material model changes over two years, so as to smooth somewhat the effects of the changes on projected losses or revenues. Finally, and a bit more tentatively, we are assessing the feasibility of publishing data that represent typical bank portfolios of loans and securities with the losses we would project for those portfolios under various stress scenarios. This kind of information could also help the public trace how changes in risk drivers alter loss projections. Having said all this, let me now say that we do not intend to publish the full computer code in the supervisory model that is used to project revenues and losses. Full disclosure would permit firms to game the system--that is, to optimize portfolio characteristics based on the parameters of the model and take risks in areas not well-captured by the stress test just to minimize the estimated stress losses. In part for this reason, full disclosure could promote a "model monoculture" in which both supervisors and firms use the same models to evaluate risks. A critical part of the DFAST/CCAR process is that firms use their own models to assess their risks. We do not want them simply to copy the supervisory model and thereby increase the vulnerability of the financial system to the inevitable blind spots in even the best models. In short, this is not like using a model to develop a regulation that, for example, limits emissions of polluting substances. In such a case, adherence to the precise model output would itself achieve the regulatory purpose. Here, by contrast, the very purpose of the regulatory regime would be undermined. Remember, this is a stress test . The shifts in activities of banks and in the economy create a dynamic set of risks. Effective prudential regulation must be equally dynamic and should try to avoid pushing major financial firms toward measuring all of their risk positions in exactly the same way. There is, however, one additional consideration. Because the stress tests would be undermined by giving the models to the banks, there are of course limited opportunities for external parties to assess the models. To promote the integrity of the models in these circumstances, we established a Model Validation Group, which is composed of modelling experts who are not involved in the design and application of the stress test models. They make regular assessments and offer suggestions for improvement. We expect to be providing the public greater information on our internal validation processes. Eliminating the qualitative CCAR exercise for smaller firms As you can already tell, our responses to the need for better alignment of the stress test with our capital rules and to the desirability of more macroprudential emphasis each required a good bit of explanation. In contrast, our response to the issue of the unnecessary burden on smaller, less complex CCAR firms is both simply stated and simply achieved. In a notice of proposed rulemaking that the Board is releasing today we are proposing that banks with less than $250 billion in assets that do not have significant international or nonbank activity would no longer be included in the annual CCAR qualitative review. As noted earlier, many of these firms have already met supervisory expectations. We do not intend for less complex firms to invest in stress testing capabilities on par with the most complex firms and, given their profile, we feel these firms can maintain the progress they have made through the normal supervisory process, supplemented with targeted horizontal reviews of discrete aspects of capital planning. This shift will reduce the intensity of supervision of their capital planning processes, remove any uncertainty as to supervisory expectations for their firms relative to the largest firms, and eliminate the possibility of a public objection to their capital plans on qualitative grounds. They would still be included in the quantitative side of the stress test and the proposed stress capital buffer. But we are also proposing to reduce the amount of data these firms are required to submit for the purpose of running the stress test, on what we call the Y-14 regulatory reports. Unlike the other substantial changes we are contemplating to CCAR and our stress test, we are proposing that these changes would be effective next year, for CCAR 2017. Conclusion This set of changes we are considering for our stress testing regime has been motivated by somewhat different considerations, against the backdrop of what we intend to remain a dynamic regulatory instrument whose procedures will be regularly refined and whose substance will be regularly adapted to changing economic conditions and industry practices. Still, in pulling this package of modifications together, we have consciously shaped them in accordance with the principle that financial regulation should be progressively more stringent for firms of greater importance, and thus potential risk, to the financial system. Two features of the package reflect this principle. First, of course, is the elimination of the qualitative portion of CCAR for nearly all the firms with less than $250 billion in assets, along with some record keeping and reporting requirements. The second key feature is the differential impact the better alignment of CCAR with our capital regulations will have on the roughly 30 firms that are covered. Let me note at the outset that the precise effects on the capital requirements of individual firms cannot be determined because of the very nature of the stress test regime. The scenarios vary from year to year, and the resulting projected effects on losses and revenues may also vary materially depending on the composition of a firm's balance sheet and activities. However, to provide some idea of what the impact may be, we assessed how the various changes I have mentioned would have affected capital requirements in the two most recent CCAR cycles. On average for the eight GSIBs, integration of the surcharge with the post-stress requirements would have been somewhat less than half offset by the simplifying changes in the prefunding of capital distributions and balance sheet assumptions. The impact on capital requirements will likely be greater for firms with larger GSIB surcharges. For the other CCAR firms, for which there are no capital surcharges, these simplifying assumptions will result in some reduction of post-stress capital requirements. We estimate that the aggregate impact of these changes for the CCAR firms as a whole should be a modest increase in the total amount of required capital. But this increase will be totally due to the impact on the eight GSIB firms, whose increased capital requirements will more than offset the reductions for the other firms. In short, the GSIBs will see their capital requirements rise. All other CCAR firms will see some reduction in their capital requirements. And firms that have less than $250 billion in assets and do not have extensive international or nontraditional banking activities will also transition to a more tailored set of capital planning expectations outside the CCAR process. 1. Dodd-Frank Act §165(i), 12 U.S.C. §5365(i). Return to text 2. For a more complete description of the Federal Reserve's DFAST and CCAR programs, see www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/stress-tests-capital-planning.htm . As a formal matter, DFAST was implemented beginning in 2013. However, in 2011 and 2012, the Federal Reserve conducted supervisory stress tests as part of its CCAR program, as explained later in the text. Return to text 3. 12 CFR 225.8. Return to text 4. The common equity capital ratio--which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets--of the 33 bank holding companies in the 2016 CCAR has more than doubled from 5.5 percent in the first quarter of 2009 to 12.2 percent in the first quarter of 2016. This reflects an increase of more than $700 billion in common equity capital to a total of $1.2 trillion during the same period. www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/bcreg/20160629a.htm . Return to text 5. The 2016 CCAR cycle started one quarter later than past years' CCAR cycles. Return to text 6. For example, our regulatory capital rules now include a minimum requirement based on common equity, reflecting the fact that common equity provides the best buffer against losses. As a result, the similar common equity requirement that had been included in the early years of CCAR, to meet an additional post-stress target ratio of tier 1 common equity, was removed after CCAR 2015. Other changes that have been integrated into the stress test include modification of the risk-weighted asset calculation methodologies and revised definitions of capital. Return to text 7. Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Macroprudential Regulation ," speech delivered at the Yale Law School Conference on Challenges in Global Financial Services, New Haven, CT, September 20. Return to text 8. See, for example, David Greenlaw, Anil Kashyap, Kermit Schoenholtz, and Hyun Song Shin (2012), " Stressed Out: Macroprudential Principles for Stress Testing ." Chicago Booth Research Paper No. 12-08, Fama-Miller Working Paper (Chicago: University of Chicago Booth School of Business, February 13). Return to text 9. The countercyclical buffer applies to banking organizations with more than $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures and to any depository institution subsidiary of such organizations. See 12 CFR Part 217, Appendix A. Return to text 10. Figure 1 further illustrates the stress capital buffer. Return to text 11. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), " Calibrating the G-SIB Surcharge ," white paper (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 20). Return to text 12. See Beverly Hirtle (2014), " Bank Holding Company Dividends and Repurchases during the Financial Crisis (PDF) ," Staff Report No. 666 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March). Return to text 13. Were a countercyclical capital buffer to be imposed, it would be added to the buffers above the 4.5 percent minimum capital requirement. Return to text 14. During the financial crisis, firms began to curtail share repurchases beginning in 2007 but generally did not cut dividends until late 2008. See Hirtle (2014). Return to text 15. The original stress test undertaken during the crisis did not allow this assumption, precisely because of our aim that the large banks as a group be well-positioned to meet the needs of creditworthy borrowers at that time of great stress. Return to text 16. See 12 CFR part 252, appendix A. Return to text 17. See 12 CFR Part 252, Appendix A. Return to text 18. See 12 CFR 252, appendix A; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), " Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing (PDF) ," Final Rule; Policy Statement, November 29. Return to text 19. Quite recently some banks have also suggested disclosing some version of the supervisory letters we send following the annual CCAR to each participating firm detailing our assessment of their capital planning processes. These banks believe that analysts and investors could benefit from knowing more detail on the concerns of the supervisors. We had already been considering how to increase the information provided around qualitative objections or conditional non-objections and will factor these latest observations into this decision. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: September 26, 2016 Back to Top

Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Conference on the New Pedagogy of Financial Regulation, Columbia Law School, New York, New York Share Let me begin with the most prosaic of observations: The events of 2007-09 will be remembered not as a banking crisis, but as a financial crisis. Neither the origins nor the transmission of stress were limited to the traditional banking system of commercial banks and thrifts. While Wachovia and Washington Mutual failed, and other large depository institutions survived only because of government support, the more spectacular failures were those of nonbank financial firms--including American International Group (AIG), Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, and the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Repurchase agreement (repo) and commercial paper markets depended on government liquidity to continue operating, as did money market funds. It is thus unsurprising that, in approaching regulatory reform after the crisis, both the official sector and academics have focused more on the financial system as a whole. The shift is apparent in the very diction of post-crisis regulatory initiatives. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) refers dozens of times to "financial stability" and "systemic risk." A special regulatory structure has been developed for "G-SIBs"--that is, banks of global systemic importance--and a new category of designated systemically important nonbank financial companies has been created. This shift is also reflected in the titles and intellectual approaches of the two books that were discussed at this conference earlier this morning--that is, financial regulation. The authors of both books have eschewed the traditional concentration on banking or securities law alone, and have even moved beyond the more innovative pre-crisis casebooks that focused on the differential regulation of various forms of financial institutions. 1 This broader category of "financial regulation" as the relevant delineation of an academic subject area seems right to me. For one thing, different forms of financial intermediation are--if not equally attractive for the preferences of specific investors and users of capital--at least significantly overlapping in the roles they can play. Beginning in the 1970s these overlaps multiplied, as the traditional separation of lending and capital market activities--which had been reinforced by the Glass-Steagall Act--began to break down under the weight of macroeconomic turbulence, technological and business innovation, and competition. In the 30 years that followed, these activities were progressively integrated further, both within bank holding companies and beyond, ultimately producing the explosive growth of money market, securitization, and derivative instruments. More fundamentally, the broader category of "financial regulation" reflects the importance of a macroprudential, or systemic, perspective on the financial system. This means taking account of the relationships among the circumstances and activities of significant financial actors through such channels as funding dependencies and correlated assets. The financial crisis has made what was formerly a minority view--the need to incorporate systemic considerations into the regulatory regime--into something approaching a consensus. But this shift of perspective--whether in pedagogy or in policy--raises as many questions as it answers. My remarks this morning will detail some of the questions that have recurred in regulatory deliberations in recent years, which I believe to be salient for policy, scholarship, and pedagogy. Then, more briefly, I will make a few observations about teaching and scholarship from the broadened perspective of financial regulation. I should note at the outset that, in the interest of time, I will confine myself to the prudential aspects of financial regulation. Thinking Through a More Integrated Approach to Financial Regulation It is only moderately reductionist to say that, from the New Deal through the crisis, the nature and scope of regulation was determined by the categorization of financial actors. If an entity was classified as a bank or a broker-dealer or an investment company, it was subject to a regulatory regime fashioned to deal with the risks associated with that form of intermediation or, perhaps more precisely, the risks that were perceived to be so associated. Such an approach always provided for some interesting legal discussions, since forms of intermediation that served similar purposes and carried broadly similar risks might be subject to quite different regulatory constraints. But when, as noted earlier, nonbank forms of intermediation began to threaten traditional bank intermediation and when, in what was at least partly an effort to maintain the franchise value of commercial banks, strictures on bank activities and affiliations were significantly relaxed, the foundation of the New Deal regime was substantially eroded. With the notable exception of an increased emphasis on capital, which itself was decidedly microprudential in focus, the prudential regime was not shored up or extended to other kinds of intermediaries, much less replaced--a signal failure that contributed to the severity of the crisis. This may be a good point at which to note in passing that the pre-crisis failures were not limited to the underappreciation of systemic or macroprudential risks. Even from a purely microprudential perspective, for example, the Basel II changes to the capital requirements for large banks were ill-conceived. 2 A natural reaction to this legacy might be to shift from a regime based predominantly on the form of an intermediary to one built predominantly on its functions. As a practical matter, though, much post-crisis regulatory reform has been directed at strengthening the traditional form-based foundation, though perhaps to a somewhat greater degree in the United States than in some other financially important jurisdictions. And, at a conceptual level, some features of particular forms of intermediaries--such as being an insured depository institution rather than a money market fund--remain rightly important for regulatory purposes. So we will probably continue to build on a form-based regulatory regime, though the potential range of complementary function-based measures could be quite extensive. And, at the very least, analyses based on function rather than form can be valuable heuristic exercises for identifying inconsistencies and lacunae in the financial regulatory system. A first set of questions follows from just such an identification of gaps in the regulatory system, which are arguably most troubling when they relate to systemic considerations--that is, when a financial intermediary or activity may contribute to risk in the financial system because of the related positions or activities of others. Two critical gaps highlighted by the crisis were the inadequate prudential regulation of the most systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) and the sometimes nonexistent prudential regulation of the many activities now denominated as "shadow banking." The SIFI issue has received the most public attention, often in the context of too-big-to-fail concerns. It was at the center of some of the most notable provisions of the Dodd-Frank Act, many of which follow from the important principle enunciated in section 165 that prudential regulation should become increasingly stringent for institutions of greater systemic importance. Precisely because a satisfactory treatment of this topic would require at least one lengthy speech on its own, it seems reasonably clear that teaching and scholarship should highlight the SIFI problem, appraise the regulatory approach toward such institutions since the crisis, and consider alternatives. An appraisal of whether more or, as some would have it, fewer measures are needed under the approach taken in the Dodd-Frank Act and related regulatory actions will, I admit, be a little challenging. Some measures--including stress testing, capital requirements, and resolution planning--are still in train, and others may be forthcoming as a result of the research program the Federal Reserve is launching to consider the potential for additional explicitly macroprudential features in capital and liquidity stress testing. 3 Still, I think it is feasible to teach and assess the general approach of using multiple regulatory tools that impose requirements that force systemically important firms to internalize the costs their distress or failure would impose on the financial system, and then leaving the regulated firms to make decisions as to how to alter their size and activities in order to make themselves most profitable within the stricter regulatory constraints. This approach can be usefully compared to structural or other approaches to the SIFI issue, such as caps on overall size or reimposition of the Glass-Steagall separation of commercial and investment banking. In addressing this topic, I have found it useful to try to specify as clearly as possible the adverse systemic consequences that may be feared by public authorities confronting the possible failure of a systemically important institution. This exercise helps identify the regulatory measures that would be most effective in promoting the resiliency and orderly resolvability of such institutions. On virtually any short list of concerns would be reliance on short-term wholesale funding sources, which may dry up quickly under stressed conditions. A firm with inadequate sources of liquidity may then be forced into responses with systemic implications, such as fire sales of assets and termination of credit extensions to their own counterparties. The other major vulnerability revealed by the financial crisis was systemic risk that may be created through so-called shadow banking activities--that is, credit intermediation outside the prudentially regulated banking system. Here is where the integration of traditional lending and capital markets is most clearly in evidence, albeit in quite different ways. In truth, many shadow banking channels passed through prudentially regulated institutions, as with the notorious structured investment vehicles and asset-backed commercial paper conduits. Changes in accounting and in bank capital and liquidity requirements have done a great deal to guard against a recurrence of such patterns in the future, though continued monitoring will be needed to prevent the development of other forms of support that elude these regulatory measures. Of greater interest for financial regulation going forward will be the constantly changing, and largely unrelated, set of intermediation activities pursued by very different types of financial market actors. While the extent of shadow banking has significantly diminished since the crisis, there is good reason to believe that it will grow in the future. Indeed, the very rigor of new regulations applicable to firms within the prudential perimeter may well incentivize more innovation outside that perimeter. It will be essential to disaggregate all the activities that might be characterized as shadow banking in order to regulate those that pose risks to the financial system while not unduly burdening forms of credit extension that may more or less benignly help meet the savings and investment needs of households and businesses. This task is perhaps summed up by the fact that activities which in one context are called "shadow banking" are in other contexts called "market-based financing." One might fairly characterize the current regulatory approach to shadow banking as one that examines, in turn, significant forms of credit intermediation outside the banking system and determines whether some type of prudential regulation is needed. In the terms I introduced a moment ago, regulators look at a particular form, such as money market funds. If no significant risks to financial stability are identified, or if some regulation to counteract those risks is implemented, the form of intermediation may then be thought of as relatively safe (at least from a systemic perspective) market-based finance. The virtue of this approach is that it allows for a very tailored regulatory response. But, as you can imagine, this approach necessarily involves a good bit of active oversight on an ongoing basis, both of measures previously taken and of new channels of nonbank intermediation as they arise. An alternative approach would be to define shadow banking in broadly applicable terms, with specified regulatory consequences that ensue more or less automatically, regardless of whether the entity conducting the shadow banking is otherwise subject to prudential regulation. To date, the attempts I have seen along these lines look likely to entail substantial overinclusion, substantial underinclusion, or regulatory consequences that are inappropriately uniform. And, in the United States and other jurisdictions, it is not clear that authority exists to take this approach, either by an individual regulatory agency or even collectively. But, as with hypothesizing a functionally-based regulatory system more generally, hypothesizing a broadly applicable regulatory definition can usefully inform the direction of the current regulatory approach of activity-by-activity scrutiny. Of course, while the current approach allows for an ad hoc consideration of the particulars of each activity, it still requires at least a general filter for identifying sources of systemic risk. My own sense is that the greatest risks to financial stability lie in activities with vulnerability to funding runs and asset fire sales. These may be associated either with some of the same kinds of short-term funding found in systemically important banking organizations or in the potential for rapid and substantial investor redemptions of their holdings in certain investment funds. Where substantial leverage--either nominal or synthetic--is also present, the risks are only greater. Efforts to calibrate these, and possibly other, risks will remain an important feature of shadow banking regulation, along with refining ways in which such risks may be mitigated. Before turning to another, though related, set of questions, let me digress a bit to note another implication of a regime in which regulation is developed with a view to risks to the financial system as a whole. The motivation both for more stringent regulation of systemically important firms and for regulation of shadow banking arises in large part from the potential contribution of each to systemwide contagion. A complementary motivation for some macroprudential measures is the importance of maintaining effective financial intermediation even during a period of severe recession or financial stress. But this reasoning should, I think, move us toward less regulatory stringency for some parts of the financial system, as well as greater stringency in other parts. For example, as banking regulation is strengthened to take account of the progressively more systemic significance of larger or more complicated institutions, there is a good argument for a less demanding regime for smaller institutions whose contribution to systemic contagion would almost surely be somewhere between modest and inconsequential. This observation raises the issue, which I have discussed previously, as to whether even within a particular form-based area of financial regulation we should be moving toward quite different regimes. 4 The next set of questions raised by a systemwide perspective on financial regulation can be described much more briefly. It pertains to the appropriate target once a need for regulation has been established. The selection among, and mix of targets for, systemically-motivated regulation will be an important determinant of the character of financial regulation in the years ahead. The relevant choices here are frequently identified in binary terms--that is, the regulation may be directed either at financial institutions or financial activities. This leads to confusion because, for example, what has been described as an "activities-based" approach to dealing with the potential risks posed by certain asset management activities actually involves regulation of the firms involved in those activities, such as through liquidity and risk management requirements. I suspect this confusion has arisen because, in the minds of some, "institution-based" regulation has become close to synonymous with banking regulation. Thus those opposed to, say, capital requirements for a particular kind of intermediary will advocate for activities-based regulation. My own sense is that it is useful to distinguish three possible targets of regulation--specific financial institutions, financial business models, and financial transactions. Most financial regulation, historically and contemporaneously, falls within what I would describe as business model regulation. So, for example, any entity engaged in the "business of banking" is subject to the panoply of requirements found in Title 12 of the U.S. Code. Similarly, the requirements imposed on money market funds by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and being considered for application to asset management activities, are also targeted at a business model, even though the kind of regulation is quite different from that applicable to insured depository institutions. In contrast, my taxonomy would categorize regulation as targeted at a specific institution when it applies because of the particular characteristics of that institution, not simply because of its business model (or models). Thus, the designation of a nonbanking firm as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) under the authority of the Dodd-Frank Act is made because the size, portfolios, activities, and other characteristics of the specific firm are found on an individualized basis to meet the statutory standard of nonbank systemic importance. Similarly, the determination of the capital surcharge applicable to SIFIs is made on the basis of the particular "systemic footprint" of the firm. Finally, a transaction-based requirement is one that would be binding on anyone involved in such a transaction (with perhaps some de minimis exceptions), regardless of their status as a particular kind of financial intermediary. An example would be the minimum margining requirements on securities financing transactions that have been agreed to at the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which the Federal Reserve will be proposing through a rulemaking next year. Of course, a particular firm may be a target under two, or possibly all three, approaches. But it is important to identify clearly why a regulation is deemed necessary and, accordingly, how it should be targeted. In the framework I have set forth, for example, institution-specific measures may be thought of as those needed to protect financial stability even though a firm is already subject to business model regulation. And a transaction-based measure may be thought of as one needed to protect financial stability regardless of whether all entities that might engage in such a transaction need to be regulated because of the risks associated with their business models. My third set of questions pertains to the scope and allocation of government authority for financial regulation. With some relatively modest exceptions, authority in the New Deal regime was determined based on the distinct regulatory aims established for different kinds of financial intermediaries, the oversight of which was assigned to different agencies. The allocation basically followed the Glass-Steagall Act's separation of commercial and investment banking. But, over time, both markets and regulatory change complicated this fairly simple picture: markets complicated this as both banks and broker-dealers invented new ways of doing business that allowed each to take on risks previously reserved for the other, and regulatory changes saw shifts in the relationship of the Federal Reserve's authority as holding company regulator and that of the SEC or Commodity Futures Trading Commission as primary regulator of important nonbank holding company subsidiaries. The additional regulatory authorities and mandates in the Dodd-Frank Act have created a quite different landscape from the pre-crisis regulatory terrain. Many of these authorities and mandates are explicitly tied to financial stability goals--a sharp departure from pre-crisis circumstances. Many must be exercised jointly by two or more agencies--in rulemakings, implementation, or both. And, of course, the Dodd-Frank Act created the FSOC--an unusual entity in U.S. administrative law. Appreciating this new configuration of authorities is important as a positive matter for understanding how regulation will be shaped over time and identifying possible remaining gaps in regulatory authority. It is also important as a normative matter in considering whether the allocation of authorities proves optimal over time. Here one would want to look at factors of efficacy, expertise, and excessive concentrations of authority, among others. In this regard, I would suggest that a comparison of the reconfigured financial regulatory system in the United Kingdom serves as an instructive counterpoint to the U.S. system. Some Thoughts on Post-Crisis Scholarship Topics and Pedagogy Scholarship Insofar as I have succeeded in identifying questions that will be central to the further development and refinement of a regulatory system that takes account of the financial system as a whole, all of what I have already said should be fertile ground for legal and economic scholarship. However, not every important topic for research fits neatly into one of these cross-cutting issues, so let me mention some policy issues that may especially benefit from academic work. First is the issue of measures and standards for evaluating systemic risk. Numerous financial economists have done very useful work in creating metrics for the systemic importance of financial institutions--a literature that has already informed regulatory efforts to designate and categorize such institutions and, as it develops further, will surely continue to do so. 5 But there are also specific legal standards, such as the financial stability factor now mandated in the review of proposed bank and holding company mergers, that could also benefit from academic work. 6 Second is the set of issues associated with corporate governance in a prudentially regulated institution. John Armour, Lucien Bebchuk, Jeff Gordon, Jon Macey, and others have already tackled some of these issues--such as incentive compensation arrangements, the appropriate duties for boards of directors in such institutions, and the appropriate scope of supervisory expectations for boards. 7 These issues remain worthy of discussion. The preceding questions and others, such as the advisability of a requirement for a non-executive chair of the board, have only grown in significance since I spoke to this topic a couple of years ago. 8 Third is the subject of overseeing the regulators, which includes such matters as the advisability of publicly releasing some or all supervisory ratings and informal enforcement actions. You may recall that our decision in 2009 to release the results of our stress test--a practice that we have continued in subsequent years--was quite controversial, but has proven to be enormously helpful both for giving investors in the firms and the public a better sense for how the Federal Reserve is conducting its capital regulation policies. Fourth is the rather broad topic of the implications of technological innovation for financial services regulation and, indeed, for the competitive position of insured depository institutions. Many innovations now promising dramatic change in the way that credit is extended will probably end up having considerably less impact. But some could prove significant. I suspect that innovations in payments systems are quite likely to have far-reaching effects, including the growth of what might be termed the "shadow payment system" at the retail level. Here, by the way, I am departing a bit from my self-limitation to prudential issues, since consumer protection issues around alternative payments systems may be quite significant. Fifth is the organization of the international system for financial regulation. The issues here are in some sense familiar from pre-crisis days: To what degree can host countries responsibly rely on home jurisdiction consolidated regulation and supervision of large and internationally active financial institutions? How should international cooperative efforts to set minimum prudential standards be brought together with domestic legal processes for financial regulation? These familiar questions have taken on new significance in light of the post-crisis emphasis on the financial system as a whole, including the varieties of shadow banking. So too the differing circumstances and legal systems of notable financial jurisdictions, which raise anew the question of how much international harmonization is ultimately desirable. The creation of the FSB, and greater emphasis on international standards in the International Organization of Securities Commissions and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors have substantially changed the relevant international organization chart from the days when only the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision produced such standards. Pedagogy Having not taught financial regulation since the interesting months of the fall 2008 semester, I am probably at a comparative disadvantage to most of this audience in reflecting on the new pedagogy of financial regulation. However, that will not stop me from making a couple of comments--though only a couple--on the core topic of this conference. First, I would urge everyone teaching in this area to place much more emphasis on the liability side of the balance sheets of financial institutions. Traditional banking law casebooks gave some treatment to deposits and deposit insurance, which provided a good point in a course to engage students on the subject of moral hazard. But the whole concept of runnable liabilities--whether uninsured deposits, repo, commercial paper, or other forms--was left largely untouched, even for commercial banks, much less for broker-dealers like Lehman Brothers or insurance holding companies like AIG. And, of course, in the pre-crisis period there was no quantitative liquidity regulation to include in a casebook. Yet the financial crisis was, at least in its more virulent periods, as much a funding crisis as it was a solvency crisis. Indeed, the very fact that it may be difficult to distinguish clearly between the two is indicative of the primacy of funding to the crisis. Particularly in the context of systemic risk, funding and liquidity issues accordingly deserve something close to the attention devoted to capital if students are to understand the origins of the crisis, the regulatory response, and the challenges of regulation going forward. A focus on liabilities will help students understand why, for example, the Federal Reserve plans on setting capital standards differently for traditional insurance companies (that is, not the pre-crisis AIG) than for bank holding companies and their affiliates. An emphasis on runnable funding will help them see why systemic concerns extend beyond SIFIs as such. It also provides a good occasion for introducing students to the role of a lender of last resort, now perhaps more of a contested concept than had previously been assumed. I have considerably less conviction regarding my second comment, but I offer it anyway, perhaps to contribute to the pedagogical discussions that will be bred by this conference. Let me preface the observation by noting that were I to teach financial regulation again, the course would have to differ markedly from that fall 2008 version. Still, I wonder whether students will acquire a strong enough foundation for understanding how a financial regulatory system works in a course that is taught essentially as a survey of financial regulatory issues, without some point of reference to which they can return as they proceed through the course (or, more probably, as they cram for the exam). I was always struck by how much of a conceptual anchor for a banking law course was provided by the famous Corrigan/Aspinwall debate on whether banks were "special." 9 One could note, for example, that Aspinwall's observation that banks were becoming less special might have suggested that other forms of intermediaries should be more regulated, rather than the implication that banks should be less regulated. Indeed, my rereading of the companion pieces suggests that despite--or maybe because of--the fact that the debate is now more than 30 years old, it might profitably introduce a course that ventures well beyond traditional banking regulation, by its invitation to consider why we regulate in the first place. Conclusion I began teaching in this area just as the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act was culminating three decades of bank deregulation. At the time, I suggested to students that the regulation of banking organizations was in an unstable equilibrium. While I initially meant the adjective mostly to refer to doctrine, it became progressively more applicable to the financial system itself. The implementation of the regulatory aims established after the crisis, along with the inevitable refinements of what has already been done, will continue to play out for some time. The upshot, I think, is both an unusually important time to be researching and writing in this area and an unusually challenging time to be teaching it. This conference has been an excellent occasion for helping to shape both a research agenda and a new pedagogy. 1. Howell E. Jackson and Edward J. Symons, Jr. (1999), Regulation of Financial Institutions (St. Paul, MN: West Group). Return to text 2. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2008), Banking on Basel: The Future of International Financial Regulation (Washington, DC: Peter G. Peterson Institute for International Economics), pp. 178-82. Return to text 3. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2016), " Next Steps in the Evolution of Stress Testing ," speech delivered at the Yale University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, CT, September 26. Return to text 4. See, e.g., Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), " Rethinking the Aims of Prudential Regulation ," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Bank Structure Conference, Chicago, IL, May 8. Return to text 5. Tobias Adrian and Markus K. Brunnermeier (2016), " CoVaR ," American Economic Review , vol. 106 (July), pp. 1705-41; Fernando Duarte and Thomas M. Eisenback (2013; revised 2015), " Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report , no. 645; and Christian T. Brownlees and Robert F. Engle (2016), "SRISK: A Conditional Capital Shortfall Measure of Systemic Risk," available at https://ssrn.com/abstract=1611229 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1611229 . Return to text 6. Daniel K. Tarullo (2012), " Financial Stability Regulation ," speech given at the University of Pennsylvania School of Law Distinguished Jurist Lecture, Philadelphia, PA, October 10. Return to text 7. See, e.g., John Armour and Jeffrey Gordon (2014), "Systemic Harms and Shareholder Value," Journal of Legal Analysis, vol. 6, no. 1 (Spring), pp. 35-85; Lucian A. Bebchuk and Holger Spamann (2010), "Regulating Bankers' Pay," Georgetown Law Journal , vol. 98, no. 2, pp. 247-87; Jonathan Macey and Maureen O'Hara (2016), " Bank Corporate Governance: A Proposal for the Post-Crisis World ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review , vol. 22, no. 1 (August), pp. 85-105. Return to text 8. Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), " Corporate Governance and Prudential Regulation ," speech given at the Association of American Law Schools 2014 Midyear Meeting, Washington, DC, June 9. Return to text 9. See E. Gerald Corrigan (1982), "Are Banks Special?" Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Annual Report , available at www.minneapolisfed.org/publications/annual-reports/are-banks-special ; and Richard Aspinwall (1983), "On the 'Specialness' of Banking," Issues in Banking Regulation , vol. 7 (Autumn), pp. 16-22. Return to text Last Update: October 21, 2016 Back to Top

Governor Daniel K. Tarullo At the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and Office of Financial Research 2016 Financial Stability Conference, Washington, D.C. Share Last summer, when I accepted President Loretta Mester's invitation to speak at this conference, I thought it would be a good occasion to step back and assess where we stand in our post-crisis efforts to promote financial stability in the United States. This morning I will offer such an assessment. I will begin by reviewing what has been accomplished. Then I will suggest how to approach the work that remains--including both tackling continuing vulnerabilities to financial stability and rationalizing the measures that have already been taken. The Crisis and Its Aftermath To understand where we stand today, we should recall why we embarked on these efforts in the first place. There is little mistaking the motivation--it was the magnitude of the destruction wrought by the financial crisis and the Great Recession that followed it. The resulting losses in employment were on a scale not seen since the Great Depression. One model used by Federal Reserve staff 1 estimates that cumulative loss in output relative to potential over the period was on the order of one quarter of a year's worth of economic output. 2 While we cannot be certain that these losses were due solely to the financial crisis, losses of this magnitude appear broadly in line with estimates of the effects of prior financial crises. 3 Moreover, the shortfalls in jobs and income relative to potential may understate the total losses, as many current estimates of potential output are significantly below levels expected prior to the Great Recession. This may be due to the declines in investment, business dynamism, and labor force attachment brought about by the shortfall in aggregate demand through hysteresis effects. 4 As evidenced by a continuing stream of scholarship, many factors contributed to the unsustainability and fragility of the pre-crisis financial system. But the inadequacy of regulation and supervision was clearly among them. Large banking firms had insufficient levels of high-quality capital; excessive amounts of short-term, wholesale funding; too few high-quality, liquid assets; and inadequate risk measurement and management systems. Systemically important nonbank financial firms whose failure could threaten the stability of the financial system were effectively outside the regulatory perimeter. Governments did not have resolution regimes that could provide for an orderly resolution of a systemically important financial firm. Shadow banking--which was funding long-term assets with short-term wholesale liabilities--exposed the financial system to a systemwide liquidity run. Although we all lived through the fall of 2008, let me dwell for a moment on that frightening period. Six months had passed since the demise of Bear Stearns in March. Over that summer, it may have appeared as though the fallout from this episode had been contained. But by the fall, it became clear that other large, non-prudentially regulated financial firms threatened financial stability. American International Group (AIG) received direct government support. Two large freestanding investment banks converted themselves into bank holding companies to gain market confidence from the imprimatur of regulatory oversight by the Federal Reserve. Merrill Lynch and Bear Stearns itself ceased to exist as independent entities and were absorbed into existing bank holding companies, with some form of government benefit facilitating the acquisition. 5 And, of course, as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac teetered on the brink of failure, they were placed into government conservatorship, with accompanying full government guarantees of their liabilities. The absence of an option for orderly resolution was faced head-on in the case of Lehman Brothers, whose bankruptcy in September moved the financial crisis to its most acute phase. Even insured depository institutions such as Wachovia and Washington Mutual, for which special resolution procedures were available, were merged into existing banks with, again, government benefits to make the absorption of these failing banks worthwhile for the acquiring institutions. 6 And a number of very large bank holding companies were under grave stress. Meanwhile, financial markets of all sorts had either ceased functioning or come dangerously close to it. Unlike in some bank crises of the past, direct connections among large financial firms were only part of the problem. At the heart of the crisis were contagion effects among firms holding similar assets--particularly, tradable assets--and the withdrawal of much of the short-term wholesale funding on which many large financial firms and the shadow banking system had come to rely. Needless to say, the larger the firm with lots of tradable assets and runnable funding, the greater the additional threat to the system. If anyone harbored remaining doubts, it was clear by October that the nation's financial system faced not just severe liquidity problems, but a solvency crisis. In response, following enactment of the Troubled Asset Relief Program by Congress, Secretary Henry Paulson oversaw the injection of government capital into the nation's largest financial firms, as well as into many smaller banking firms. This first step toward stability was reinforced in early 2009 when Secretary Timothy Geithner initiated the stress test exercise to determine how much capital these firms needed to remain viable financial intermediaries and, perhaps as importantly, to share this information with markets. In the succeeding months, the Federal Reserve obliged the firms to raise enough private capital to replace the government capital and to meet the minimum capital levels established by the stress tests. By the latter part of 2009, the U.S. financial system had been stabilized, but only with substantial injections of taxpayer capital and the complementary support of other guarantees and lending facilities variously provided by the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)--both to banks and to non-bank financial actors. And the nation had meanwhile been plunged into the deepest economic downturn since the Great Depression. Demands were widespread, both in the country and the Congress, for a regulatory response to protect against the reemergence of the conditions that had led to the crisis. While there were different views on exactly what should be done, on how much new authority was needed for the regulators who had not fully exercised their existing powers, and on the degree to which regulators should be required--rather than just empowered--to take certain actions, there was agreement that action was needed. Throughout 2009, discussion and debate ensued not just between, but within, the political parties on how best to respond. If there was one powerful, widely held view that underlay the public debate, it was that the system needed to change to avoid a repeat of the taxpayer bailouts of so many large financial institutions. It was only toward the end of the legislative exercise that resulted in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) that the process took a more partisan turn. Indeed, the Dodd-Frank Act contains measures that commanded fairly wide consensus, such as the need for higher capital requirements for the largest banks. Furthermore, the origins of some features of the legislation rested as much or more with Republican than Democratic legislators, such as the section 165 requirement for resolution plans that will make systemically important firms resolvable in bankruptcy without requiring taxpayer support or resulting in major disorder in the financial system. The Nature and Impact of the New Regulatory Regime Now let us fast forward to the present. Less than a decade after being the epicenter of a global financial crisis, today the United States has the strongest and most diverse financial system of any major economy in the world. Credit default swap (CDS) spreads and other market indicators suggest that investors have remained confident in the solvency of large U.S. banks through several recent episodes of global financial volatility. 7 For example, during the market strains at the beginning of this year, the CDS spreads of U.S. banks increased only 25 to 50 basis points, and even so only briefly, while large banks in some other parts of the world saw their CDS spreads increase substantially more and for a longer period. The relative strength of, and resulting market confidence in, U.S. banks has allowed them to expand their lending, the growth of which has returned during the last couple of years to a pace similar to that in the pre-crisis, pre-bubble years. 8 What accounts for this dramatic change in the position of the U.S. financial system? First, the crisis response by U.S. authorities was fairly quick and complete. The resolute actions of the Bush Administration in late 2008 and the Obama Administration early in 2009 helped stabilize banks and begin their recovery in fairly short order. Recapitalization proceeded quickly, even as the stress test compelled an early reckoning with actual and potential losses. The forceful monetary policy response, the liquidity programs of the Federal Reserve, and the FDIC's guarantee of bank debt prevented the bottom from dropping out of the badly shaken financial system. The emergency fiscal stimulus of 2009 helped prevent a downward spiral in the real economy from a Great Recession to another depression. Second, and of more relevance for the subject of this conference, was the regulatory reform program put in motion even before the crisis had ended. This program has steadily strengthened the capital, liquidity, and risk management positions of large banks, with progressively more stringent measures applied to the most systemically important institutions. The new regulatory regime for large banks serves two important, complementary goals. One is to ensure that the nation's large financial institutions are sufficiently strong to continue to function effectively as intermediaries, lending to creditworthy businesses and households even in a period of substantial financial and economic stress. If they cannot do so because, for example, their capital positions have been too weakened, the result could be a deepening of what may already be a serious recession. The other goal is to address the too-big-to-fail problem. When some combination of the size, functions, portfolios, and interconnectedness of a financial institution are such as to make authorities fear that its failure could endanger the entire financial system, they will be tempted to rescue the firm through direct capital injections or indirect measures to strengthen its solvency. Knowing this, other market actors will be willing to lend to that institution at a premium lower than its actual risks would suggest is warranted, an effect that is particularly apparent during periods of stress. Taking both these goals into account, the regulatory regime must aim for much greater resiliency in the large banks than in smaller ones, so that they can continue to function even under serious stress without solvency assistance from the government and, thus, avoid causing more harm to the economy. But the regime must also be able to contemplate failure by a very large bank--that is, to plan for the possibility that a larger bank may become insolvent notwithstanding much greater ex ante resiliency. The regime must promote market discipline and offset the moral hazard that comes if a bank and its creditors believe the government will have no real choice but to bail the bank out. Much has been accomplished in the last six or seven years to build a regime that advances both these goals. I want to highlight four of its elements: capital, liquidity, risk management, and resolution planning. Capital is, of course, central to ensuring resiliency although, as I will explain shortly, the presence or absence of other regulatory requirements is relevant in setting minimum capital levels. Because no single capital measure can capture all possible sources of loss, U.S. banking regulation has for three decades required both a leverage ratio and a risk-based capital requirement. In responding to the crisis, we have applied a higher leverage ratio and stronger risk-based capital requirements, including a robust stress testing program to larger banks. The risk-based capital regime that has been built since the crisis contains several distinct components: a minimum capital requirement, a buffer requirement, and a surcharge on systemically important banks. 9 Let me explain the rationale for each component. The minimum capital requirement represents the amount of capital that experience suggests a bank needs so as to retain the confidence of its customers and counterparties and thus function as an intermediary. Recognizing that a bank operating below its minimum capital will be vulnerable to a sudden loss of market confidence, the regulatory consequences of falling below the minimum are severe and intended to force such a bank to quickly take steps to raise its capital level back above the minimum. The buffer capital requirement is sized so that, if the economy suffers a severe recession that leads a bank to suffer a substantial loss, the bank will still be above its minimum capital level and thus able to continue operating and lending to support economic growth. The buffer is intended to be useable in times of stress, and the regulatory consequences of falling into the buffer are accordingly less severe than the consequences of falling below the minimum. The surcharge on systemically important banks requires systemically important firms to recognize, and hold capital against, the costs that their failure would impose on the broader economy. The minimum and buffer requirements were calibrated using historical data on bank losses across a number of countries in a way that would be appropriate for all large banks across a range of countries, although we recognized at the time that these requirements might not reflect market circumstances in all situations. The surcharge for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) was calibrated to provide a sufficient amount of additional capital to reduce sufficiently the chances of a G-SIB's failure so that the impact of its failure, discounted by the probability of that failure occurring, would approximately equal the impact of the failure of a large bank holding company that is not a G-SIB, discounted by the somewhat higher probability of its failure. 10 As I explained recently, we will soon consider adopting a "stress capital buffer" to integrate the post-crisis capital regime with our supervisory stress test. 11 In this approach, each firm would have a buffer requirement derived from our annual stress test, taking the place of the existing buffer requirement, which is the same for all firms. This change would make the capital regime more risk-sensitive by using firm-specific information on risks drawn from the stress test. Using the supervisory stress test to guide a risk-sensitive capital regime seems far preferable to reliance on a bank's internal models, which have proven problematic as a basis for risk-based capital requirements under Basel II. 12 The progressive implementation of this capital regime has substantially increased the resiliency of the largest banks. Although there can be reasonable differences over just how to compute minimum requirements, the post-crisis regime differs from pre-crisis days precisely because there is now a well thought through rationale for those much higher minimum requirements. Because of this regime, banks subject to the annual supervisory stress test have to this point more than doubled their high-quality capital, while shedding many of their riskiest assets and activities. A second important feature of the post-crisis regulatory regime for large banks has been the introduction of quantitative liquidity regulations. The financial crisis was, in the first instance, as much about liquidity as solvency. What proved in retrospect to be excessive liquidity for some types of assets turned into scarcity nearly overnight, confirming the view that liquidity is most available when you need it least and least available when you need it most. The period was defined by runs, not on bank deposits (at least not insured bank deposits), but on short-term wholesale funding. Because of deep uncertainty about the condition of counterparties and the value of assets serving as collateral, investors refused to roll over existing repurchase agreements (or repos) and similar extensions of credit, much less to offer new lending. Many trading activities ground to a near halt, and dealers were forced into fire sales of the assets on their balance sheets that remained liquid. Indeed, it was difficult at times to distinguish between liquidity and solvency crises at particular firms. The Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) have placed the funding of large banks on a firmer footing. The LCR requires a large bank to hold enough high-quality liquid assets to cover the net cash outflows the bank would expect to occur over a 30-day stress scenario. This requirement establishes a buffer against liquidity risk that reduces the bank's vulnerability to a run, such as materialized in the recent crisis. In the event a bank does encounter liquidity difficulties, the LCR's 30-day buffer will give the authorities time to assess the bank's condition and react as appropriate. The NSFR complements the LCR by requiring an amount of stable funding that is tailored to the liquidity risk of a bank's assets and liabilities, based on a one-year time horizon. The NSFR creates an incentive for banks to extend the maturity of their funding, making them more resilient to market stress. To offset the risks of the short-term wholesale funding structures that proved so dangerous in the recent crisis, the NSFR requires more stable funding for short-term loans to financial firms. It is important to note how liquidity requirements also affect the capital needed by a bank, as can be illustrated by a simple, if admittedly improbable, example. Assume two banks with exactly the same assets and the same amount of capital. One funds those assets entirely through insured (sticky) deposits and longer-term debt, while the other funds its assets entirely through short-term uninsured deposits and repo borrowing. Assume now that an external shock reduces the value of the assets dramatically, with lingering uncertainty as to whether the value will continue to drop. It is readily apparent that the two large banks face very different risks, since the second bank's funding will at best become more expensive and at worst decline or disappear. A sound regulatory regime will align the riskiness of the two banks more closely, by requiring the second bank to change its funding profile, increase its capital, or some combination of the two. In fact, the LCR and NSFR would require more stability in funding at my second hypothetical bank, while one of the factors used to calculate the capital surcharge applicable to the largest banks is its relative reliance on runnable funding. I will not go into detail in explaining a third key factor of our post-crisis regulatory regime--the requirement for rigorous risk management at large banks. But a brief example should make the point. During the height of the crisis in the winter of 2009, as we were conducting the first stress test, we found that some of the largest banks were literally unable to determine in any reasonable time their aggregate exposures to particular counterparties and business lines across their varied operations. That deficiency made it easier to understand how they could have gotten themselves in such trouble. Because of the supervisory expectations for risk management in our annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) exercise, the information and risk management systems of all banks have improved substantially, though work remains to be done at some of the largest banks. A fourth key element of the post-crisis regulatory regime is to develop credible options for resolution so that even one of the largest financial firms could be allowed to fail without bringing the financial system down. Without such options, market discipline will remain lacking. Moral hazard will lurk in the background, since market actors will doubt that a large institution would be allowed to fail. Moreover, government officials must themselves have confidence in the viability of orderly resolution and bankruptcy procedures, or else during periods of high stress, they will be tempted to use some form of government help to keep the firm solvent. Next Steps While it is perhaps a bit soon for a full evaluation of the regulatory regime for large banks, several studies affirm its beneficial economic effects, particularly when the destructive impact of a financial crisis is taken into account. 13 This assessment should obviously be adjusted as warranted by new studies and data. But even as this work proceeds, we should continue to ask two questions. First, are we reasonably confident that the largest U.S. banks could weather a period of stress, and, in the more remote event they could not, that they would no longer present the Hobson's choice of disorderly failure endangering the entire financial system or some form of solvency bailout? While they are strong relative to their peers in other major economies and have held up well during the few bouts of moderate financial stress we have experienced over the last several years, these firms have not yet faced a major financial challenge. Second, should we adjust statutory or regulatory provisions that are not needed for, or are less efficient means for achieving, financial stability? Let me offer some perspective on answering both questions, along with a handful of specific proposals. With respect to the first question, there is certainly room for discussion over the most suitable minimum capital standards for the most systemically important financial firms. As I noted when we were deciding on the expected impact approach as the best available method for calibrating capital surcharges, there is no magic to that method. 14 Indeed, even within that approach, we should be open to research that suggests new or improved ways to determine the relative systemic importance of firms. However, I think it is important to have a methodology that is clearly explained and is based on the research that has been done. Let me note in passing two points that can be drawn from that research. First, there is work subsequent to the formulation of the Basel III capital standards suggesting that the costs of higher capital requirements may be somewhat lower, and the benefits broader, than previously thought. Second, however, the reduction in the probability of a financial crisis associated with increasing capital levels will begin to level off at some point, thereby creating diminishing benefits for tighter capital standards. 15 Moreover, as important as capital is to promoting systemic stability, it is not the only relevant consideration. The relative presence or absence of other regulations that mitigate risk in banks should affect minimum capital levels. To my mind, the most important of these are regulations limiting dependence of financial firms on runnable funding sources. 16 If a firm is not vulnerable to runs, it is far more likely to weather a financial storm without resorting to fire sales or cutting off customers from credit, and thus far less likely to wreak havoc on the financial system. In short, I think it healthy that discussion continues over the right type and levels of capital requirements and, more generally, over whether we have the right mix of policies. To that end, here are a few relatively near-term steps that we at the Federal Reserve can take to further advance financial stability goals. First is to continue focused work on making the largest, most systemically important firms resolvable in order to minimize both moral hazard and any harm that may befall the economy if such a firm were to fail. This means continued work by the Federal Reserve and the FDIC to require these firms to develop their resolution plans and, more importantly, modify their organizational structures and day-to-day practices such as liquidity management so as to enable an orderly resolution, should it become necessary. Along these lines, I would hope that Congress will move forward with a set of changes to the bankruptcy code to facilitate the resolution of large financial firms and, thereby, limit the number of instances in which the government would need to use the Title II procedures of Dodd-Frank. In the very short term, we will also finalize our rule requiring the most systemically important firms to hold a sizeable amount of long-term debt, which would be available to the FDIC or a bankruptcy judge for conversion into equity should the firm fail. Note that this requirement is intended to prepare for the possibility that the firm fails despite all the measures we have taken to strengthen resiliency. Having identifiable instruments for conversion that would survive the loss of most or all of the firm's equity is necessary for a private recapitalization of the firm to be successful. A second step is to determine if we can develop metrics that would reflect a firm's particular vulnerabilities to funding shocks, liquidity shocks, and fire sale dynamics in their needed capital as part of the annual stress test. 17 These measures would directly take into account macroprudential concerns of financial system stability. They might well counsel increased capital requirements for some of the largest banks. A third step is to take another look at the capital and liquidity positions of large U.S. branches of some foreign banks. As has become apparent, the actual consolidated capital positions of some such banks can be difficult for us to discern when the bank uses internal models to compute its required regulatory capital. It is critical to ensure that large U.S. branches of foreign banks do not create financial instability in the United States if their parents' global positions come under stress. Although I have been focusing mostly on the risks to financial stability posed by the largest financial firms, I would not want to leave a discussion of future work without offering another reminder that they are not the only source of vulnerabilities. The kinds of "shadow banking" that grew up around the private-label mortgage backed securities markets have largely disappeared, but other forms of runnable liabilities remain outside prudentially regulated institutions. There is also good reason to believe that new forms of shadow banking will develop in the future and, as I have explained at some length elsewhere, continued attention to such activities will be needed. 18 Turning now to an agenda for rationalizing what has already been done, I will not attempt to lay out a list of appropriate measures so much as to suggest some key considerations in forming such an agenda. First, it is critical that we not forget our still quite recent history. Earlier in this talk I recounted the origins and effects of the financial crisis as a reminder as to why we now have the stronger capital requirements and other measures I have described. There is surely a need to review over time the changes that have been implemented to assess how much additional stability we have gained and at what cost. As we gain experience with the statutory and regulatory measures that have been implemented, we have begun assessments of the efficacy and efficiency of these measures. Thus, for example, we are proposing to remove the qualitative assessment exercise in CCAR for most firms with less than $250 billion in assets. 19 As part of our continuing examination of changes in market liquidity in the post-crisis period, we are assessing whether refinements might usefully be made in any of the regulations that have generally had beneficial effects in containing excessive and unsustainable liquidity. And as part of our efforts to tailor our regulations according to the business models of firms, we are considering ways to address the special issues posed for the large custody banks by certain elements of our regulatory framework. But in considering these and other changes, we will not weaken the essential elements of the existing regime that guard against another financial crisis. Second--and here is an affirmative argument for rationalization measures--we need to have a more explicit and thorough tiering of requirements within the prudential regulatory regime. The flip side of the observation that the largest banks need stricter and more wide-ranging regulation because of the special risks they pose is that the smaller and less interconnected a bank is, the less risk it presents and thus the less strict its regulatory requirements need be. The Dodd-Frank Act reflects this principle, not only in its mandate of progressively more stringent requirements as the systemic importance of a financial firm increases, but also in the asset-size thresholds it establishes for various new regulations. However, as I have noted in the past, I think these thresholds were set too low in places. 20 For example, I would raise the threshold for enhanced prudential standards from its current $50 billion level, perhaps to $100 billion. And I would entirely exempt community banks--by which I mean those with less than $10 billion in assets--from some regulations, such as the Volcker rule and the incentive compensation rule. It is worth noting that the burden of these rules for small banks is often less in the substantive constraints they impose on bank activities than in the compliance costs they impose. Even with efforts by banking agencies to streamline implementing regulations for smaller banks, the relatively scarce compliance resources of those banks must still be directed towards assuring that no changes in substantive activities are needed and possibly documenting their compliance. Indeed, I would generalize this point to suggest that the smaller the bank, the greater the likelihood that a potential disconnect between costs and benefits of regulation is rooted in the disproportionate costs of exams, audits, and reporting. So while I think it is worthwhile to continue, for example, efforts to simplify capital rules for small banks, the greater value for those banks may lie in efforts to streamline the number of rules that apply to them and to reduce the number of separate compliance exams and exercises to which they are subject. While especially applicable to small banks, this point has broader application, as in our earlier-mentioned proposal to exempt most banks with less than $250 billion in assets from the qualitative component of our annual CCAR exercise. My third suggested consideration in rationalizing the regulatory regime is a caution against being excessively attracted to simple answers to a set of risks posed by complicated and diverse activities. There is no question, in my mind at least, that regulations can become excessively complicated. A prime example is the Basel II approach of basing banks' capital requirements on their internal models. It is exceedingly difficult and costly for supervisors to validate those models rigorously and, even so, the potential remains for intentional or unintentional mistakes that are hard to detect in a timely manner. But this example does not mean that the simplest possible regulation is always optimal. Consider, in this regard, the idea of substituting a somewhat higher leverage ratio requirement for all other capital standards and many other regulatory requirements. While this idea has a surface appeal, since the imposition of, say, a 10 percent leverage ratio on the current balance sheets of large banks would yield a very well-capitalized set of banks. But one needs to look at the dynamic effects of such a requirement. Since a higher leverage ratio would also make banks significantly less profitable, and with the constraints of risk-based capital and liquidity requirements lifted, they would be strongly incentivized to change the composition of their balance sheets dramatically, shedding safer assets like Treasuries in exchange for riskier but higher-yielding assets. After all, with a leverage ratio as the only significant constraint, the regulatory cost of a short-term Treasury bill is identical to that of a junk bond. Thus, to truly assure the safety and soundness of the financial system, a leverage ratio serving as the sole or dominant form of prudential regulation would probably have to be set considerably higher, at a level where the impact on financial intermediation could be quite extensive, particularly in what are today regarded as relatively safe capital market activities. Using both a leverage ratio and a strong set of risk-based capital requirements best combines the goals of safety and soundness, on the one hand, and efficient economic intermediation on the other. We should remember that it was because of the limitations of a stand-alone leverage ratio that risk-based capital requirements were introduced in the 1980s. Conclusion This conference is a good moment to remember just how bad things can be when financial stability is not effectively safeguarded and a financial crisis ensues. It is, accordingly, also a good moment to caution against backsliding on the considerable progress that has been made toward a regulatory system that will provide just such a safeguard, particularly with respect to the largest, most systemically important banks. While other modes of reform might have been taken, the one we have followed has provided a strong foundation for financial stability. And, although I am sure some large banks would like to pare back our liquidity and risk management requirements or reduce required capital levels, both they and the economy have now largely adjusted to the new regime. After compelling banks in the depths of the crisis to raise capital sufficient to keep them at the minimum level necessary to function as effective intermediaries, we have since increased their resiliency through requirements to increase the quality and quantity of their capital. But we have done so with a long transition period that allowed them mostly to build capital through retained earnings. And we have generally left to the banks choices about reducing size or exiting activities in response to the incentives created by regulations calibrated with credit and funding risks in mind. Our stress test and CCAR exercises should ensure that the largest banks will not maintain distributions of capital to their shareholders in the face of rising financial stress, as they did in 2007 and 2008, which left them more vulnerable to the crisis. There are surely refinements that can be made to the regulatory regime that has emerged, particularly--though not exclusively--with respect to smaller banks that pose neither systemic nor macroprudential risks. And, as I have suggested, there is surely a healthy debate to be had as to whether additional strengthening of resiliency measures is appropriate for the largest institutions. But I do not think there is a sound economic case for generally weakening the regulatory requirements applicable to the largest banks. And I certainly do not think the taxpayers should bear the risk that would be entailed by any such weakening. 1. This estimate is from the FRB/US model, which is one model of the U.S. economy used by staff at the Federal Reserve Board. For a description of the model and access to the data, see www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/frbus/us-models-package.htm . Return to text 2. Losses attributable to the Great Recession have been estimated using different metrics and range widely. For example, one 2013 study suggests that total U.S. losses from the financial crisis could range from 40 to 90 percent of a year's worth of economic output, or $6 to $14 trillion. Tyler Atkinson, David Luttrell, and Harvey Rosenblum (2013), " How Bad Was It? The Costs and Consequences of the 2007-09 Financial Crisis (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Staff Papers, no. 20 (July). For an alternative view that finds lower effects of moderate crises, but that excludes the recent crisis, see Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer (2015), " New Evidence on the Impact of Financial Crises in Advanced Countries (PDF) ," NBER Working Papers, no. 21021 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March). Return to text 3. For estimates that predate the recent crisis, see Stephen G. Cecchetti, Marion Kohler, and Christian Upper (2009), "Financial Crises and Economic Activity," in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), pp. 89-135. Return to text 4. For a discussion of these effects, see Laurence M. Ball (2014), "Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession in OECD Countries," European Journal of Economics and Economic Policies: Intervention , vol. 11, no. 2 (September), pp. 149-160; and Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2015), "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy," IMF Economic Review , vol. 63 (March), pp. 71-109. Return to text 5. In the case of JPMorgan's acquisition of Bear Stearns, the Federal Reserve provided credit to support the transaction. In the case of Bank of America's acquisition of Merrill Lynch, Bank of America sought an arrangement that would ring fence any losses incurred by Merrill so as not to impose those losses on the parent company. The Federal Reserve publicly announced its willingness to negotiate such an arrangement. Although subsequent developments obviated the need for a ring fence arrangement, the public announcement was perceived as benefiting Bank of America during the period of extreme market uncertainty in late 2008. Return to text 6. Wells Fargo benefited from a significant tax advantage in the Wachovia acquisition, while the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation agreed to share some losses in the Washington Mutual portfolio in order to facilitate its acquisition by JPMorgan. Return to text 7. Some have suggested that market-based measures of bank risk indicate that banks are not safer than before the crisis. For example, CDS spreads are well above their levels in early 2006. But this as likely suggests that investors were too sanguine in 2006 as that they believe there has been no change in bank safety since then. And, as reflected in the changes made by credit ratings agencies in their assessment of implied support for banks from the government, markets may rightly perceive that the government is less likely now to bail out a bank that gets in trouble. Moreover, equity prices may be down because some combination of economic conditions and regulation make profits likely to be lower than was expected and experienced in the unsustainable period leading up to the crisis. Return to text 8. Core loans grew at an average annual rate of about 7 percent from 1995 to 2004. Core loan growth was 5.4 percent in 2014, 6.5 percent in 2015, and 7.1 percent thus far in 2016. Return to text 9. In addition to increasing minimum capital ratios, post-crisis reforms also placed more emphasis on the quality of regulatory capital by introducing the common equity tier 1 capital ratio, which reflects the focus by bank investors and counterparties during the crisis on common equity. Return to text 10. The reason why the non-G-SIB's probability of failure is higher is because its capital ratio requirement is lower without a surcharge. For an explanation of this "expected impact" methodology, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Calibrating the G-SIB Surcharge," white paper (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 20). Return to text 11. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2016), " Next Steps in the Evolution of Stress Testing ," speech delivered at the Yale University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, CT, September 26. Return to text 12. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2014), " Rethinking the Aims of Prudential Regulation ," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Bank Structure Conference, Chicago, IL, May 8. Return to text 13. Early assessments include Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010), " Assessing the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements: Final Report (PDF) " (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, December); and Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), " An Assessment of the Long-Term Economic Impact of Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements (PDF) " (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, August). More recent assessments include William R. Cline (2016), " Benefits and Costs of Higher Capital Requirements for Banks (PDF) ," Petersen Institute for International Economics Working Paper, no. 16-6 (March); and Ingo Fender and Ulf Lewrick (2016), " Adding It All Up: The Macroeconomic Impact of Basel III and Outstanding Reform Issues (PDF) ," BIS Working Papers No. 591 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, November). Return to text 14. See Daniel K. Tarullo (2011), " Regulating Systemically Important Financial Firms ," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, June 3. Return to text 15. See, for example, Jihad Dagher, Giovanni Dell'Ariccia, Luc Laeven, Lev Ratnovski, and Hui Ton (2016), "Benefits and Costs of Bank Capital," IMF Staff Discussion Note SND/16/04 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, March). Return to text 16. For a discussion of the relationship between capital and liquidity standards, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability ," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, DC, May 3. Return to text 17. See Tarullo, "Next Steps in the Evolution of Stress Testing." Return to text 18. See, e.g., Daniel K. Tarullo (2016), opening remarks delivered at the Center for American Progress and Americans for Financial Reform Conference, Washington, DC, July 12, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/tarullo20160712a.htm ; and Daniel K. Tarullo (2015), " Thinking Critically about Nonbank Financial Intermediation ," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, November 17. Return to text 19. See Amendments to the Capital Plan and Stress Test Rules, 81 Fed. Reg. 67,239-60 (September 30, 2016), www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2016-09-30/pdf/2016-23629.pdf . Return to text 20. See, for example, Daniel K. Tarullo, "Rethinking the Aims of Prudential Regulation." Return to text Last Update: December 02, 2016 Back to Top
