1 Presentation to Lambda Alpha International and Arizona Bankers Association Phoenix, Arizona By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on January 7, 2014 Housing, Banking, and the Recovery: The Outlook Thank you, Sheila, for that kind introduction. And thank you again for your years of service to the San Francisco Fed. It’s great to be back in Phoenix again, and I’m pleased to start the year off on a positive note. After years of fits and starts, the economy appears to be on a much stronger path than we’ve seen in some time. It was only eighteen months ago that the satirical newspaper The Onion ran the headline, “Nation’s Economists Quietly Evacuating their Families.” That was then. More recently, the economic data have been quite encouraging, and there’s reason to believe that this year, the economic recovery will gain further momentum. Since we’re being hosted by Lambda Alpha International and the Arizona Bankers Association, I’d like to talk to you today about the housing market and banking conditions. I’ll also give an overview of where I see the economy and, of course, monetary policy, going. As usual, let me say here that the views expressed today are entirely mine and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. 2 Housing market Some of the good news has been coming from a sector many of you know well: housing. Nationally, the housing market started its rebound in early 2012, and the recovery has been fairly steady since. This improvement has been propelled by several forces. First, the Fed’s very accommodative monetary policy supported historically low mortgage rates. Second, housing prices had seen a steep decline—and the cost of a new home is still much lower than at the market’s peak. Third, as the labor market improves, household incomes are rising. That is, with low mortgage rates, cheaper houses and more money in Americans’ bank accounts, housing is affordable again and the market has seen a reversal. Sales and prices are up substantially. In fact, prices on existing homes have risen at double-digit rates nationwide over the past year.1 They are now up by about 20 percent from the lows reached in 2011. This improvement in home prices and sales has created a virtuous cycle: The rebound in the market has helped to reduce foreclosures, which are almost back to pre-crash levels. Fewer foreclosures means fewer distressed sales—which means fewer houses being sold at drastically reduced prices. Fewer distressed sales means less supply and fewer sellers willing to take a loss—which strengthens prices further. As prices strengthen and the market looks up, builders 1 National house price numbers are based on the CoreLogic National Home Price Index (including distressed sales) unless otherwise indicated (data currently through October). 3 see the increase in demand, which bolsters new home construction. That, of course, boosts businesses in related industries—like building materials, home furnishings and appliances—and creates jobs, lots of jobs. Of course, there’s always a caveat. You’ve probably heard the story of Harry Truman wanting a one-handed economist, because he was tired of hearing, “On the other hand…” So, “on the other hand,” the recovery in the housing sector comes with concerns that prices might be rising too rapidly. I don’t think this should set off alarm bells, at least yet. First, there are important differences between circumstances now and what we saw leading into the crisis. Lending standards and financial oversight are much stricter, for one.2 For another, recent price increases have in large part reversed an overreaction in the market during the housing crash. That is, house prices don’t look that out of line with fundamentals overall. In addition, prices may be affected by the limited numbers of homes currently for sale. It looks as though owners have been holding off putting their houses up for sale, waiting for the market to strengthen even further.3 That would mean there are plenty of houses ready and waiting on the sidelines. I expect to see more of these houses come back on the market, and the resulting increase in supply should help temper upward pressure on prices. 2 Swanson (2013). 3 Krainer and Hedberg (2013). 4 Second, other factors are keeping the rebound in check. Mortgage rates rose last year, which dampened sales, slowing momentum in house prices. And while there’s been a sizable increase in housing construction, it’s still low by historical standards. To put numbers to that: It looks like about 600,000-plus single-family homes were started in 2013, based on the data through November. The longer-term annual average is about 1 million per year. So, we are nowhere near “boom” levels of housing construction. As for Arizona specifically, I don’t have to tell anyone here that you felt the worst of the crash. But you have also been home to one of the earliest and strongest recoveries. Home prices in Phoenix more than doubled between 2000 and mid-2006. By late 2009, the crisis had plunged values back to almost 2000 levels and foreclosures reached nearly double the national rate. Today, prices in Phoenix are up by about 45 percent over the worst lows, and Arizona’s foreclosures were actually below the national rate, according to the latest data. Although Phoenix housing indicators have moderated some in recent months, as they have nationwide, the trends remain positive. District banking sector The banking recovery in the western states has also been improving. Just as an aside, today is a birthday of sorts for American banking. The country’s first commercial bank—the Bank of North America—opened in Philadelphia on January 7th, 1782. 5 So as an anniversary present, I’m pleased to say that banking conditions have improved steadily across the Federal Reserve’s 12th District, which covers the nine westernmost states, including Arizona. This improvement reflects the recovery in the housing market and the overall economy. As many of you know, the Federal Reserve has an appraisal system for banks’ soundness that we refer to as CAMELS ratings. For the uninitiated, the letters in CAMELS stand for capital; asset quality; management capability; earnings; liquidity; and sensitivity to market risk. Many of the 12th District’s banks have seen improvement in all of these areas over the past few years. Banks are generally better capitalized, with more liquid assets; earnings have improved; and new loans have increased while past-due ones have diminished.4 Looking more closely at local conditions, Arizona’s increase in the pace of loans from late-2012 to late-2013 was among the fastest in the nation, which is great. However, the damage done by the recession is still evident in the high number of non-performing loans.5 Despite signs of overall improvement in banking conditions, I recognize that District banks face general challenges as well. There are two concerns I hear most often from bankers, particularly those from smaller community banks. First, banks’ profits are being squeezed by 4 Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Banking Supervision and Regulation (2013a). 5 Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Banking Supervision and Regulation (2013b). 6 narrow interest spreads. Second, there is a concern that some banks may be underestimating the risks to their health posed by future increases in interest rates. For the non-bankers out there: The FOMC has kept short-term interest rates near zero for the past five years. That’s the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed’s monetary policy decision-making body. We did this in order to lower interest costs to consumers and businesses and thereby increase spending to get the economy moving again. However, low short-term interest rates have helped to keep market interest rates low in general. When interest rates are low, banks earn less money from the loans they’ve made. At the same time, it’s hard to offset this by lowering the rate they pay on deposits. As a result, banks are worried about the gap between the return they make when they loan money and the rate they pay on deposits. That is, the “narrow interest spreads.” There’s no question that these narrow interest spreads have been depressing bank earnings. However, I expect slow but steady progress on earnings as banking conditions continue to improve. As the economy strengthens, banks will make more loans, increasing the income they make. Banks are also concerned about the risks associated with rising interest rates. The reasoning is that the value of some assets—particularly longer-term ones, like bonds—falls when interest rates rise. 7 This is something we and other bank regulators are keeping a close eye on. Many banks in our District, especially smaller ones, have increased their longer-term asset holdings in a “reach for yield.” All else being equal, longer-term assets tend to deliver higher rates of return, and banks are looking to offset lower earnings from the narrow interest spread. There was a slight rise in longer-term interest rates seen during the second and third quarters of 2013. Consequently, the market value of longer-term securities held by banks fell. The balance sheets of community banks in our District, therefore, showed some unrealized losses on investment securities. These amounts are relatively small, so the risk remains very manageable for the time being. This is particularly true given the substantial increase in bank capital over the past few years. However, our supervision and regulation group feels that a significant minority of banks in the District is unduly exposed to this risk. They have therefore increased both supervisory oversight and resources available for bankers to manage that risk.6 The state of the economy today The strengthening conditions in banking and housing are signs of overall economic improvement. Economic growth picked up steadily during the first three quarters of 2013, and I expect it to pick up further this year. As I mentioned, recovery in the housing sector has helped drive consumer spending, particularly on items such as furniture and appliances. Manufacturing 6 Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Banking Supervision and Regulation (2013a). 8 has also strengthened, spurred in part by a recovery in overseas demand and the resulting export growth. This newfound momentum is partly due to an easing of headwinds that had been holding back growth over the past few years. One was the lingering effects of the financial crisis.7 A healthier banking sector, and improving stock and house prices, are signs of that headwind diminishing. Additionally, government fiscal policy will be less of an issue. Further significant federal spending cuts appear to be off the table for now. State and local governments have seen substantial budgetary improvements, allowing them to hire and spend somewhat more freely. In fact, state and local government employment increased last year, showing gains for the first time in more than four years. For a while, there was concern that the partisan bickering and brinkmanship in Washington would deal a knockout blow to business and consumer confidence. While the government shutdown did cause confidence to plummet, it quickly rebounded once the fiscal stalemate was resolved. Hiring continued as well: The economy added about 200,000 jobs a month from August through November, a small pickup from the pace over the past few years. It appears that businesses and households are getting used to—and therefore are less alarmed by—recurring 7 Jordà et al. (2011). 9 battles over Washington’s spending and the debt ceiling. Uncertainty—about the economy, fiscal policy, and myriad other concerns—has been a key factor holding back the recovery. The return of some semblance of calm in Washington, D.C., accompanied by the recent budget deal, is cause for hope that some of the hostilities are easing. This should temper at least one source of uncertainty. As a result of these various positive developments, I see growth of real, that is, inflation- adjusted, gross domestic product picking up, from about 2½ percent in 2013 to about 3 percent this year and next. Labor market conditions The ongoing economic recovery has fostered a steady improvement in labor markets. The unemployment rate is now down fully three percentage points from the worst days in 2009, when it hit 10 percent. The unemployment rate is often seen as the best indicator of labor market health; it is therefore a number we rely on heavily. However, there are also encouraging signs from the other measures of labor market conditions. We see a rising number of households that say they feel jobs are abundant and available. More small businesses say they are having difficulty filling open positions. And more people are quitting their jobs. That may not sound like good news, but it is! People obviously don’t quit jobs if they’re not confident they can find other, better ones. So we’re seeing a much more upbeat outlook from workers and employers. 10 The one indicator that remains stubbornly low is the share of the population with a job. Since the recession ended, that number has been stuck near its lowest level in 30 years. This is partly because the economy has not fully recovered all the jobs it lost during the recession.8 But, importantly, it is also because of longer-term factors that monetary policy cannot address. There is the ageing population, for one. For another, there is the rising number of working-age people receiving permanent disability benefits. This has been a growing phenomenon as the labor market stayed stubbornly unfriendly to low-wage workers for a number of years.9 When we adjust for these factors, we actually see that the employment-to-population ratio is telling basically the same story as the unemployment rate and other labor market indicators. Monetary policy All these economic improvements affect how we set monetary policy. People often think of the Fed’s responsibility purely in terms of managing, or fighting, inflation. In fact, we have a dual mandate from Congress: stable prices, yes, but also maximum employment. In its simplest terms, there should be enough jobs for everyone and your paycheck should hold its value. As you know, the FOMC recently scaled back on our bond purchases, moving from $85 billion a month to $75 billion. This bond-buying program is generally referred to as 8 Between January 2008 and February 2010, the United States lost 8.7 million nonfarm payroll jobs. As of November 2013, 7.4 million have been regained (about 85 percent of the lost jobs). 9 Autor and Duggan (2006). 11 “quantitative easing” or “QE” by people outside the Fed. Inside the Fed, it’s less elegantly referred to as LSAPs. That stands for large-scale asset purchases. This program was part of our response to the financial crisis and slow recovery. During the worst days of the recession, the economy was struggling despite the fact that the Federal Reserve had lowered short-term interest rates to near zero, in order to encourage spending. However, lowering the funds rate wasn’t enough to get the economy back on track. We couldn’t move short-term interest rates lower, because interest rates can’t fall much below zero. With the economy still sluggish, we turned to unconventional methods, including the large-scale asset purchases. This program of buying assets has proven to be a very useful complement to our conventional policy tool of setting short-term interest rates. By buying bonds, we pushed up the price of these assets. As a result, rates on longer-term loans like auto loans and home mortgages came down. When interest rates are low, people are more likely to make purchases—particularly more expensive items that require loans. Cars and appliances, for instance, and working capital in the case of businesses. As demand for goods and services goes up, businesses can expand, purchasing more supplies and hiring more workers. Businesses down the supply chain then grow, newly hired workers have more money to spend, and it all gets money flowing back into the economy. With the economy having improved so much and the future looking brighter, it was time to start taking our foot off the accelerator and ease up on the monetary stimulus. 12 Assuming the economic recovery plays out as we expect, we will likely continue to reduce the pace of those purchases, and eventually eliminate them, over this year. This will be an important first step towards eventually bringing monetary policy back to a more normal setting. As the FOMC has said repeatedly, these policy steps will depend on prevailing economic conditions and the economic outlook, rather than on some fixed date on the calendar. As far as those conditions go: While there have been significant improvements, unemployment remains above what we usually see in a sustained economic recovery. The current rate of 7 percent is well above the typical estimate of the sustainable level of unemployment, which is between 5 and 6 percent. The other half of our mandate is price stability. Inflation has been too low for some time now. I know that sounds odd to some people; high inflation is generally thought to be the danger. Those of us who lived through the 1970s and early 1980s remember the havoc it can wreak: spiraling energy and food prices, incredibly high interest rates, and paychecks eaten up by the ever-increasing cost of living. Excessively low inflation, however, is also a problem. The Fed defines price stability as an inflation rate of 2 percent.10 Both overall inflation and core inflation—which is the measure after we strip out the volatile energy and food components—have been running below 2 percent 10 See the statement of longer-term goals and policy strategy released by the FOMC in January 2012 (Board of Governors 2012). 13 since April of 2012. It does appear that inflation has finally bottomed out, and will move back to where we want it over the next few years. However, I expect it will take time for inflation to get back to 2 percent. In a nutshell, the combination of too-high unemployment and too-low inflation calls for continued monetary accommodation. In this regard, I want to stress that scaling back on asset purchases is not a retreat from accommodative monetary policy. The federal funds rate will remain near zero for the foreseeable future. Specifically, as the FOMC put it, “well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6.5 percent, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal.” That’s actually one of our shorter policy sentences—the Fed isn’t known for its brevity. In other words, we’re starting to ease off the gas, but we’re nowhere near hitting the brakes yet. Conclusion In conclusion, things are definitely looking up. We’re still not where the economy should be, but we’re well on the road to recovery, and I see things getting better in the year ahead. Thank you. 14 References Autor, David H., and Mark G. Duggan. 2006. “The Growth in the Social Security Disability Rolls: A Fiscal Crisis Unfolding.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 20(3, Summer), pp. 71–96. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2012. “Press Release.” January 25. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20120125c.htm Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Banking Supervision and Regulation. 2013a. “First Glance 12L (3Q13). Banking Recovery – Slow and Steady.” November 27. http://www.frbsf.org/banking- supervision/publications/first-glance-12l/2013/november/first-glance-third-quarter-2013/ Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Banking Supervision and Regulation. 2013b. “Banks at a Glance: 12th Federal Reserve District Banking Profiles by State.” December 2013. http://www.frbsf.org/banking-supervision/publications/banks-at-a-glance/Banks-at-a-Glance- 20130930.pdf Krainer, John, and William Hedberg. 2013. “Why Are Housing Inventories Low?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-31 (October 21). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2013/october/low-housing-inventory-factors/ Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2011. “Financial Crises, Credit Booms, and External Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons.” IMF Economic Review 59(2), pp. 340–378. Swanson, Eric T. 2013. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco FedViews, January 10. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/fedviews/2013/january/january-10-2013/ .

1 Presentation to the Money Marketeers of New York University New York, New York By John C. Williams, President and, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on February 19, 2014 Economic Conditions and Monetary Policy: A Transitional Phase Introduction Thank you, William, and good evening everyone. I’d like to talk to you today about the outlook for the economy and its implications for monetary policy. We’re heading into a transitional phase, and many people have questions about what the coming year will bring— questions about the economy’s trajectory, questions about the labor market, and questions about the effects of the future path of monetary policy—and how the Fed will steer the ship during this time of change. As always, let me add the caveat that the views expressed here are mine alone, and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. An Improving Economy It’s nice to start off by saying that things are looking up. The recent economic data have, overall, been positive: GDP is on the rise, the labor market is improving and we’ve seen an easing—and in some cases, a reversal—of some of the headwinds we’ve been fighting. Real GDP growth picked up in the second half of 2013, to a more than 3 percent annual rate. Although some of that increase reflected inventory building, solid gains in real final sales were particularly encouraging, increasing much faster in the second half of 2013 than in the first. This pickup in aggregate demand underscores the economy’s improving momentum as we enter 2014. 2 There has also been sustained improvement in labor market conditions. The unemployment rate has steadily declined, with a drop of 0.6 of a percentage point over the past three months. We also averaged nearly 180,000 new jobs a month over the past six months. Job growth in December and January came in below that average, partly due to the effects of bad weather in December, but the overall pace remains strong enough to keep bringing the unemployment rate down. Other indicators of labor market health are encouraging as well, such as workers’ perception of job availability and their willingness to quit their current jobs. What I’m hearing from the business community is also increasingly upbeat. Most of the San Francisco Fed’s contacts have a positive outlook, and are planning to increase hiring this year. This is consistent with a broadly optimistic view we’ve seen on a national level, in surveys of executives. So, the economic recovery appears to have shifted to a healthy, stronger path. This newfound strength comes in large part from the easing of headwinds that had been holding back the recovery, the two most important of those being housing and fiscal policy. The reversal in the housing market has been propelled in part by the effects of very accommodative monetary policy, which pushed mortgage rates to historical lows. Both the pace of sales and house prices have increased rapidly over the past few years. This, in turn, has led to an increase in construction. In fact, residential construction contributed roughly a third of a percentage point to GDP growth in 2012–2013. While the increase in mortgage rates last year reined in the pace of the housing recovery somewhat, the housing market overall continues to expand. The rebound in the housing sector has broader implications for the economy, positioning it to become a tailwind. It bolsters consumer spending by improving household wealth and balance sheets, and has had distinct benefits for the small business sector. The drop in house 3 prices and net wealth during the housing bust made it difficult to finance new businesses. As a result, new, small firms struggled during the recession and showed tepid employment growth during the early stages of the recovery.1 Because those types of businesses usually account for a substantial share of employment gains during recoveries, investment and job growth were affected. Now that house prices and net wealth are rising again, financial conditions for small business owners are improving. This should foster new businesses and turn into a tailwind for growth down the line. The second is fiscal policy. Over the past few years, federal fiscal policy has been a significant source of drag to the economy. In addition to tax increases and spending cuts, which directly impinge on GDP growth, fiscal policy has been surrounded by a cloud of uncertainty and brinkmanship. Heightened uncertainty about the future makes people more cautious and less willing to take on new commitments. People tend not to make potentially irreversible economic decisions if they’re unsure whether they’ll have a job in six months’ time, meaning they stop spending on all but the necessities. Economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco estimate that the rise in policy uncertainty over the past several years increased the unemployment rate by as much as 1¼ percent, as of late 2012.2 That translates into nearly 2 million lost jobs. The good news is that confidence can recover. Since the government shutdown was resolved late last year, economic policy uncertainty has come back down and consumer confidence has rebounded. In December, the Federal Reserve did its part by laying out a clear plan to gradually reduce our asset purchases over this year, giving a level of assurance about the future course of monetary policy. And by avoiding a replay of the brinkmanship over federal 1 Laderman (2013). 2 Leduc and Liu (2013). 4 fiscal policy, Congress averted what could have been a serious blow to the economy. Federal fiscal policy is likely to exert less of a drag this year, and hopefully policy uncertainty won’t surge again, which together mean fewer headwinds than in prior years. Collectively, these improvements mean that the economy is entering 2014 with good momentum. Real GDP grew just over 2½ percent last year, and I see a modest pickup to around 3 percent growth on average this year and next. This is significantly above the underlying trend growth rate, or potential GDP growth, which economists at the San Francisco Fed peg at about 2 percent a year. Challenges for the Fed’s Dual Mandate The sustained improvement in the economy is a very welcome development. However, it has presented some challenges to the FOMC’s communication of our views on the future course of monetary policy. Let me start with our guidance related to employment. As an indicator of overall health in the labor market, economists typically compare the unemployment rate to its long-term equilibrium level, the so-called “natural rate of unemployment.” While the unemployment rate has fallen substantially, especially in recent months, it remains well above typical estimates of its natural rate, which I peg at around 5½ percent. Although the decline in the unemployment rate in part reflects an increase in employment over the past few years, it can also be traced to an unusually large drop in the labor force participation rate. Now, the majority of that decline over the past six years is due to structural factors, rather than cyclical. These include the first wave of baby-boomers entering retirement and the growing number of disability claimants among the working-age population. There is, however, some non-participation in the labor market that appears to be cyclical. For example, the number of people in school and not in the labor force rose considerably over 5 the past several years. We also see a large number of people who have dropped out of the labor force but still say they want a job. Combined, these groups account for a good part of the increase in non-participation not related to retirement. It’s likely that many of these people will come back to the labor force as job-seekers as the market improves. We can therefore think of them as a source of labor market slack that is not reflected in the official unemployment rate, though I’d stress that we can’t say precisely to what extent. Turning to inflation: It has been running below the FOMC’s longer-term goal of 2 percent for well over a year now. That goal is based on the PCE price index, which provides a comprehensive measure of prices. There are three key factors holding down inflation. First, and most important, is domestic economic slack. The U.S. economy continues to operate below capacity, as we see in the still-high unemployment rate and still-low GDP relative to its potential. Second is global economic conditions that have led to an appreciation of the U.S. dollar and lower import prices. Many other countries are struggling with slack as well. Downward pressure on inflation in those countries also tends to hold down import price inflation in the United States. For example, import prices fell by over 1 percent last year. The third factor is the unusually slow growth in the cost of health care over the past year. Health care prices have typically increased faster than other prices, but last year they increased only 1.2 percent, the lowest rate of inflation since the early 1960s. This extraordinarily low rate of price increases is due in part to mandated reductions in Medicare reimbursement rates, and is unlikely to be sustained. Looking ahead, I expect unemployment to continue to come down and slack in the labor market to dissipate; foreign markets to continue to strengthen, with less downward pressure from import prices; and for special factors, like health-care costs, to ebb. Assuming this transpires, 6 inflation will gradually come back up towards our 2 percent longer-run target over the next few years. There is a chance that inflation will increase more quickly than that forecast. We generally look at the overall unemployment rate as a good yardstick of labor market slack and inflation pressures. However, its usefulness may be compromised today by the extraordinary number of long-term unemployed—defined as those out of the workforce for six months or longer. During the recent recession and its aftermath, the level of long-term unemployment rose well above its previous highs in records dating back to the late 1940s. Standard models of inflation typically do not distinguish between the short- and long- term unemployed, because they’re assumed to affect wage and price inflation in the same way. However, recent research suggests that the level of long-term unemployment may not influence inflation pressures to the same degree as short-term unemployment.3 This view takes into account the unfortunate fact that the longer someone is unemployed, the more difficult it becomes to find a job. The long-term unemployed may be chronically disadvantaged—meaning they’re not competing directly with the short-term unemployed for jobs. The continued severity of this situation could make the United States more like Europe, where long-term unemployment is more prevalent and exerts relatively little influence on wage and price determination.4 So if the long-term unemployed exert less downward pressure on wages than the short- term unemployed, the overall unemployment rate may be less useful for forecasting inflation now than it normally is. In fact, the short-term unemployment rate—the ratio of those unemployed less than six months divided by the labor force—is currently at the relatively low level of 4.2 percent. This is well below its longer-run historical average. Accordingly, it could 3 Gordon (2013) and Watson (2014). 4 Lindbeck and Snower (2001). 7 be that slack in labor markets is much less than assumed. As a result, with the unemployment rate continuing to come down, the inflation rate could rise more quickly than expected. I currently see this as a risk to the inflation outlook. For now, measures of wage and price inflation remain muted. Monetary Policy Options and Tools In light of elevated unemployment and low inflation, monetary policy needs to remain highly accommodative. As you know, our primary conventional policy tool is the federal funds rate, which also serves as a benchmark for short-term market interest rates. As the financial crisis and recession intensified, we lowered the funds rate to near zero and have kept it there since December 2008. To ensure that this translated into longer-term interest rates, we started providing forward guidance about the likely future trajectory of the fed funds rate. We also started the large-scale asset purchase program, or “quantitative easing,” in late 2008. The latest round started in September of 2012, and at its height purchased $85 billion of combined long- term Treasury and mortgage-backed securities each month. In December of 2013, the FOMC announced the first step in scaling back those purchases from $85 billion to $75 billion per month. We set in motion a second step-down in purchases to $65 billion per month at our meeting last month. Assuming the economy evolves more or less in line with our expectations—and, like the saying goes, it’s difficult to make predictions, especially about the future—the gradual tapering in the pace of asset purchases will continue. It is not locked in, but the bar for altering the path is high. In particular, it’s important for monetary policy to keep focused on the medium-term outlook for the economy and not overreact to month- to-month movements in the data. 8 These reductions in the pace of asset purchases do not represent a tightening of monetary policy. Instead, they represent the first steps in ending the process of adding monetary accommodation in support of the economy. Once the asset purchase program is completed, the next step will be to start the process of eventually bringing monetary policy back to a more normal stance. In the December 2012 meeting, the FOMC also outlined plans to keep the funds rate at the zero lower bound at least until the unemployment rate reached 6½ percent, again in the context of price stability. The sizable subsequent improvement in economic conditions, and especially the decline in the unemployment rate below 7 percent, has necessitated updating and expanding this guidance. In particular, the guidance as of this past December is that the fed funds rate will likely remain near zero “well past the time that the unemployment rate declines below 6½ percent.” 5 Now that the unemployment rate is near 6½ percent, we will need to modify this guidance further. The FOMC will discuss this in detail and I don’t want to speculate on the decision that will be made. But let me frame the issue as follows. Back in 2011, when we first introduced specific quantitative forward guidance on the future path of the funds rate, the public’s expectations about our policy plans differed sharply from our own. In particular, private expectations were for the first funds rate increase to occur much earlier than we thought appropriate at the time.6 Quantitative forward guidance proved to be a very powerful, albeit blunt, tool for bringing public expectations of when we will raise interest rates in closer alignment with our own views. 5 Board of Governors (2013). 6 Swanson and Williams (2013) and Williams (2014). 9 The situation is very different now. Public expectations of future monetary policy appear to be reasonably aligned with our own, so there is no problem to “fix.” Instead, our forward guidance should be aimed at providing the public with a good understanding of the key drivers of our policy decisions. This is best done by trying to explain how we are likely to react to economic developments, rather than putting down specific, quantitative markers for future policy decisions. Qualitative guidance of this type, complemented by our economic projections, speeches, and testimony, is better suited for the current situation. It avoids the problem of oversimplifying policy decisions down to one or two indicators and appropriately highlights the various economic factors that influence monetary policy. When we do eventually increase the funds rate, and start the process of normalizing monetary policy, clarity and transparency will be key. We’ll do our best to be clear, both in advance and as it’s happening…we don’t want to give anyone an excuse to pretend they didn’t see it coming. We saw in December, with the taper announcement, that this can be achieved: the Fed can be clear and markets can take what we’re saying at face value. Looking further ahead, there are questions about normalizing monetary policy when we have this huge quantity of excess reserves, which were created to fight the financial crisis and recession. The Fed’s balance sheet has expanded to over $4 trillion, an unprecedented level. The Fed has been devoting a lot of thought and research to making sure that we can successfully conduct monetary policy and influence interest rates even with a large balance sheet. We have three main tools at our disposal to manage bank reserves while we normalize policy.7 The first is paying interest on reserves. The IOER rate lets banks earn a risk-free return on their reserves held at the Fed, instead of lending them to other banks overnight. This helps 7 For additional details, see Potter (2013). 10 put a floor on the funds rate and other money market rates. The second and third tools the Federal Reserve has been testing as ways to drain reserves. One is the Term Deposit Facility, or TDF, whereby financial institutions can deposit excess reserves in interest-bearing deposits for a fixed period of time, similar to a CD. The other is “reverse repos.” The IOER rate and TDF are only available to depository institutions; reverse repos are also available to non-bank financial institutions. The Fed has been developing and testing a program of reverse repos, with a range of trading partners, with the goal of providing even tighter control over short-term interest rates. All these tools will be available to help us control short-term interest rates. Conclusion To sum up: Things are definitely looking better. We’re entering 2014 with solid momentum. The FOMC’s taking the first steps towards reducing the pace of additional monetary accommodation is a reflection of that improvement. Let me stress that the normalization of monetary policy is likely to be a gradual process, and I expect the fed funds rate will stay near zero until well into next year. Of course, there will also be challenges along the way. But we are prepared for the inevitable bumps in the road. And that road we’re on is, finally, the one on the way to normal. Thank you. 11 References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 2013. “Press Release.” December 18. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20131218a.htm Gordon, Robert J. 2013. “The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU During the Slow Recovery.” NBER Working Paper 19390. Laderman, Elizabeth. 2013. “Small Businesses Hit Hard by Weak Job Gains.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-26 (September 9). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2013/september/small-business-job-growth- employment-rate/ Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu. 2013. “Uncertainty and the Slow Labor Market Recovery.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-21 (July 22). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2013/july/us-labor-market-uncertainty-slow-recovery/ Lindbeck, Assar, and Dennis J. Snower. 2001. “Insiders versus Outsiders.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(1, Winter), pp. 165–188. Potter, Simon. 2013. “Recent Developments in Monetary Policy Implementation.” Remarks before the Money Marketeers of New York University, December 2. http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2013/pot131202.html Swanson, Eric T. and John C. Williams. 2013. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-02. Forthcoming, American Economic Review. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/working-papers/2012/wp12-02bk.pdf. Watson, Mark W. 2014. “Inflation Persistence, the NAIRU, and the Great Recession.” Working paper, Princeton University, January. Forthcoming, American Economic Review. http://www.princeton.edu/~mwatson/papers/Watson_AERPP_2014.pdf Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at Brookings. http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2014/01/16-monetary-policy-zero-lower-bound- williams

1 Speech to Seattle University Albers School of Business Seattle, Washington By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on 5 March 2014 The Federal Reserve: Inside Monetary Policy Introduction Thank you, Dean Phillips, it’s a pleasure to be here. A while back, I was asked to speak to a group of educators about the messages to get across to their students about the Federal Reserve. I naturally assumed that textbooks were updated about as frequently as when I was in college—in fact, that they might still be using the same ones. This was important, because while economic principles haven’t changed, the discussion about the Fed and our role has; with the events of the past seven years, we’re not talking about reserve requirements anymore.1 We’re talking about over a dozen emergency lending programs, a 4 trillion—that’s trillion with a “t”—dollar balance sheet, and a newfound openness to discussing our future policy decisions. We’re talking about breaking new ground in monetary policy. The good news is that college textbooks have been pretty well updated, and cover a lot of these new developments. But even so, I thought there were broader questions about the Fed’s role in the economy and society that got lost in the details. I was left with the question: what are the important take-aways about the Fed? The answers are pertinent to anyone studying business or economics today. So with that in mind, I’d like to talk about three fundamental questions regarding the Federal Reserve. First, what’s 1 Williams (2011). 2 special about the Fed that makes it so important? Second, what does the Fed actually do? And third, why do the Fed’s policy decisions matter for the economy? What makes the Fed so important? Before I proceed, I am obligated to mention that my comments reflect my own views and not necessarily those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. With that disclaimer out of the way, let me turn to the first question, what makes the Fed so important? Let’s first establish that it actually is, or at least is viewed by many as being so. [Figure 1] I’ll bet most everyone in this room recognizes both Ben Bernanke and Janet Yellen, which I think makes the point. Whenever the Fed decides—or doesn’t decide—to do something, it’s there in the newspaper, above the fold, main headline. When there’s a new Chair appointed, when there’s speculation about who that will be, it occupies a front-and-center place in the news cycle, as we saw last year. You all know who the Fed Chair is, but do you know who heads the other financial regulatory agencies? These are important institutions, with critical roles in overseeing our banking system, but few Americans can name their heads, and none moves markets with a single sentence. What’s different about the Fed? Well, obviously we are unique in that we—and we alone—set monetary policy. The Federal Open Market Committee—the FOMC—gets together every six weeks or so to discuss, debate, and make policy decisions that are incredibly important for the U.S. economy and, by extension, the global economy. But more than that, we’re a unique institution in the federal government, both in function and in structure. One key difference between us and the Congress, or the President, or a state legislature for that matter, is that we’re not elected. We don’t have to get House or Senate approval for what we do; we don’t have to run it by the President; there’s no one from the Treasury 3 Department at our meetings. This gives us a great deal of autonomy in making monetary policy. Compare that to the process of changing the tax code, which must pass both houses of the Congress and be approved by the President. Now, obviously we’re overseen by the Congress, and, as a sidebar for those who may have heard otherwise, we are audited! If tomorrow Congress decided to abolish the Fed, they could do that, assuming they got presidential assent. Which I hope they don’t. In part, because I like my job, but mostly because this arrangement allows us to make what we think are the best policy decisions. We don’t have partisan battles to win or the distraction of election cycles, which means we can avoid the short-termism that can interfere with decision-making. Over our history we’ve built an institution staffed with highly experienced, non-partisan experts committed to our public purpose. We’re free to focus not just on immediate results, but on medium- and longer-term outcomes that we truly believe are in the best interests of the country. When I sit with my colleagues at the boardroom on Constitution Avenue in Washington, D.C., there’s no discussion of politics at all, except to the extent that they shape the federal policies and the economic environment in which we operate. That room is almost a bubble—an oasis of political neutrality in what most people view as the most partisan place in the country. We just discuss the best research and analysis, look at all the information we can gather, and try to come to the best decision. So my answer to that first question is that what makes the Fed so important is its ability to regularly make decisions that affect the economy…but moreover that it has the freedom to do so by virtue of the unique role bestowed on us by our democratically elected government. That carries a lot of accountability and a need for transparency. The license the American people 4 have given us holds us to a very high standard, and we take that trust and responsibility very seriously.2 What does the Fed do? On to the second question: what does the Fed actually do? I don’t want this to sound condescending—if you’ve voluntarily shown up for a talk about the Fed, you’ve probably read all about us in your textbooks and in the news. If you’re here under duress, it means the professor who forced you to come uses those same textbooks. You know that the Fed makes cash available across the country, runs key parts of our payments systems, conducts oversight and regulation of banks and other financial institutions, and, of course, makes monetary policy. However, despite what you may hear from some commentators, we don’t actually print money. The Bureau of Engraving and Printing in the Treasury does that. So, if we’re not printing money, what does monetary policy do? And why is there that confusion? Well, the simple answer is that we buy and sell securities. In ordinary times, those are mostly short-term Treasury bills. Post-financial crisis, however, has constituted extraordinary times. We shifted to purchasing long-term Treasury and mortgage-backed securities—you know this as “quantitative easing” or “QE.” How do we pay for these securities that we are buying? If you look at this slide here [Figure 2], it shows the asset and liability sides of the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. I’ll start with how the balance sheet appeared in July 2007, on the eve of the financial crisis. At that time, we owned a little over $850 billion of assets. As you can see, our asset holdings of Treasury securities are largely balanced out on the liability side of the ledger by the amount of currency in circulation, which is treated as a liability of the Federal Reserve. In addition, there’s a relatively 2 Williams (2011). 5 small amount of reserves, which are deposits that banks keep in their accounts at the Fed. As things go, that’s all pretty boring. In normal times, monetary policy is conducted by making small changes to the amount of reserves that banks hold with us by buying or selling some of our Treasury bills. This shift in the supply of reserves affects the interest rate that banks pay each other. Thus, we “set” short-term interest rates by making small changes in the supply of reserves. With the financial crisis, however, our balance sheet got a lot more interesting…and a lot bigger. Early on, we increased reserves to drive short-term interest rates close to zero. But we didn’t stop there. Take our asset purchase program, for example. When we buy these Treasury and mortgage-backed securities, what we’re doing is purchasing them on the open market and then crediting the bank accounts of the institutions we bought them from with reserves in their Fed accounts. But those reserves did not exist a moment before we made that transaction. A rudimentary analogy would be: your personal bank account is at zero, but you go into a store anyway, and at checkout, you have the power to say, “The money has been paid.” The Federal Reserve has a monopoly on this ability to generate bank reserves out of thin air. Likewise, we can extinguish them when we wish. We have the unique capability to conduct open-market operations and fundamentally change the amount of liquidity in the financial system. This, in turn, affects the prices of assets, which affects financial conditions, which affects the economy. I said earlier that a lot of the discussion has changed because of the current environment, and this is one area that’s very different from its historical precedent. Because we’re making these asset purchases, we’ve added colossally to both sides of our balance sheet. When we make purchases that enlarge the asset side, the additional reserves we create for financial institutions 6 expands the liability side. You can see this in the second set of bars in Figure 2. In normal times, our balance sheet doesn’t change much, because moving assets by a few billion dollars had a sizable effect on interest rates. Since the recession, it’s been a different story. The first two rounds of asset purchases expanded our balance sheet to about $2.8 trillion, as of September 2012. Since then, the QE3 program has expanded it to just over $4 trillion. Which demonstrates the extent to which these last several years have been extraordinary times for monetary policy. So the answer to the second question, what does the Fed actually do, is that, yes, we move cash around, we oversee and regulate financial institutions; but what’s truly special is that we have this incredible ability to generate reserves in the banking system, thereby affecting interest rates. Why do the Fed’s policy decisions matter for the economy? That leads directly to the third question, why does the Fed matter for the economy? And though it wasn’t by design, we did get two natural experiments that illustrated the power of monetary policy in the past year. Financial markets pay close attention to the public announcement that comes out after each FOMC meeting, because it contains important information about the future path of interest rates, the relative returns to investments in stocks and bonds, the likely value of the U.S. dollar, and so on. So the day of the FOMC statement can be a day of major movements in financial markets. Let’s look at a specific example of a market reaction to monetary policy. Figure 3 shows what happened after the June FOMC meeting last year. The black line shows the value of the U.S. dollar against the euro as the day progressed, the red line shows the level of the S&P 500 stock market index, and the blue line is the yield on a 10-year U.S. Treasury note. Markets were 7 pretty flat that day up until the FOMC announcement came out at 2 p.m. eastern time. At the press conference following the announcement, then-Chairman Bernanke expressed optimism about economic conditions and said that QE could get scaled back, or “tapered,” later that year. This set off what has been termed the “taper tantrum” that roiled financial markets. Investors had clearly been expecting tapering to occur much later. What effect did this have? You can see that the statement had an immediate impact, albeit a small one, if you look at 2 p.m. As the day progressed, the market response intensified. The 10-year Treasury yield went up about 13 basis points that day, rising another 20 over the next few days, which translates into higher mortgage rates and higher interest rates for longer- term lending. So the market’s response brought long-term interest rates up substantially. Economic theory tells us that if interest rates are higher, then the return on bonds is higher, which raises the opportunity costs of investing in the stock market… and, accordingly, the stock market fell, dropping about 1 ¼ percent by the end of the day and almost 5 percent by the following Monday. Similarly, theory tells us that when the return to holding U.S. bonds rises, the foreign exchange value of the dollar should rise. That’s exactly what happened, with the dollar rising nearly 1 percent against the euro that afternoon. The market reaction to the FOMC statement on September 18 is a direct contrast. This slide [Figure 4] shows a tick-by-tick—again, it’s all looking relatively normal, up until 2 p.m. eastern time, when up on the Fed website pops the FOMC statement announcing that… nothing’s changing. For most organizations, saying it’s business as usual wouldn’t have much of an effect. But this time, many market participants thought we were going to start cutting back on our asset purchases. This is a real-life example of how important expectations of monetary policy are, because this announcement—that things were staying the same—was news. Because 8 they expected us to begin the taper, market participants saw not changing anything as essentially an easing of monetary policy. If you look at the chart, you’ll see the response in the markets was immediate, and the reverse of what happened on June 19. The Treasury yield went down; the exchange rate dropped; and the S&P went up. By the way, this is a great example of economic theory playing out in practice exactly as it’s supposed to. Economists like it when this happens because we can counter witticisms like, “An economist is an expert who will know tomorrow why the things he predicted yesterday didn’t happen today.” In this case, what happened was exactly what economists tell us monetary policy should do. So, how do these movements in asset prices affect the economy? The theory behind these reactions follows the basic logic you’ve all been taught in class: If the stock market is higher, people feel wealthier and that makes them more willing to spend. Lower interest rates mean a greater appetite for making long-term investments, whether it’s individuals buying cars or businesses investing. A weaker dollar, all else being equal, makes our exports cheaper and imports more expensive, which also helps increase spending on U.S. goods and services. That’s the theory. How can an empirical economist say for certain that the Fed’s policies are working? We find that by looking at the areas of the economy that are doing the best. The answer—along with the answer to the question: Why does the Fed matter to the economy?—is that the rebounding sectors are the interest-sensitive ones. Auto sales are pretty close to where they were before the financial crisis. Home sales and construction—though they’re nowhere near as strong as right before the crash—are the areas of the economy that have improved most. If you look at sectors that aren’t sensitive to interest rates, like services, or non-durable goods, 9 they’re still relatively depressed. They’ve come back from the lows they hit, but haven’t recovered in the same way as interest-sensitive sectors have.3 This gets to the heart of question three, why the Fed matters to the economy: because monetary policy affects the way people behave—the way they spend and save and invest—from individuals to corporations. Conclusion To sum up: the Federal Reserve has been given unique license by the government and the American people to make critical public policy decisions. We make monetary policy to steer the country through both ordinary and extraordinary economic times, using the best tools at our disposal. And the policy decisions we make fundamentally alter the way people and businesses make decisions. Thank you. 3 See Williams (2014) and Cúrdia (2014) for evidence and discussion. 10 What makes the Federal Reserve so important? Figure 1 What does the Fed actually do? Figure 2 Jul. 25, 2007 Sep. 12, 2012 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities Source: Federal Reserve Board Federal Reserve Balance Sheet $, Trillions Treasury securities Treasury and agency securities Currency Currency Reserves (Bank deposits held at Fed) Other Other 11 What does the Fed actually do? Figure 2 (continued) Jul. 25, 2007 Feb. 26, 2014 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 Assets Liabilities Assets Liabilities Source: Federal Reserve Board Federal Reserve Balance Sheet $, Trillions Treasury securities Treasury and agency securities Currency Currency Reserves (Bank deposits held at Fed) Other Other Why does the Fed matter for the economy? Figure 3 2.0 2.1 2.2 2.3 2.4 98 99 100 101 102 12:00 PM 1:00 PM 2:00 PM 3:00 PM 4:00 PM Source: Bloomberg Index, 12:00 PM ET = 100 Market Reaction to 6/19/13 FOMC Announcement Percent S&P 500 (left scale) USD-EUR exchange rate (left scale) 10-year Treasury yield (right scale) 12 Why does the Fed matter for the economy? Figure 4 2.6 2.7 2.8 2.9 3.0 3.1 98 99 100 101 102 12:00 PM 1:00 PM 2:00 PM 3:00 PM 4:00 PM Source: Bloomberg Index, 12:00 PM ET = 100 Market Reaction to 9/18/13 FOMC Announcement Percent S&P 500 (left scale) USD-EUR exchange rate (left scale) 10-year Treasury yield (right scale) 13 References Cúrdia, Vasco. 2014. FedViews. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, February 13. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/fedviews/2014/february/february-13-2014/ Williams, John C. 2011. “Economics Instruction and the Brave New World of Monetary Policy.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-17 (June 6). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2011/june/economics-instruction-monetary-policy/ Williams, John C. 2014. “Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound.” Working paper, Hutchins Center on Fiscal & Monetary Policy at Brookings. http://www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2014/01/16- monetary-policy-zero-lower-bound-williams
