CCPs are different from most other financial intermediaries in the sense that the CCP stands between two parties to a cleared transaction whose payment obligations exactly offset each other. A CCP faces market or credit risk only in the event that one of its members defaults and its required initial margin or other pre-funded financial resources are insufficient to cover any adverse price swings that occur during the period between the time of default and the time that the CCP is able to liquidate the defaulting party's positions. However, like most other financial intermediaries, CCPs do face liquidity risks. Their business model is based on timely payments and the ability to quickly convert either the underlying assets being cleared or non-cash collateral into cash. For this reason, CCPs should carefully consider liquidity when launching new products and only offer clearing of products that can be sold quickly, even in times of stress. Liquidity problems can occur in central clearing even if all counterparties have the financial resources to meet their obligations, if they are unable to convert those resources into cash quickly enough. The amount of liquidity risk that CCPs face can sometimes dwarf the amount of credit or market risk they face. This is particularly true for the clearing of cash securities such as Treasuries. In that case, the securities being cleared are extremely safe and likely to rise in value in times of stress. But in contrast to most cleared derivatives, the cash payments involved are very large because counterparties exchange cash for the delivery of the security on a gross basis. I will look at these risks from two perspectives, first in terms of the payments that CCPs must make, and then in terms of the payments they expect to receive. Payment Flows from CCPs In the case of a member's default, a CCP must be equipped to make the cash payments owed to non-defaulting counterparties when due. This requirement can be met as long as there is sufficient margin, mutualized resources such as the guarantee fund, or the CCP's own resources held in cash and in the required currency. But if those funds are held in securities, then the CCP will need to convert them to cash, either by entering into a repurchase agreement, or using them as collateral to draw on a line of credit. And if the CCP holds either cash or securities denominated in a currency different from the one in which payment must be made, it will need to either engage in a spot FX transaction or in an FX swap. Principle seven of the PFMI addresses these liquidity risks, calling for all CCPs to meet a "Cover 1 standard"--that is, to hold enough liquid resources in all relevant currencies to make payments on time in the event of the default of the clearing member that would generate the largest payment obligation under a wide range of potential stress scenarios. More complex CCPs and those with a systemic presence in multiple jurisdictions are encouraged to meet a "Cover 2 standard." The PFMI also provide guidance on the resources that qualify in meeting these requirements: cash held at a central bank or a creditworthy commercial bank, committed lines of credit, committed repurchase agreements, committed FX swap agreements, or highly marketable collateral that can be converted into cash under prearranged and highly reliable funding arrangements. There are two sets of risks involved here. First, where should CCPs put their cash? As central clearing has expanded, CCPs have had to deal with increasingly large amounts of cash margin. CCPs can deposit some of these funds with commercial banks. But regulatory changes have made it more expensive for banks to take large deposits from other financial firms, and in some cases banks may be unwilling to accept more cash from a CCP. And many of the largest banks are also clearing members, which introduces a certain amount of wrong-way risk. A clearing-member default could be especially fraught if the defaulting bank also held large cash balances for the CCP. For this reason, CCPs may prudently place limits on the amount deposited at a given institution. In order to diversify their holdings, many also place cash in the repo market. If it is available, the ability to deposit cash at a central bank allows for another safe, flexible, and potentially attractive option--a subject I will return to later. Second, how can CCPs be assured that they will be able to convert securities into cash or draw on other resources in times of stress? The PFMI uses the words "committed" and "pre-arranged" in describing qualifying liquid resources. Indeed, the PFMI does not view spot transactions on the open market as reliable sources of liquidity during times of stress. The Federal Reserve has strongly supported this approach. Liquidity plans should not take for granted that, at a time of stress involving a member default, lines of credit, repurchase agreements, or FX swaps could be arranged on the spot. Committed sources of liquidity are more likely to be available. They also allow market participants and regulators to make sure that plans are mutually consistent. If a CCP has arranged for a committed liquidity source, then the provider should account for it in its own plans and demonstrate that it can meet its commitment. Of course, this liquidity is not free, nor should it be. Regulatory changes have forced banks to closely examine their liquidity planning and to internalize the costs of liquidity provision. The costs of committed liquidity facilities will be passed on to clearing members. These costs are perhaps highest in clearing Treasury securities, where liquidity needs can be especially large. To meet its estimated needs, DTCC's Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (FICC) is planning to institute a committed repo arrangement with its clearing members. Despite initial concerns, the industry seems prepared to absorb these costs, but they will not be trivial for many members. 4 Payment Flows to CCPs While initial and variation margin help mitigate credit risk in central clearing, they can also create liquidity risk. Clearing members and their clients are required to make margin payments to CCPs on a daily basis, and in times of market volatility these payments may rise dramatically. This source of liquidity risk can occur even in the absence of a default. For example, after the UK referendum on Brexit, the resulting price swings triggered many CCPs to make substantial intraday and end-of-day margin calls. Fortunately, members had prepared and were able to make the needed payments, but the sums involved caught many off guard and the experience served as a useful warning. According to data from the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), the top five CCPs requested $27 billion in additional margin over the two days following the referendum, about five times the average amount. 5 In most cases, clearing members have an hour to meet intraday margin calls. Clearing members have no choice but to hold enough liquid resources to meet the range of possible margin calls, as the consequences of missing a margin call are considerable. Brexit was only the most recent example in which margin calls were unexpectedly large. Margin calls were also quite large after the stock market crash of October 1987. That episode helps to demonstrate how complicated payments flows can be and why liquidity risk also needs to be viewed from a macroprudential perspective, considering potential risks to flows across the system. After falling about 9 percent the week before, on October 19, 1987, the S&P 500 stock market index fell about 20 percent. Margin calls were about 10 times their normal size, and caused a very complicated set of payment flows across multiple exchanges, CCPs, and banks. 6 The next slide helps to represent the ensuing payment flows. 7 Calls requesting payment are on the left in red. When making a margin call, a CCP requests payment from its clearing members. Clearing members in turn request margin payments from the customers for whom they are clearing, and those customers must then direct their bank to make the payment. If everything works as it should, payments (in green, on the right) will ensue. The customer's bank will deliver the requested payment to the clearing member's bank (or payment bank). The payment bank will then deliver the funds to a settlement bank used by the CCP, and the settlement bank will then credit the funds to the CCP. In theory, each of these payments would have to happen sequentially, but often parties offer intraday credit (represented by the dashed orange lines) to help smooth these flows. For example, the settlement bank may provide intraday credit to the clearing member, sending funds to the CCP before the member has delivered funds to the payment bank or before those funds have been transferred to the settlement bank. Clearing members or the customer's bank may also provide intraday credit to their customers, again making payments before funds have been received in order to help speed the payments chain. Over the course of October 19, 1987, the system worked largely as I have just described. But on October 20, every single link in these payments and credit chains was interrupted. This is represented graphically in the next slide . By that morning, many settlement banks and clearing members had yet to receive offsetting payments for credit that had been extended the previous day. Goldman Sachs and Kidder, Peabody had together extended $1.5 billion in credit that had not yet been paid. 8 As a result, some firms pulled back on providing further credit, which then forced each link of the payments chain to operate sequentially. Payments slowed, with the unintended consequence that uncovered positions grew larger and stayed open for even longer. Without credit, some customers were unable to meet their margin calls and were forced to liquidate their positions. This gridlock sparked fears that a clearing member or even a CCP would be forced to default. The Federal Reserve reacted to this threat by encouraging banks to continue to extend credit and by injecting funds into the system to help ensure that credit was available. The 1987 stock market crash did not leave much lasting impact on the economy, but if these liquidity problems had been allowed to cause the default of a major clearing member or even a CCP then it could have had a much more serious impact. While this might seem like simply an interesting bit of history, the payments chains involved in central clearing are still very similar today. To guard against the same sorts of liquidity risk today, we need to make sure that every link in these chains will work as it is intended to under stress. While neither Brexit nor the October 1987 crash involved a clearing member default, these incidents do point to the potential complications of such a default. I have already discussed the steps that a CCP might need to take in the event of a default to meet its liquidity needs. Some of those needs, such as committed lines of credit or repo agreements, could involve tapping financial resources at the same banks that are clearing members. Thus, clearing members may need to juggle several different liquidity exposures simultaneously in the event of a default. They may face draws on committed sources of liquidity, and if there are market stresses around the default, which seems a near certainty, they may at the same time face a sudden increase in intraday margin calls and their own internal demands for more liquid resources. 9 These are risks that we should seek to understand better. Policy Implications The Federal Reserve is the primary supervisory authority for two designated financial market utilities (or DFMUs), and plays a secondary role relative to the six other DFMUs. As a central bank, we are particularly concerned with liquidity issues. 10 I will address four policy issues that need careful consideration as the public sector and market participants continue to address liquidity risks in central clearing. Stress Testing The 1987 stock market crash showed that we need to look at liquidity risks from a systemwide perspective. That event involved multiple CCPs and also involved multiple links in the payments chains between banks and CCPs. Conducting supervisory stress tests on CCPs that take liquidity risks into account would help authorities better assess the resilience of the financial system. A stress test focused on cross-CCP liquidity risks could help to identify assumptions that are not mutually consistent; for example, if each CCP's plans involve liquidating Treasuries, is it realistic to believe that every CCP could do so simultaneously? Authorities in both the United States and Europe have made progress in conducting supervisory stress tests of CCPs. In the United States, the CFTC conducted a useful set of tests of five major CCPs last year. 11 The tests analyzed each individual institution's ability to withstand the credit risks emanating from the default of one or more clearing members. This was innovative and necessary work. It would be useful to build on it by adding tests that focus on liquidity risks across CCPs and their largest common clearing members. Such an exercise could focus on the robustness of the system as a whole rather than individual CCPs. The European Securities and Markets Authority is already expanding its supervisory stress testing exercise to incorporate liquidity risk. A similar exercise here in the United States should be seriously considered. Ensuring Efficiency The industry collectively needs to ensure that the liquidity flows involved in central clearing are handled efficiently and in a way that minimizes potential disruption. As I noted, there was some concern about the size of margin calls following Brexit, and certain CCPs have taken measures to address this. For example, LCH has subsequently made changes to its intraday margining procedures in an effort to reduce liquidity pressures on its clearing members, allowing them to offset losses on their client accounts with gains on the house account. 12 Other CCPs are also actively engaged in efforts to increase their efficiency.FICC is looking at potential solutions using distributed ledger technology to clear both legs of overnight repo trades, which could allow for greater netting opportunities and thereby reduce potential liquidity needs. 13 Several CCPs are also looking at ways to expand central clearing to directly include more buy-side firms, which could also offer greater netting opportunities. Doing so could also offer new sources of liquidity if the new entrants are able to take part in the CCP's committed liquidity arrangements. Diversification of sources of liquidity would offer tangible benefits--CCPs would avoid relying on the same limited set of clearing members for all of their liquidity needs. As one example, the Options Clearing Corporation established an innovative pre-funded, committed repurchase facility with a leading pension fund. As regulators, we should encourage innovations that increase clearing efficiency and reduce liquidity risks where they meet the PFMI and our supervisory expectations. Central Bank Accounts As I discussed earlier, CCPs have a complicated set of decisions on how and where to hold their cash balances. Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act authorized the Federal Reserve to establish accounts for DFMUs, and we now have accounts with each of the eight institutions that the Financial Stability Oversight Council has so designated. These accounts permit DFMUs to hold funds at the Federal Reserve, but not to borrow from it. 14 Allowing DFMUs to deposit balances at the Federal Reserve helps them avoid some of the risk involved in holding balances with their clearing members. Doing so also provides CCPs with a flexible way to hold balances on days when margin payments unexpectedly spike and it is difficult to find banks that are willing to accept an unexpected influx in deposits. In such a case, it may also be too late in the day to rely on the repo market. The availability of Fed accounts could help avoid potential market disruptions in those types of circumstances. Cross-Border Cooperation The lessons from Brexit also point to the need for cross-border cooperation. Brexit triggered payments flows to CCPs across many jurisdictions. As far as liquidity risks are concerned, it is immaterial whether a CCP is based in the United States or abroad so long as it clears U.S. dollar denominated assets and must make and receive U.S. dollar payments. There are different possible approaches to such cross-border issues. Efforts to address these liquidity risks should carefully take into consideration the effect that they would have on the broader financial system. For example, splintering central clearing by currency area would fragment liquidity and reduce netting opportunities, which in the case of events like Brexit could actually trigger even greater liquidity risk. In my opinion, we should be searching for cooperative solutions to these issues. Conclusion In the years following the financial crisis, one of the primary lessons for market participants and their regulators was the criticality of liquidity risk management. Financial firms such as Lehman Brothers and AIG struggled to obtain sufficient liquidity to meet their obligations. Liquidity is also a crucial concern in central clearing, and while regulatory reforms have done much to strengthen both CCPs and their clearing members, we should continue to make progress in creating a more robust and efficient system. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Federal Reserve. Return to text 2. In 2013, CPMI-IOSCO launched a multi-level, multi-year monitoring program to evaluate how the principles and responsibilities in the PFMI are being implemented around the world. Several different assessments have been completed to date and the findings have provided important insight on both the progress and methods by which authorities and CCPs have sought to implement the PFMI. In 2014, CPMI-IOSCO published supplemental guidance and a menu of recovery tools to help financial market infrastructures, including CCPs, meet the expectations in the PFMI that all financial market infrastructures have a comprehensive and effective recovery plan. Return to text 3. While the work done in the context of the joint work plan represents significant regulatory efforts related to CCPs, progress is also being made on a parallel path. In particular, it is important to highlight the adoption and implementation of the SEC's Covered Clearing Agency Standards, which further strengthens the risk management standards that clearing agencies registered with the SEC must meet. In addition, the SEC and the industry have been working jointly to shorten the settlement cycle to two days for many securities products, culminating in the SEC's adoption of amendments to Rule 15c6-1(a) earlier this year. Return to text 4. " Treasury repos may hit 20bp under DTCC liquidity plan ," Risk.net, November 25, 2015. Return to text 5. " Derivatives traders forced to provide $27bn collateral post-Brexit ," Financial Times, November 16, 2016. Return to text 6. Cash equities were traded in New York on the New York Stock Exchange, equity futures were traded and cleared in Chicago by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, while stock options were traded on the Chicago Board Options Exchange and cleared by the Options Clearing Corporation. Return to text 7. This figure is an adaptation from one presented in Andrew Brimmer (1989), "Central Banking and Systemic Risks in Capital Markets," Journal of Economic Perspectives , Spring, 3–16. Return to text 8. " The Day the Nation's Cash Pipeline Almost Ran Dry ," The New York Times, October 2, 1988. Return to text 9. Regulatory changes since the financial crisis have encouraged banks to hold much greater amounts of high-quality liquid assets, which would help them in meeting such liquidity demands. Return to text 10. Section 804 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Financial Stability Oversight Council to designate those financial market utilities that the council determines are, or are likely to become, systemically important. Eight utilities have been designated: The Clearing House Payments Company, L.L.C.; CLS Bank International; Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Inc.; The Depository Trust Company; Fixed Income Clearing Corporation; ICE Clear Credit L.L.C.; National Securities Clearing Corporation; and The Options Clearing Corporation. Return to text 11. " Supervisory Stress Test of Clearinghouses (PDF) ," Commodity Futures Trading Commission, November 2016. Return to text 12. LCH has also moved forward by one hour the timing of the last intraday margin call and made procedural changes that will speed up the processing of the call, which should also help with payment flows. Return to text 13. " DTCC & Digital Asset Move to Next Phase after Successful Proof-Of-Concept for Repo Transactions Using Distributed Ledger Technology ," DTCC, February 2017. Return to text 14. According to title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act, a designated financial market utility may only borrow from the discount window only in unusual and exigent circumstances and only upon a majority vote of the Board of Governors following consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: June 23, 2017 Back to Top

﻿ Speech by Governor Powell at the Salzburg Global Seminar - Federal Reserve Board Skip to main content An official website of the United States Government Here's how you know Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Back to Home Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Stay Connected Federal Reserve Facebook Page Federal Reserve Instagram Page Federal Reserve YouTube Page Federal Reserve Flickr Page Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page Federal Reserve Threads Page Federal Reserve X Page Federal Reserve Bluesky Page Subscribe to RSS Subscribe to Email Recent Postings Calendar Publications Site Map A-Z index Careers FAQs Videos Contact Search Submit Search Button Advanced Toggle Dropdown Menu Main Menu Toggle Button Sections Search Toggle Button Search Search Submit Button Submit Home News & Events Speeches Speech PDF June 26, 2017 Remarks Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Salzburg Global Seminar, Salzburg, Austria Share I appreciate the opportunity to speak at the Salzburg Global Seminar. Today I will discuss our current regulatory regime, and areas where we may be able to make adjustments. As always, the views I express here are my own. 1 We need a resilient, well-capitalized, well-regulated financial system that is strong enough to withstand even severe shocks and support economic growth by lending through the economic cycle. The Federal Reserve has approached the post-crisis regulatory and supervisory reforms with that outcome in mind. There is little doubt that the U.S. financial system is stronger today than it was a decade ago. Loss-absorbing capacity among banks is substantially higher as a result of both regulatory requirements and stress testing exercises. The banking industry, and the largest banking firms in particular, face far less liquidity risk than before the crisis. And progress in resolution planning by the largest firms has reduced the threat that their failure would pose. These efforts have made U.S. banking firms both more robust and more resolvable. Evidence overwhelmingly shows that financial crises can cause severe and lasting damage to the economy's productive capacity and growth potential. Post-crisis reforms to financial sector regulation and supervision have been designed to significantly reduce the likelihood and severity of future financial crises. We have sought to accomplish this goal in significant part by reducing both the probability of failure of a large banking firm and the consequences of such a failure were it to occur. As I mentioned, we have substantially increased the capital, liquidity, and other prudential requirements for large banking firms. These measures are not free. Higher capital requirements increase bank costs, and at least some of those costs will be passed along to bank customers and shareholders. But in the longer term, stronger prudential requirements for large banking firms will produce more sustainable credit availability and economic growth. Our objective should be to set capital and other prudential requirements for large banking firms at a level that protects financial stability and maximizes long-term, through-the-cycle credit availability and economic growth. To accomplish that goal, it is essential that we protect the core elements of these reforms for our most systemic firms in capital and liquidity, stress testing and resolution. With that in mind, I will highlight five key areas of focus for regulatory reform. The first is simplification and recalibation of regulation of small and medium-sized banks. We are working to build on the relief we have provided in the areas of call reports and exam cycles, by developing a proposal to simplify the generally applicable capital framework that applies to community banking organizations. The second area is resolution plans. The Fed and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation believe that it is worthwhile to consider extending the cycle for living will submissions from annual to once every two years, and focusing every other of these filings on key topics of interest and material changes from the prior full plan submission. We are also considering other changes, as I discussed last week when testifying to Congress. Third, the Federal Reserve is reassessing whether the Volcker rule implementing regulation most efficiently achieves its policy objectives, and we look forward to working with the other four Volcker rule agencies to find ways to improve that regulation. In our view, there is room for eliminating or relaxing aspects of the implementing regulation in ways that do not undermine the Volcker rule's main policy goals. Fourth, we will continue to enhance the transparency of stress testing and the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR). We will soon seek public feedback concerning possible forms of enhanced disclosure, including a range of indicative loss rates predicted by the Federal Reserve's models for various loan and securities portfolios, and information about risk characteristics that contribute to the loss-estimate ranges. We will also provide more detail on the qualitative aspects of stress testing in next week's CCAR disclosure. Finally, the Federal Reserve is taking a fresh look at the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio. We believe that the leverage ratio is an important backstop to the risk-based capital framework, but that it is important to get the relative calibrations of the leverage ratio and the risk-based capital requirements right. U.S. banks today are as strong as any in the world. As we consider the progress that has been achieved in improving the resiliency and resolvability of our banking industry, it is important for us to look for ways to reduce unnecessary burden. We must also be vigilant against new risks that may develop. In all of our efforts, our goal is to establish a regulatory framework that helps ensure the resiliency of our financial system, the availability of credit, economic growth, and financial market efficiency. We look forward to working with our fellow regulatory agencies and with Congress to achieve these important goals. And finally, I would also like to note that work continues to address the risks identified with existing reference rates. Just last week, the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) selected a new rate suitable for use with new derivative contracts. I am confident the broad Treasuries repo rate, which the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has proposed publishing in cooperation with the Office of Financial Research, is based on a deep and actively traded market and will be highly robust. With this choice, the ARRC has taken another step in addressing the risks involved with the LIBOR. 1. These remarks are substantially similar to the testimony delivered at the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, & Urban Affairs hearing titled "Fostering Economic Growth: Regulator Perspective" on June 22, 2017. Return to text Last Update: June 26, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C. Share Good morning. Thank you to the American Enterprise Institute and Steve Oliner for inviting me here to speak. My topic today is the urgent need for fundamental reform of our system of housing finance--the great unfinished business of post-financial crisis reform. 1 The Federal Reserve is not charged with designing or evaluating proposals for housing finance reform. But we are responsible for regulating and supervising banking institutions to ensure their safety and soundness, and more broadly for the stability of the financial system. A robust, well-capitalized, well-regulated housing finance system is vital to achieving those goals, and to the long-run health of our economy. We need a system that provides mortgage credit in good times and bad to a broad range of creditworthy borrowers. While reforms have addressed some of the problems of the pre-crisis system, there is broad agreement that the job is far from done. The status quo may feel comfortable today, but it is also unsustainable. Today, the federal government's role in housing finance is even greater than it was before the crisis. The overwhelming majority of new mortgages are issued with government backing in a highly concentrated securitization market. That leaves us with both potential taxpayer liability and systemic risk. It is important to learn the right lessons from the failure of the old system. We can also apply lessons from post-crisis banking reform. Above all, we need to move to a system that attracts ample amounts of private capital to stand between housing sector credit risk and taxpayers. We should also use market forces to increase competition and help to drive innovation. The global financial crisis ended in 2009, and the economy has just completed its eighth consecutive year of expansion. We are near full employment. The housing market is generally strong, although it is still recovering in some regions. To preserve these gains, we must ensure the stability of our financial system. With that goal in mind, we are near completion of a comprehensive program to raise prudential standards for our most systemically important banks. But fundamental housing finance reform--including reform to address the ultimate status of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, two systemically important government sponsored enterprises (GSEs)--remains on the "to do" list. As memories of the crisis fade, the next few years may present our last best chance to finish these critical reforms. Failure to do so would risk repeating the mistakes of the past. The Pre-Crisis System Congress created Fannie Mae in 1938 and Freddie Mac in 1970. For many years, these institutions prudently pursued their core mission of enhancing the availability of credit for housing. Beginning in the early 1980s, Fannie and Freddie helped to facilitate the development of the securitization market for home mortgages. They purchased and bundled mortgage loans, and sold the resulting mortgage-backed securities (MBS) to investors. Fannie and Freddie also guaranteed payment of principal and interest on the MBS. With this guarantee in place, MBS investors took the risk of changing interest rates, and the GSEs took the risk of default on the underlying mortgages. Thanks to the growth in securitization, these two GSEs have dominated U.S. housing finance since the late 1980s. The pre-crisis system did its job for many years. By promoting standardization, structuring securities to meet a broad range of investor risk appetites, and issuing guaranteed MBS, Fannie and Freddie brought greater liquidity to mortgage markets and made mortgages more affordable. But the system ultimately failed due to fundamental flaws in its structure. In the early days of securitization, the chance that either GSE would ever fail to honor its guarantee seemed remote. But the question always loomed in the background: Who would bear the credit risk if a GSE became insolvent and could not perform? Would Congress really allow the GSE to fail to honor its obligations, given the devastating impact that would have on mortgage funding and the housing market? The law stated explicitly that the government did not stand behind the GSEs or their MBS, as Fannie and Freddie frequently pointed out in order to avoid tougher regulation. Nonetheless, investors understandably came to believe that the two GSEs were too-big-to-fail, and priced in an implicit federal government guarantee behind GSE obligations. In the end the investors were right, of course. The implicit government guarantee also meant that investors--including banks, the GSEs themselves, and investors around the world--did not do careful due diligence on the underlying mortgage pools. Thus, securitization also enabled declining lending standards. This was not only a problem of the GSEs--private label securitizations also helped to enable lower underwriting standards. Over time, the system's bad incentives caused the two GSEs to change their behavior and take on ever greater risks. The GSEs became powerful advocates for their own bottom lines, providing substantial financial support for political candidates who supported the GSE agenda. Legislative reforms in the 1990s and the public/private structure led managements to expand the GSEs' balance sheets to enormous size, underpinned by wafer-thin slivers of capital, driving high shareholder returns and very high compensation for management. These factors and others eventually led to extremely lax lending conditions. The early 2000s became the era of Alt-A, low doc, and no doc loans. 2 These practices contributed to the catastrophic failure of the housing finance system. Almost nine years ago, in September 2008, Fannie and Freddie were put into "temporary" conservatorship and received injections of taxpayer funds totaling $187.5 billion. In the end, the system privatized the gains and socialized the losses. The buildup of risks is clear in hindsight. But many officials and commentators raised concerns long before the collapse. 3 The long-standing internal structural weaknesses of the old system ultimately led to disastrous consequences for homeowners, taxpayers, the financial system, and the economy. Reforms to Date Before considering the path forward, it is important to acknowledge that today's housing sector is healthier and in some respects safer than it was in 2005. Although there are significant regional differences, national data show that housing prices have fully recovered from their gut-wrenching 35 percent drop during the crisis. Mortgage default rates have returned to pre-crisis levels. Mortgage credit is available and affordable for strong borrowers. There has also been meaningful progress in reforming the old system. In 2008, Congress enacted the Housing and Economic Recovery Act, which, among other things, created the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), modeled on and with similar powers to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. Under the FHFA's oversight, the two GSEs' retained portfolios have declined to about half of their pre-crisis size, and are expected to continue on a downward path. The FHFA and the GSEs have also been working to develop a market for the GSEs to lay off their credit risk. These innovative transactions have raised about $50 billion in private capital that now stands between taxpayers and mortgage credit risk in the GSEs' portfolios. In addition, the creation of a Common Securitization Platform should strengthen the GSEs' securitization infrastructure and facilitate further reforms with an eye toward enhancing competition. New regulations have also been put in place since the crisis with the goal of encouraging sound underwriting of mortgage loans. Today, lenders must make a good faith effort to determine that the borrower has the ability to repay the mortgage. Moreover, if the lender provides a "qualified mortgage" contract to the borrower, then the lender needs to meet certain other requirements. 4 For example, some contract features such as an interest-only period or negative amortization, where the loan balance increases even though the borrower is making payments, are taboo. Upfront points and fees are limited too. Today's Challenges These reforms represent movement in the right direction, but leave us well short of where we need to be. Despite the GSEs' significant role in this key market, there is no clarity about their future. When they were put into conservatorship, Treasury Secretary Paulson noted that "policymakers must view this next period as a 'time out' where we have stabilized the GSEs while we decide their future role and structure." 5 Almost nine years into this time out, the federal government's domination of the housing sector has grown and is actually greater than it was before the crisis. Fannie, Freddie, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs have a combined market share of about 80 percent of the purchase mortgage market, with the remaining 20 percent held by private financial institutions. After reaching nearly 30 percent of the market before the crisis, private-label securitization has dwindled to almost nothing today. The two GSEs remain in government conservatorship, with associated contingent liabilities to US taxpayers. 6 Fannie and Freddie have remitted just over $270 billion of profits to the Treasury, more than paying back the government's initial investment. However, under current terms of the contracts that govern their access to Treasury funds, their capital will decline to $0 by January 1, 2018. Today, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have more than $5 trillion of MBS and corporate debt outstanding, which is widely held and receives various forms of special regulatory treatment. And because of their scale, these enterprises continue to serve as important standard-setters and significant counterparties to other firms. While mortgage credit is widely available to most traditional mortgage borrowers, those with lower credit scores face significantly higher standards and lower credit availability than before the crisis. We can all agree that we do not want to go back to the poor underwriting standards used by originators prior to the crisis. But it may also be that the current system is too rigid, and that a lack of innovation and product choice has limited mortgage credit availability to some creditworthy households. According to a survey by the American Banker, in 2016 only nine percent of mortgage originations failed to meet the qualified mortgage contract criteria, down from 16 percent in 2013. 7 The same survey reported that almost one-third of U.S. banks make only qualified mortgage loans, despite the fact that FHA- and GSE-eligible mortgages are exempt from the qualified mortgage requirements until January 2021 or until housing finance reform is enacted, whichever date comes first. Applying the Lessons of Banking Reform to Housing Finance The post-crisis reform program for our largest banks presents an appropriate standard against which the housing finance giants should be judged. After eight years of reform, our largest banking institutions are now far stronger and safer. Common equity capital held by the eight U.S. global systemically important banks has more than doubled to $825 billion from about $300 billion before the crisis. After the crisis revealed significant underlying liquidity vulnerabilities, these institutions now hold $2.3 trillion in high-quality liquid assets, or 25 percent of their total assets. Under rigorous annual stress tests, they must demonstrate a high level of understanding of their risks and the ability to manage them, and must survive severely adverse economic scenarios with high levels of post-stress capital. And they must file regular resolution plans that have made them significantly more resolvable should they fail. These measures were implemented to reduce the risk that a future crisis will result in taxpayer support, and to help ensure that the financial system could continue to function even in the event that one of these banks were to default. It is ironic that the housing finance system should escape fundamental reform efforts. The housing bubble of the early 2000s was, after all, an essential proximate cause of the crisis. Housing is the single largest asset class in our financial system, with total outstanding residential real estate owned by households of $24 trillion and roughly $10 trillion in single-family mortgage debt. 8 While post-crisis regulation has addressed mortgage lending from a consumer protection standpoint, the important risks to taxpayers and the broader economy and financial system have not been robustly addressed. The most obvious and direct step forward would be to require ample amounts of private capital to support housing finance activities, as we do in the banking system. We should also strive for a system that can continue to function even in the event of a default of any firm. No single housing finance institution should be too big to fail. Greater amounts of private capital could come through a variety of sources, including through the entry of multiple private guarantors who would insure a portion of the credit risk, through risk-sharing agreements, or through expanded use of credit-risk transfers. Although private capital must surely be part of the reform effort, there may be limits to the amount of risk that we can credibly expect the private sector to insure. It is extremely difficult to appropriately price the insurance of catastrophic risk--the risk of a severe, widespread housing crisis. Both the private-sector insurance industry and government have struggled with this, particularly with how to smooth the consistent collection of premiums with the irregular payout of potentially enormous losses that may be needed only once or twice in a century. Furthermore, losses can be correlated across asset classes and geographies in these catastrophic events, rendering risk-diversification strategies ineffective. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have successfully transferred some credit risk to the private sector, but have thus far avoided selling off much of this catastrophic credit risk, arguing that doing so is not economical. 9 Principles for Reform After promising legislative initiatives have moved forward but fallen short of enactment, the air is again thick with housing finance reform proposals. As I mentioned at the outset, housing finance reform has important implications for the Federal Reserve's oversight of financial institutions, and for the U.S. economy and its financial stability. While I would not presume to judge these reform proposals, I will offer some principles for reform. These principles are based on the lessons learned from the old system's collapse, and from the experience of post-crisis bank reform. First, we ought to do whatever we can to make the possibility of future housing bailouts as remote as possible. Housing can be a volatile sector, and housing is often found at the heart of financial crises. 10 Our housing finance institutions were not--and are not--structured with that in mind. Extreme fluctuations in credit availability for housing hurt vulnerable households, reduce affordability and availability, and, as we have seen, can threaten financial stability. As with banks, the goal should be to ensure that our housing finance system can continue to function even in the face of significant house price declines and severe economic conditions. Changing the system to attract large amounts of private capital would be a major step toward that goal. The question of the government's role in the new system is a challenging one for Congress. Many of the well-known reform proposals include some role for government. Some argue that government cannot avoid bearing the deep-in-the-tail risk of a catastrophic housing crisis. A number of proposals incorporate a government guarantee to cover this risk, to take effect after a significant stack of private capital is wiped out. That brings me to my second principle: If Congress chooses to go in this direction, any such guarantee should be explicit and transparent, and should apply to securities, not to institutions. Reform should not leave us with any institutions that are so important as to be candidates for too-big-to-fail. Third, we should promote greater competition in this market. The economics of securitization do not require a duopoly. Yet there is no way for private firms to acquire a GSE charter and enter the industry. This is akin to having only two banks with federal deposit insurance, which would make competition by other banks very difficult. Greater competition would help to reduce the systemic importance of the GSEs, and spur more innovation. Greater competition also requires a level playing field, allowing secondary market access to a wide-range of lenders and thereby giving homebuyers a choice among many potential mortgage lenders and products. Fourth, it is worth considering simple approaches that restructure and repurpose parts of the existing architecture of our housing finance system. We know that housing reform is difficult; completely redrawing the system may not be necessary and could complicate the search for a solution. Using the existing architecture would allow for a continued smooth, gradual transition. Fifth and last, we need to identify and build upon areas of bipartisan agreement. In my view, at this late stage we should not be holding out for the perfect answer. We should be looking for the best feasible plan to escape the unacceptable status quo. Conclusion I see two reasons why this is a good time to address the housing finance system's shortcomings. First, the economy and the housing sector are healthy. It would be far more disruptive to implement fundamental structural changes during difficult economic times. Second, memories of the crisis are fading. If Congress does not enact reforms over the next few years, we are at risk of settling for the status quo--a government-dominated mortgage market with insufficient private capital to protect taxpayers, and insufficient competition to drive innovation. There is a serious risk, if not a likelihood, that this state of affairs may persist indefinitely, leaving our housing finance system in a semi-permanent limbo. Fortunately, we are blessed with a growing menu of reform options available for public vetting. And there appear to be areas of broad agreement among them. One of those plans, or a combination of different features of various plans, might well suffice to move us to a better system. Housing finance reform will protect taxpayers from another bailout, be good for households and the economy, and go some distance toward mitigating the systemic risk that the GSEs still pose. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. See, for example, Markus K. Brunnermeier, "Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008," The Journal of Economic Perspectives , Vol. 23, No. 1 (Winter 2009), pp. 77-100; Major Coleman IV, Michael LaCour-Little, and Kerry D. Vandell, "Subprime Lending and the Housing Bubble: Tail Wags Dog?" Journal of Housing Economics, Vol.17, Issue 4 (December 2008) pp. 272-290; Shiller, Robert J. (2012) The Subprime Solution: How Today's Global Financial Crisis Happened, and What to Do about It, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press; E. Pinto (2015), "Three Studies of Subprime and Alt-A loans in the U.S. Mortgage Market," American Enterprise Institute (January 2015), www.aei.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Pinto-Government-Housing-Policies-in-the-Lead-up-to-the-Financial-Crisis-3-Studies-1.6.15.pdf . Return to text 3. See, for example, Alan Greenspan, "Government-Sponsored Enterprises," remarks delivered at the Conference on Housing, Mortgage Finance, and the Macroeconomy, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, May 19 2005, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/default.htm ; and Randal Quarles "Remarks Before the Women in Housing and Finance," June 13, 2006. Return to text 4. More specifics on the features required for qualified mortgage contracts are available at www.consumerfinance.gov/askcfpb/1789/what-qualified-mortgage.html . Return to text 5. Statement by Secretary Henry M. Paulson, Jr. on Treasury and Federal Housing Finance Agency Action to Protect Financial Markets and Taxpayers, September 7, 2008, www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/hp1129.aspx . Return to text 6. The size of these contingent liabilities is potentially quite large. FHFA's stress test results published in August 2016 found that under its severely adverse scenario the two GSEs could need to draw up to $125.8 billion from the U.S. Treasury. See www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/Reports/ReportDocuments/2016_DFAST_Severely-Adverse-Scenario.pdf . Return to text 7. American Bankers Association, "24th Annual ABA Residential Real Estate Survey Report," (March 2017), www.aba.com/Press/Documents/2017ABARealEstateLendingSurveyReport.pdf. Return to text 8. Based on information contained in the Financial Accounts of the United States available at www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/releases/mortoutstand/current.htm . Return to text 9. See "Overview of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Credit Risk Transfer Transactions," FHFA (August 2015). The overview differentiates between expected loss (credit losses that would be projected to occur even under a stable baseline), unexpected loss (losses that might occur under a stressful but plausible event such as recession) and catastrophic loss (losses beyond those of an unexpected loss and that are deemed highly unlikely to occur). The overview notes that " catastrophic risk events are deemed so unlikely, meaning they present so little risk, that the Enterprises have found it to be too costly (not economical) to transfer much of this risk to the private sector," https://www.fhfa.gov/aboutus/reports/reportdocuments/crt-overview-8-21-2015.pdf . Return to text 10. See for example Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff, "The Aftermath of Financial Crises," American Economic Review, vol. 99 (May 2009) pp. 466-72; Òscar Jordà, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, "The Great Mortgaging: Housing Finance, Crises, and Business Cycles," NBER Working Paper No. 20501 (September 2014), www.nber.org/papers/w20501 ; and the International Monetary Fund, "Housing Finance and Financial Stability – Back to Basics?" Global Financial Stability Report (April 2011), www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/Issues/2016/12/31/~/media/Websites/IMF/imported-flagship-issues/external/pubs/ft/GFSR/2011/01/pdf/_chap3pdf.ashx . Return to text Last Update: July 06, 2017 Back to Top

Governor Jerome H. Powell At the Large Bank Directors Conference, Chicago, Illinois Share Good morning. Thank you to President Evans for inviting me to speak here today about the role of boards of directors of large banking firms. 1 Ten years ago this month, the world witnessed the first tremors of what we now think of as the Global Financial Crisis and the subsequent Great Recession. For the United States and many other countries, this would turn out to be the most painful economic period since the Great Depression. In the wake of the crisis, governments around the world instituted a wide range of reforms that were designed to reduce the likelihood and severity of a recurrence. In the United States, the core elements of those reforms included significantly higher capital standards; new liquidity requirements; forward-looking stress tests; and resolution planning. Our largest banking firms are without question much stronger than before the crisis. We are nearing completion of the major parts of this reform program, and are undertaking a thorough review to help assure that the reforms we put in place are both effective and efficient. 2 During the crisis, some large banking firms incurred massive losses. Some of these losses were from products--such as super-senior collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) or structured investment vehicles (SIVs)--whose risks were not even on the radar screen of the firm's board of directors. After the crisis, the Federal Reserve significantly raised our expectations for the boards of directors of large banking firms. Taking risk in service of clients is an essential part of the business of banking, including credit risk, interest rate risk, and various forms of operational risk. Our reforms were designed to assure that boards of directors understand and approve the strategy of the company and the risks inherent in that strategy, and that the institution has the capital, liquidity, and risk management capabilities necessary to manage those risks. Today, the role of a director of a large banking firm is more expansive, more challenging, and more important than ever. Boards now oversee management's participation in highly challenging annual exercises, such as stress testing, capital planning, and resolution planning, that have fundamentally changed the business of our largest institutions. Boards now more carefully evaluate the compensation practices of these large institutions to assure that they reinforce positive incentives and discourage unwanted risk taking. Across a range of responsibilities, we simply expect much more of boards of directors than ever before. There is no reason to expect that to change. We do take seriously our obligation to assess whether our reforms are achieving their desired effects, without imposing unnecessary burden. In 2014, we began a review of these higher expectations for directors. We found that many boards have significantly improved their practices. We also found some ways to make our reforms both more effective and more efficient. For example, while directors generally say that they understand and embrace their more challenging responsibilities, we consistently hear that directors feel buried in hundreds or even thousands of pages of highly granular information, to the point where more important strategic issues are crowded out of board deliberations. Some of this granular information was likely driven by our supervisory guidance, which included specific expectations not only for the management of the institution, but also for the board of directors. Over time, this guidance has increased the number of specific directives aimed at boards well into the hundreds, which may have fostered a "check-the-box" approach by boards. There is also a widespread feeling that our supervision seems to have downplayed the difference in roles between boards and management. Our current ratings system for bank holding companies, which for large banking firms would be replaced by the currently proposed LFI ratings system, refers to the "board and senior management" as a subcomponent rating of risk management. 3 We have also combined the roles of the board and senior management in many of our supervisory feedback letters. After careful consideration, last month we proposed a new framework for our oversight of boards. 4 In formulating this proposal, we had discussions with academics, consultants, legal practitioners, and directors of banking firms. Let me start by saying what the new approach will not do. We do not intend that these reforms will lower the bar for boards or lighten the loads of directors. The new approach distinguishes the board from senior management so that we can spotlight our expectations of effective boards. The intent is to enable directors to spend less board time on routine matters and more on core board responsibilities: overseeing management as they devise a clear and coherent direction for the firm, holding management accountable for the execution of that strategy, and ensuring the independence and stature of the risk management and internal audit functions. These were all areas that were found wanting in the financial crisis, and it is essential that boards get these fundamentals right. Our new proposal will move to a principles-based approach. We have identified five common attributes that effective boards should exhibit, and for which we will have high expectations. This principles-based approach recognizes that large firms have a broad range of business models, structures, and practices. While we want to be clear about our expectations, we also want to give directors the flexibility to meet them in a manner that works for their particular boards. First, an effective board should guide the development of a clear and coherent strategy for the firm and set the types and levels of risks it is willing to take. Alignment of business strategy and risk appetite should minimize the firm's exposure to large and unexpected losses. In addition, the firm's risk management capabilities need to be commensurate with the risks it expects to take. Second, an effective board should actively manage its information flow and deliberations, so that the board can make sound, well-informed decisions that take into account risks and opportunities. Third, an effective board should hold senior management accountable for implementing the firm's strategy and risk appetite and maintaining the firm's risk management and control framework. Fourth, an effective board should ensure the independence and stature of the independent risk management and internal audit functions. It is difficult to overstate the importance of this. Risk management systems and controls may discourage or limit certain revenue-generating opportunities. Failure to ensure the independence of these functions from the revenue generators and risk takers has been shown to be dangerous, and this is something for which the board is accountable. Finally, an effective board should have a composition, governance structure, and set of established practices that are appropriate in light of the firm's size, complexity, scope of operations, and risk profile. Boards need to be aware of their own strengths and weaknesses, and to ensure that directors bring an appropriately diverse range of skills, knowledge, experience, and perspective. Significant events, such as an unexpected loss or compliance failure, should cause boards to reflect and reassess their structure, composition, and processes. An effective board takes a preventative approach and engages in probing self-assessments regularly and systematically. Before I conclude, let me say a few words about an aspect of the proposal that has attracted some attention, which is the reversal of a relatively recent practice of directing all examination and inspection findings--what we call "matters requiring attention" (MRAs) and "matters requiring immediate attention" (MRIAs)--to the board as well as to management. 5 The practice resulted in boards of directors reviewing and signing off on management's compliance with every MRA and MRIA. When we began that practice in 2013, our intention was to ensure that directors were in a position to hold management accountable in addressing risk management shortcomings. By 2014, we realized that the practice was "almost surely distracting from strategic and risk-related analyses and oversight by boards". 6 For perspective, a large banking firm may have one hundred or more MRAs outstanding at a given time, many of which are at a level of granularity that is more appropriate for management to remediate, with board oversight. The new proposed framework is designed to make boards more effective in holding management accountable in these efforts. While we have proposed that most MRAs and MRIAs be addressed in the first instance to management and not to the board, the board would continue to receive MRAs where board practices are at issue or where management has failed to promptly and adequately take the required actions. The board would also continue to receive copies of examination and inspection reports, including formal communications with the institution. In the parlance of the proposed guidance I just outlined, we fully expect the board to actively manage the information flow related to MRAs and to hold management accountable for remediating them. In doing so, a board may choose to track progress and closure of MRAs through an appropriate board committee, rather than getting into the granular detail on every individual MRA. Conclusion We need financial institutions that are strong enough to support economic growth by lending through the economic cycle. To achieve that goal, we need strong and effective boards of directors at firms of all sizes. A strong and effective board provides strategic leadership and oversight, which is much more challenging and important than checking off lists of assigned tasks. I look forward to our continuing dialogue on this subject today and in the months to come, and reviewing carefully the comments received on the proposal. 1. The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. Return to text 2. Jerome H. Powell, " Relationship Between Regulation and Economic Growth ," (testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, June 22, 2017). Return to text 3. See SR letter 04-18, " Bank Holding Company Rating System ," 69 FR 70444 (December 6, 2004). Return to text 4. See www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20170803a.htm . Return to text 5. MRIAs are matters of significant importance and urgency that the Federal Reserve requires banking organizations to address immediately and include, for example, matters that have the potential to pose significant risk to the safety and soundness of the banking organization, matters that represent significant noncompliance with applicable laws or regulations and repeat criticisms that have escalated in importance due to insufficient attention or inaction by the banking organization. MRAs, on the other hand, are matters that are important and that the Federal Reserve is expecting a banking organization to address over a reasonable period of time, but when the timing need not be "immediate." See Supervision and Regulation (SR) letter 13-13/Consumer Affairs letter 13-10, " Supervisory Considerations for the Communication of Supervisory Findings ." Return to text 6. See " Corporate Governance and Prudential Regulation ," remarks by Governor Daniel J. Tarullo at Association of American Law Schools Midyear Meeting, June 9, 2014. ("We should probably be somewhat more selective in creating the regulatory checklist for board compliance and regular consideration. One example, drawn from Federal Reserve practice, is the recent supervisory guidance requiring that every notice of a "Matter Requiring Attention" (MRA) issued by supervisors must be reviewed, and compliance signed off, by the board of directors. There are some MRAs that clearly should come to the board's attention, but the failure to discriminate among them is almost surely distracting from strategic and risk-related analyses and oversight by boards.") Return to text Last Update: August 30, 2017 Back to Top
