Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the "Community Banking in the 21st Century," a Conference Co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, St. Louis, Missouri Share I would like to welcome everyone to the inaugural Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS). I particularly want to thank the Federal Reserve and CSBS staff members who worked hard to organize this event. By bringing together community bankers, bank regulators, and researchers from academic institutions and government agencies, the conference will help us all to better understand the issues that are most important to the future of community banking. You may have noticed that I referred to this as the "inaugural" conference. Although firm plans have not yet been made, I do hope this will be the first of many joint Federal Reserve System and CSBS conferences that focus on community banking research and policy. The U.S. banking system has undergone significant consolidation over the past two decades or so, with very large banking organizations increasing their market shares. Nevertheless, community banks (which we typically define as banking institutions with assets of $10 billion or less) continue to provide vital financial services to households, small businesses, and small farms in communities across America. Community banking is fundamentally a local, relationship-based business. Community bankers live in the localities they serve; their customers are their neighbors and friends. Their direct, personal knowledge of the local economy enables them to tailor products and services to meet their communities' needs. They can look beyond credit scores and other model-based metrics to make lending decisions in part based on more qualitative information that large regional or national financial institutions are less well suited to consider. Community bankers recognize that their own success depends on the health of the communities they serve, which is why so many community bankers contribute locally as citizens and leaders as well as in their capacities as lenders and providers of financial services. The photos that you see around the conference center do a very nice job of capturing the spirit of community banking and illustrating the contributions of community bankers. Although community banks have some natural advantages, such as local knowledge and relationships, they also face significant challenges. As battle-scarred survivors of a financial crisis and deep recession, community bankers today confront a frustratingly slow recovery, stiff competition from larger banks and other financial institutions, and the responsibility of complying with new and existing regulations. Some observers have worried that these obstacles‑‑particularly complying with regulations‑‑may prove insurmountable. My colleagues at the Federal Reserve and I understand these concerns, and we are committed to crafting supervisory policies and regulations that are appropriately scaled to banks' size and complexity. And we have confidence that the remarkable resilience of America's community bankers will enable them not only to survive, but also to thrive in the years ahead. The best way to understand the challenges that community bankers face is to talk to the bankers themselves, and we at the Federal Reserve do that regularly. For example, to ensure that we remain mindful of the unique characteristics of community banks, the Federal Reserve Board established the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council. This council is composed of representatives of community banks, thrifts, and credit unions from each of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts. Members of the council meet with the Board twice a year, bringing to us the views and concerns of their colleagues back home. Our meetings with the council have been extremely informative and have improved our ability to understand and respond to community bank concerns. Of course, understanding those concerns is of limited value unless we use what we have learned in the process of rulemaking. To make that connection, we also established a subcommittee of the Board that reviews all regulatory and supervisory proposals for their potential effects on community banks. The subcommittee also has worked toward communicating more effectively with the industry regarding the extent to which new rules and guidance do, or do not, apply to community banks. I hope those efforts are helping community bankers avoid spending time trying to understand rules that do not apply to them. One of the strengths of the Federal Reserve System is the quality of the research done by our economists and other professionals. The research we do on community banking helps guide our thinking on regulatory matters and on broader economic trends. In particular, the Board's subcommittee on community banking is regularly briefed on relevant research being conducted across the System. Thus, research findings inform policy, and policy concerns guide research. In fact, after learning about several research projects, the subcommittee suggested that the staff hold a community banking research conference--a suggestion that brought all of us to St. Louis today. The range of topics that will be covered over the next day and a half is impressive. The first research session this afternoon will focus on the role of community banks in our financial and economic system. Papers in this session examine whether community banks influence new-firm survival, whether equipment finance is a potential growth area for community banks, how community bank failures affect local economic performance, and whether community bank lending relationships in rural areas are fundamentally different from those in urban areas. Two research sessions are scheduled for tomorrow morning. The first will consider community bank performance, with papers looking at the effect of financial derivatives on community bank profitability, the characteristics of community banks that recovered from significant financial distress, the effect of distance between merging banks on postmerger performance, and the determinants of differences in profitability across community banks. The second session will consider issues of bank supervision and regulation, with papers discussing variations in the stringency of bank examination standards over time and their effect on lending, the effects of the Dodd-Frank Act on community banks, the relationship between community bank capital ratios and the likelihood of failure, and an approach for rationalizing bank supervision and regulation. As you can see, the papers at this conference cover a variety of important topics, and I expect they will provoke spirited discussions among the many experts in attendance. I must say that I am encouraged to see so many researchers from a wide range of academic and government institutions working on issues of great interest to both community bankers and their regulators. To close the conference, CSBS Chairman Charles Vice will present a report summarizing information gathered from more than 1,500 community bankers attending town hall sessions across the country over the past several months. In addition, a panel of community bankers will share their own views on the state of community banking and prospects for the future. Thank you for being here. I wish you an enjoyable and productive conference. Last Update: October 02, 2013 Back to Top

Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the "Central Bank Independence--Progress and Challenges," a Conference Sponsored by the Bank of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico (via prerecorded video) Share It is a pleasure to offer a few remarks at this conference marking the 20th anniversary of the Bank of Mexico's independence. In August 1993, Mexico's congress approved changes to the country's constitution that granted policy autonomy to the Bank of Mexico and made price stability its primary mandate. Over the past two decades, these actions, along with a number of other constructive steps taken by Mexican policymakers, have paid substantial dividends in terms of improved economic performance. At the time that the Mexican congress changed the status and mandate of the central bank, the nation's economy had been suffering periodic bouts of economic instability for many years. The 1970s through the mid-1990s in particular were marked by episodes of high inflation, boom-and-bust cycles, and financial crises. Indeed, shortly after the new Bank of Mexico law went into effect in April 1994, the Mexican economy entered the throes of the so-called peso crisis. However, the changes to the monetary policy framework, along with greater fiscal discipline and the adoption of a more flexible exchange rate, soon bore fruit. Notably, inflation fell to single-digit levels by the early 2000s. And in 2001 the Bank of Mexico formally adopted an inflation-targeting regime, which--outside of some temporary fluctuations--has succeeded in keeping inflation at around 4 percent. Importantly, the improved monetary policy framework, together with other reforms, has thus far helped reduce Mexico's susceptibility to financial crises. When the recent financial crisis in the United States and other advanced economies threatened to spill over to Mexico, the inflation credibility enjoyed by the Bank of Mexico allowed it to counter economic weakness by easing monetary conditions, even though headline inflation was running above its target range at the time. The Bank's rate cuts helped stabilize the economy, and Mexican output returned to its pre‑crisis level by late 2010. Strong countercyclical policy actions of this type were unlikely to have been feasible in Mexico a few decades ago; with little in the way of inflation-fighting credibility and an immature financial sector, the monetary authority in earlier years was often forced to respond to a crisis by tightening monetary conditions, rather than loosening them, in an effort to limit capital flight, exchange rate depreciation, and increases in inflation. Of course, we should not be surprised that central bank independence has contributed to Mexico's improved macroeconomic stability over the past two decades. A broad consensus among economists--supported by considerable empirical evidence--holds that a central bank's credibility and effectiveness are enhanced when it is able to make monetary policy based on its assessment of what is in the economy's long-run interest rather than in response to short-term political pressures. The benefits of a sound monetary framework are further enhanced when combined with good fiscal, regulatory, and trade policies. As you probably know, the Federal Reserve is also celebrating an anniversary this year--the centennial of its founding. Like the Bank of Mexico, the Federal Reserve is an independent central bank, and, as in the case of the Bank of Mexico, that independence has evolved and gradually strengthened over time. For example, in the early years following the Fed's founding in 1913, the Secretary of the Treasury and the Comptroller of the Currency served on the Federal Reserve Board, an arrangement that only changed in the 1930s when the Fed underwent significant structural reforms. The Federal Reserve was also less than fully independent during and just after World War II, when it agreed to keep Treasury yields at low levels to reduce the cost of financing wartime deficits. After the war, as inflation pressures rose, Federal Reserve policymakers wanted to return to independent rate setting, but the Treasury demurred, hoping to keep the cost of servicing the national debt low. The conflict was resolved in 1951 through the Treasury-Fed Accord, an agreement that reestablished the Federal Reserve's ability to set rates as dictated by the needs of the broader economy. During the 1980s, under the leadership of Chairman Paul Volcker, the Fed further established its credibility and independence by taking the necessary steps to bring inflation under control. As in Mexico, the benefits of central bank independence in the United States have included low inflation, well‑anchored inflation expectations, and increased policy credibility, which contribute to a more stable overall economic environment. Indeed, during the recent financial crisis and the ensuing recession, the Fed has been able to take aggressive monetary policy actions to help stabilize the economy without dislodging longer-term inflation expectations. We should recognize, though, that in democratic societies, central bank independence must be accompanied by accountability to the public and its representatives. In this regard, transparency is key. To ensure appropriate accountability, while also making monetary policy more effective, central banks in the United States, Mexico, and around the world have worked hard to increase their transparency over the past 20 years or so. For example, in the United States, the Fed's policymaking arm, the Federal Open Market Committee, releases a statement after each meeting explaining its decisions and reporting the vote, publishes detailed minutes three weeks after each meeting, and provides a quarterly summary of Committee participants' economic and policy projections. My colleagues on the Board and I often testify before congressional committees, we speak regularly in public, and I hold news conferences four times a year. The Bank of Mexico has likewise significantly increased its transparency since becoming independent, through steps including the adoption of a target range for inflation, the regular publication of inflation reports and policy statements, and the timely release of minutes following each policy meeting. The economies of the United States and Mexico not only have in common independent central banks, they are also closely tied by geography and history. The United States is by far Mexico's largest trading partner, accounting for about two-thirds of Mexican merchandise trade. In turn, Mexico accounts for about one-eighth of U.S. foreign trade, thereby ranking, along with Canada and China, among our three largest trading partners. In addition, remittances coming from Mexican workers in the United States benefit the Mexican current account and are a welcome source of income for many Mexican families. The strong links between our economies have led to close cooperation between our central banks. An example is the bilateral currency swap arrangement between the Federal Reserve and the Bank of Mexico that was set up during the global financial crisis. This swap line was one of 14 that the Fed established with foreign central banks around the world. These swap arrangements proved their value as they helped alleviate dollar funding pressures, reduce interbank borrowing rates, and calm market fears during some of the worst phases of the crisis. The swap line with Mexico was in addition to a line established in 1994 along with the North American Free Trade Agreement. The Federal Reserve and the Bank of Mexico also work closely together--and with other central banks--through international meetings, seminars, and conferences; in the provision of technical assistance; and through other activities in forums such as the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the Group of Twenty (G-20), and the Center for Latin American Monetary Studies, or CEMLA. I would be remiss if, before ending, I did not note the strong leadership that Governor Agustín Carstens continues to provide at the Bank of Mexico. His leadership in economic policy, in several key roles, has been instrumental in solidifying the progress that Mexico has made over the past two decades. Agustín has also built an impressive record in the international policy community more broadly. He is currently the chair of the BIS Consultative Council for the Americas, has recently been appointed chair of the BIS Economic Consultative Committee and the Global Economy Meeting, and played a key role in Mexico's successful presidency of the G-20 last year. To conclude, I would like to congratulate the Bank of Mexico on the 20th anniversary of its independence. I wish you a productive conference marking this auspicious occasion. And I wish the Bank of Mexico continued success in its work to stabilize and strengthen the Mexican economy. Last Update: October 14, 2013 Back to Top

Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Fourteenth Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, Washington, D.C. Share I am very pleased to participate in this event in honor of Stanley Fischer. Stan was my teacher in graduate school, and he has been both a role model and a frequent adviser ever since. An expert on financial crises, Stan has written prolifically on the subject and has also served on the front lines, so to speak--notably, in his role as the first deputy managing director of the International Monetary Fund during the emerging market crises of the 1990s. Stan also helped to fight hyperinflation in Israel in the 1980s and, as the governor of that nation's central bank, deftly managed monetary policy to mitigate the effects of the recent crisis on the Israeli economy. Subsequently, as Israeli housing prices ran upward, Stan became an advocate and early adopter of macroprudential policies to preserve financial stability. Stan frequently counseled his students to take a historical perspective, which is good advice in general, but particularly helpful for understanding financial crises, which have been around a very long time. Indeed, as I have noted elsewhere, I think the recent global crisis is best understood as a classic financial panic transposed into the novel institutional context of the 21st century financial system. 1 An appreciation of the parallels between recent and historical events greatly influenced how I and many of my colleagues around the world responded to the crisis. Besides being the fifth anniversary of the most intense phase of the recent crisis, this year also marks the centennial of the founding of the Federal Reserve. 2 It's particularly appropriate to recall, therefore, that the Federal Reserve was itself created in response to a severe financial panic, the Panic of 1907. This panic led to the creation of the National Monetary Commission, whose 1911 report was a major impetus to the Federal Reserve Act, signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on December 23, 1913. Because the Panic of 1907 fit the archetype of a classic financial panic in many ways, it's worth discussing its similarities and differences with the recent crisis. 3 Like many other financial panics, including the most recent one, the Panic of 1907 took place while the economy was weakening; according to the National Bureau of Economic Research, a recession had begun in May 1907. 4 Also, as was characteristic of pre-Federal Reserve panics, money markets were tight when the panic struck in October, reflecting the strong seasonal demand for credit associated with the harvesting and shipment of crops. The immediate trigger of the panic was a failed effort by a group of speculators to corner the stock of the United Copper Company. The main perpetrators of the failed scheme, F. Augustus Heinze and C.F. Morse, had extensive connections with a number of leading financial institutions in New York City. When the news of the failed speculation broke, depositor fears about the health of those institutions led to a series of runs on banks, including a bank at which Heinze served as president. To try to restore confidence, the New York Clearinghouse, a private consortium of banks, reviewed the books of the banks under pressure, declared them solvent, and offered conditional support--one of the conditions being that Heinze and his board step down. These steps were largely successful in stopping runs on the New York banks. But even as the banks stabilized, concerns intensified about the financial health of a number of so-called trust companies--financial institutions that were less heavily regulated than national or state banks and which were not members of the Clearinghouse. As the runs on the trust companies worsened, the companies needed cash to meet the demand for withdrawals. In the absence of a central bank, New York's leading financiers, led by J.P. Morgan, considered providing liquidity. However, Morgan and his colleagues decided that they did not have sufficient information to judge the solvency of the affected institutions, so they declined to lend. Overwhelmed by a run, the Knickerbocker Trust Company failed on October 22, undermining public confidence in the remaining trust companies. To satisfy their depositors' demands for cash, the trust companies began to sell or liquidate assets, including loans made to finance stock purchases. The selloff of shares and other assets, in what today we would call a fire sale, precipitated a sharp decline in the stock market and widespread disruptions in other financial markets. Increasingly concerned, Morgan and other financiers (including the future governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Benjamin Strong) led a coordinated response that included the provision of liquidity through the Clearinghouse and the imposition of temporary limits on depositor withdrawals, including withdrawals by correspondent banks in the interior of the country. These efforts eventually calmed the panic. By then, however, the U.S. financial system had been severely disrupted, and the economy contracted through the middle of 1908. The recent crisis echoed many aspects of the 1907 panic. Like most crises, the recent episode had an identifiable trigger--in this case, the growing realization by market participants that subprime mortgages and certain other credits were seriously deficient in their underwriting and disclosures. As the economy slowed and housing prices declined, diverse financial institutions, including many of the largest and most internationally active firms, suffered credit losses that were clearly large but also hard for outsiders to assess. Pervasive uncertainty about the size and incidence of losses in turn led to sharp withdrawals of short-term funding from a wide range of institutions; these funding pressures precipitated fire sales, which contributed to sharp declines in asset prices and further losses. Institutional changes over the past century were reflected in differences in the types of funding that ran: In 1907, in the absence of deposit insurance, retail deposits were much more prone to run, whereas in 2008, most withdrawals were of uninsured wholesale funding, in the form of commercial paper, repurchase agreements, and securities lending. Interestingly, a steep decline in interbank lending, a form of wholesale funding, was important in both episodes. Also interesting is that the 1907 panic involved institutions--the trust companies--that faced relatively less regulation, which probably contributed to their rapid growth in the years leading up to the panic. In analogous fashion, in the recent crisis, much of the panic occurred outside the perimeter of traditional bank regulation, in the so-called shadow banking sector. 5 The responses to the panics of 1907 and 2008 also provide instructive comparisons. In both cases, the provision of liquidity in the early stages was crucial. In 1907 the United States had no central bank, so the availability of liquidity depended on the discretion of firms and private individuals, like Morgan. In the more recent crisis, the Federal Reserve fulfilled the role of liquidity provider, consistent with the classic prescriptions of Walter Bagehot. 6 The Fed lent not only to banks, but, seeking to stem the panic in wholesale funding markets, it also extended its lender-of-last-resort facilities to support nonbank institutions, such as investment banks and money market funds, and key financial markets, such as those for commercial paper and asset-backed securities. In both episodes, though, liquidity provision was only the first step. Full stabilization requires the restoration of public confidence. Three basic tools for restoring confidence are temporary public or private guarantees, measures to strengthen financial institutions' balance sheets, and public disclosure of the conditions of financial firms. At least to some extent, Morgan and the New York Clearinghouse used these tools in 1907, giving assistance to troubled firms and providing assurances to the public about the conditions of individual banks. All three tools were used extensively in the recent crisis: In the United States, guarantees included the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC) guarantees of bank debt, the Treasury Department's guarantee of money market funds, and the private guarantees offered by stronger firms that acquired weaker ones. Public and private capital injections strengthened bank balance sheets. Finally, the bank stress tests that the Federal Reserve led in the spring of 2009 and the publication of the stress-test findings helped restore confidence in the U.S. banking system. Collectively, these measures helped end the acute phase of the financial crisis, although, five years later, the economic consequences are still with us. Once the fire is out, public attention turns to the question of how to better fireproof the system. Here, the context and the responses differed between 1907 and the recent crisis. As I mentioned, following the 1907 crisis, reform efforts led to the founding of the Federal Reserve, which was charged both with helping to prevent panics and, by providing an "elastic currency," with smoothing seasonal interest rate fluctuations. In contrast, reforms since 2008 have focused on critical regulatory gaps revealed by the crisis. Notably, oversight of the shadow banking system is being strengthened through the designation, by the new Financial Stability Oversight Council, of nonbank systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) for consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve, and measures are being undertaken to address the potential instability of wholesale funding, including reforms to money market funds and the triparty repo market. 7 As we try to make the financial system safer, we must inevitably confront the problem of moral hazard. The actions taken by central banks and other authorities to stabilize a panic in the short run can work against stability in the long run, if investors and firms infer from those actions that they will never bear the full consequences of excessive risk-taking. As Stan Fischer reminded us following the international crises of the late 1990s, the problem of moral hazard has no perfect solution, but steps can be taken to limit it. 8 First, regulatory and supervisory reforms, such as higher capital and liquidity standards or restriction on certain activities, can directly limit risk-taking. Second, through the use of appropriate carrots and sticks, regulators can enlist the private sector in monitoring risk-taking. For example, the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) process, the descendant of the bank stress tests of 2009, requires not only that large financial institutions have sufficient capital to weather extreme shocks, but also that they demonstrate that their internal risk-management systems are effective. 9 In addition, the results of the stress-test portion of CCAR are publicly disclosed, providing investors and analysts information they need to assess banks' financial strength. Of course, market discipline can only limit moral hazard to the extent that debt and equity holders believe that, in the event of distress, they will bear costs. In the crisis, the absence of an adequate resolution process for dealing with a failing SIFI left policymakers with only the terrible choices of a bailout or allowing a potentially destabilizing collapse. The Dodd-Frank Act, under the orderly liquidation authority in Title II, created an alternative resolution mechanism for SIFIs that takes into account both the need, for moral hazard reasons, to impose costs on the creditors of failing firms and the need to protect financial stability; the FDIC, with the cooperation of the Federal Reserve, has been hard at work fleshing out this authority. 10 A credible resolution mechanism for systemically important firms will be important for reducing uncertainty, enhancing market discipline, and reducing moral hazard. Our continuing challenge is to make financial crises far less likely and, if they happen, far less costly. The task is complicated by the reality that every financial panic has its own unique features that depend on a particular historical context and the details of the institutional setting. But, as Stan Fischer has done with unusual skill throughout his career, one can, by stripping away the idiosyncratic aspects of individual crises, hope to reveal the common elements. In 1907, no one had ever heard of an asset-backed security, and a single private individual could command the resources needed to bail out the banking system; and yet, fundamentally, the Panic of 1907 and the Panic of 2008 were instances of the same phenomenon, as I have discussed today. The challenge for policymakers is to identify and isolate the common factors of crises, thereby allowing us to prevent crises when possible and to respond effectively when not. 1. See Ben S. Bernanke (2012), " Some Reflections on the Crisis and the Policy Response ," speech delivered at "Rethinking Finance," a conference sponsored by the Russell Sage Foundation and Century Foundation, New York, April 13. For the classic discussion of financial panics and the appropriate central bank response, see Walter Bagehot ([1873] 1897), Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons). Return to text 2. Information on the centennial of the Federal Reserve System is available at www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/centennial/about.htm . Return to text 3. The Panic of 1907 is discussed in a number of sources, including O.M.W. Sprague (1910), A History of Crises under the National Banking System (PDF), National Monetary Commission (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office), and, with a focus on its monetary consequences, Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press). An accessible discussion of the episode, from which this speech draws heavily, can be found in Jon R. Moen and Ellis W. Tallman (1990), " Lessons from the Panic of 1907 ," Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Economic Review , May/June, pp. 2-13. Return to text 4. See Charles W. Calomiris and Gary Gorton (1991), "The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts, and Bank Regulation," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 109-74. Return to text 5. As discussed in Bernanke, "Some Reflections on the Crisis" (see note 1), shadow banking, as usually defined, comprises a diverse set of institutions and markets that, collectively, carry out traditional banking functions--but do so outside, or in ways only loosely linked to, the traditional system of regulated depository institutions. Examples of important components of the shadow banking system include securitization vehicles, asset-backed commercial paper conduits, money market funds, markets for repurchase agreements, investment banks, and mortgage companies. Return to text 6. See Bagehot, Lombard Street , in note 1. Return to text 7. For a more comprehensive discussion of recent changes in the regulatory framework, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability ," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, May 3. Return to text 8. See Stanley Fischer (1999), " On the Need for an International Lender of Last Resort ," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 13 (Fall), pp. 85-104. Return to text 9. For example, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), Capital Planning at Large Bank Holding Companies: Supervisory Expectations and Range of Current Practice (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, August). Return to text 10. For a more detailed discussion, see Daniel K. Tarullo (2013), " Toward Building a More Effective Resolution Regime: Progress and Challenges ," speech delivered at "Planning for the Orderly Resolution of a Global Systemically Important Bank," a conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Washington, October 18. Return to text Last Update: November 08, 2013 Back to Top

Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At A Teacher Town Hall Meeting: 100 Years of the Federal Reserve, Washington, D.C. Share Accessible Keys for Video [Space Bar] toggles play/pause; [Right/Left Arrows] seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec ); [Up/Down Arrows] increase/decrease volume; [M] toggles mute on/off; [F] toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11); The [Tab] key may be used in combination with the [Enter/Return] key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off. Thank you for that introduction. Tonight marks the third time in just a little over three years that the Federal Reserve System has hosted a teacher town hall, and I am very pleased to have this opportunity to speak with educators, both those of you here in Washington, D.C., and those watching at Reserve Bank gatherings around the country. I look forward to your questions in a few moments. But let me begin by briefly discussing an important milestone for the Federal Reserve--its centennial--and the opportunity that this occasion affords to teach and learn about the Fed's origins, history, and role, and about how this institution has helped shape the nation's economy and financial system. President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act, which established the Federal Reserve System, on December 23, 1913. As the 100th anniversary of that event approaches, we have several reasons to look back at an eventful century. One important reason is to better understand what historical experience can teach us about how best to respond to current challenges. For example, as many of you know, the bold measures the Fed took in response to the recent financial crisis reflected in part its determination to avoid repeating the sorts of mistakes it made before and during the Great Depression of the 1930s. Similarly, our commitment to safeguarding price stability is reinforced by memories of the costs of high inflation during the 1970s and the Federal Reserve's subsequent restoration of price stability under Chairman Volcker during the 1980s. Beyond the insights that the study of the Federal Reserve's first 100 years offer to economists, historians, and policymakers about how the Fed can best meet its objectives today and in the future, a second reason to mark the centennial is the opportunity it affords to educate young people about the Federal Reserve and its important role in promoting a healthy economy and stable financial system. When I was an educator, I quickly came to understand that students are most motivated to learn when they can see the connection of the lesson to their own lives. The Fed and its activities, and economics in general, can seem remote from daily concerns. But as teachers, you can show students how the Federal Reserve's decisions concretely affect them and their families. The Fed's actions influence the overall strength and stability of the economy, as you know, but they also affect the cost of a mortgage, the prices of goods and services, and the health of the job market that your students are part of or will soon be entering. Economics also complements and enriches the study of history. When I took history classes in high school, we spent much of our time memorizing dates and important events--revolutions, wars, elections, the passage of laws, and so on. While I appreciated the need to be familiar with such milestones, I remember feeling that I would like to know more about the lives of ordinary people at those times, not just about kings and queens and presidents. In college and graduate school, I studied economic history and found what I was looking for. For me, economic history added critical context by zooming in on the conditions of ordinary life--how people earned their livings, what their wages would buy, the extent to which they felt economically secure, the pace of economic change that they faced. Appreciating what the lives of ordinary people were like at various times and places helped explain the larger events--the wars, revolutions, and elections--as well. By the same token, understanding history also requires an appreciation of the role of key economic institutions, including central banks like the Federal Reserve. When I was in graduate school, my teacher, Stanley Fischer, introduced me to the work of Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz, which demonstrated that monetary policy can have enormous effects on how the economy performs, for good or for ill. That realization helped motivate me to specialize, in graduate school and after, in monetary economics and related fields. Similarly, for your students, it's impossible to understand the Great Depression, America's strong economic performance after World War II, or the recent financial crisis without learning about the Federal Reserve and the debates that have surrounded it. Learning about the Federal Reserve and about economics more generally will help students in their daily lives, by helping them make better financial or career decisions, for example, and by helping them become more informed citizens and voters. Learning about the Federal Reserve and its economic context will also give students a deeper understanding of history, as I noted. Yet there is one more reason why we at the Fed hope to use this centennial as an educational opportunity--to maintain and strengthen the democratic accountability and effectiveness of this institution. Traditionally, like other central banks, the Fed was reluctant to explain its policy decisions or otherwise engage with the public, partly based on a belief that this approach increased the effectiveness of monetary policy. However, this lack of openness became increasingly out of step with other institutions in our democratic society; it also reduced the effectiveness of Fed policies by inhibiting public understanding and discussion of policy goals and strategies. This approach began to change in the 1990s, when the Federal Reserve began to regularly provide more information about how it saw the economic situation and how it would respond. Increasing the Fed's transparency, openness, and accountability has been one of my top priorities as Chairman. A more open Fed, in my view, is both a more effective and more democratically legitimate institution. Indeed, the complex challenges we face as a nation are best addressed in an environment of informed public discourse, which is only possible when policy decisions are made in as transparent a way as possible. The centennial may be just an accident of the calendar, but any time is a good time to help more people learn about the Fed and what it does to enhance the economic well-being of Americans. It is often said--alas, accurately--that teaching is a thankless profession, so let me close by thanking you for what you give to your students. Our country and our economy need informed citizens who can think independently and critically. More pertinent to today's meeting, let me also thank you for your interest in teaching your students about the history and role of the Federal Reserve. As many of you have discovered, the Federal Reserve has a variety of classroom tools available through our education portal, FederalReserveEducation.org . Notably, the System's economic and financial education staff is introducing today a set of three lesson plans that examine the past 100 years of central banking. I hope they will provide practical help in your classes. Thank you for participating in today's event. I look forward to your questions and to an interesting discussion of the Federal Reserve's past, present, and future. Last Update: November 13, 2013 Back to Top

Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the Annual Conference of the Union of Arab Banks, Beirut, Lebanon (via prerecorded video) Share Good morning. I am pleased to address the Annual Conference of the Union of Arab Banks (UAB) as it celebrates 40 years of success representing the interests of the Arab banking and financial communities. The UAB may justifiably take great pride in its many accomplishments during the past four decades. Among other achievements, the UAB has emerged as a key international and regional participant in developing policies that promote financial stability, economic integration, and sustainable development and prosperity. The UAB has also been a champion of sharing best practices and training among regulators and bankers. The partnership that has developed between the Federal Reserve and the UAB may be counted among these successes. Ten years ago, the Federal Reserve helped establish--with the support of many of the countries represented at this conference--the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Financial Regulators' Initiative. Sarkis Yoghourtdjian of the Federal Reserve Board, who is attending with you today, was asked to lead this initiative, whose aim has been to provide technical assistance and bank supervision training to central banks and bank supervisory authorities. Now in its 10th and final year, the Financial Regulators' Initiative has sponsored more than 40 training programs and conferences throughout the MENA region, and it has provided many short-term, on-the-job training opportunities for MENA regulators with U.S. banking agencies. We are grateful to the UAB for its many contributions to the success of this initiative. In addition to celebrating accomplishments, anniversaries also provide a time for reflection and self-assessment. Governments, central bankers, financial regulators, and the banking industry still labor today in the long shadow cast by the global financial crisis. Against that backdrop, financial regulators around the world are engaged in a historic and sweeping renovation of the global financial structure. One of the most important goals is to ensure that banks hold more and higher-quality capital, and have sufficient liquid assets on hand, to be able to survive a market shock or severe economic downturn. In addition, we must push banking organizations of all sizes to ensure their compensation practices link pay to performance and do not encourage excessive risk-taking. Past and current crises underscore an additional lesson. Then as now, international or regional financial crises require a coordinated response to safeguard the stability of the world's financial system. To that end, the UAB can play an important regional role by facilitating efforts to address potential cross-border issues, and by providing a local platform for strong cooperation between home and host supervisors during normal and crisis periods. At your conference this week, I anticipate you will discuss the opportunities and challenges that lay ahead for your members. Among the topics, no doubt, will be the prospects for partnership between the public and private sectors, the importance of establishing institutions capable of managing crises, the effects of new regulatory and supervisory structures on the banking industry, and the role of the banking sector in promoting economic growth. We at the Federal Reserve face similar challenges and opportunities, and we look forward to working with you to find common approaches and solutions. I wish you a successful and productive conference. Warm congratulations on your 40th anniversary, and best wishes for another 40 years of success. Last Update: November 14, 2013 Back to Top

Chairman Ben S. Bernanke At the National Economists Club Annual Dinner, Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture, Washington, D.C. Share Nearly eight years ago, when I began my time as Chairman, one of my priorities was to make the Federal Reserve more transparent--and, in particular, to make monetary policy as transparent and open as reasonably possible. I believed then, as I do today, that transparency in monetary policy enhances public understanding and confidence, promotes informed discussion of policy options, increases the accountability of monetary policymakers for reaching their mandated objectives, and ultimately makes policy more effective by tightening the linkage between monetary policy, financial conditions, and the real economy. Of course, responding to the financial crisis and its aftermath soon became the Federal Reserve's main focus. As it has turned out, however, following the stabilization of the financial system, supporting our economy's recovery from the deepest recession since the Great Depression has required a more prominent role for communication and transparency in monetary policy than ever before. In my remarks, I will discuss how the Federal Reserve's communications have evolved in recent years and how enhanced transparency is increasing the effectiveness of monetary policy. Despite the challenges inherent in communicating in an unprecedented economic and policy environment about a future that can be only imperfectly foreseen, I will explain why I believe that policy transparency remains an essential element of the Federal Reserve's strategy for meeting its economic objectives. Policy Frameworks and Communication To understand the critical role that the Federal Reserve's communications about monetary policy has played in recent years, it is useful to start by discussing the role of monetary policy communication more generally, including the relationship between policy communication and the broader policy framework. Making monetary policy is sometimes compared to driving a car, with policymakers pressing on the accelerator or the brakes, depending on whether the economy needs to be sped up or slowed down at that moment. That analogy is imperfect, however, for at least two reasons. First, the main effects of monetary policy actions on the economy are not felt immediately but instead play out over quarters or even years. Hence, unlike the driver of a car, monetary policymakers cannot simply respond to what lies immediately in front of them but must try to look well ahead--admittedly, a difficult task. Second, the effects of monetary policy on the economy today depend importantly not only on current policy actions, but also on the public's expectations of how policy will evolve. The automotive analogy clearly breaks down here, for it is as if the current speed of the car depended on what the car itself expects the driver to do in the future. The public's expectations about future monetary policy actions matter today because those expectations have important effects on current financial conditions, which in turn affect output, employment, and inflation over time. For example, because investors can choose freely between holding a longer-term security or rolling over a sequence of short-term securities, longer-term interest rates today are closely linked to market participants' expectations of how short-term rates will evolve. If monetary policymakers are expected to keep short-term interest rates low, then current longer-term interest rates are likely to be low as well, all else being equal. In short, for monetary policy, expectations matter. Indeed, expectations matter so much that a central bank may be able to help make policy more effective by working to shape those expectations. Experience demonstrates that a useful approach to managing expectations--one that dovetails well with basic principles of transparency--involves policymakers stating clear objectives as well as their plans for attaining those objectives. For example, over the past two decades, many central banks have introduced explicit numerical targets for inflation. Supplemented by regular publication of the central bank's economic forecasts and provisional plans for achieving its objective in the medium term, numerical inflation goals have helped increase the transparency and predictability of policy in a number of economies. In this spirit, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has clarified the Federal Reserve's objectives and policy strategy. Because of its dual mandate from the Congress, which specifies both maximum employment and price stability as policy objectives, the Federal Reserve could not adopt a numerical inflation target as its exclusive goal. Nor would it have been appropriate for the FOMC simply to provide a fixed objective for some measure of employment or unemployment, in parallel with an inflation objective. In contrast to inflation, which is determined by monetary policy in the longer run, the maximum level of employment that can be sustained over the longer run is determined primarily by nonmonetary factors, such as demographics, the mix of workforce skills, labor market institutions, and advances in technology. Moreover, as these factors evolve, the maximum employment level may change over time. Consequently, it is beyond the power of the central bank to set a longer-run target for employment that is immutable or independent of the underlying structure of the economy. 1 The approach on which the FOMC agreed is described in its statement of longer-run goals and policy strategy, issued in January 2012 and reaffirmed in January of this year. 2 The statement begins by affirming the FOMC's commitment to meeting both of its statutory objectives. It then indicates that, in the context of the FOMC's dual mandate, the Committee sees price stability as corresponding to a 2 percent longer-term inflation goal. On the employment side of the mandate, the Committee makes its best assessment of the maximum level of employment at any given time, recognizing that such assessments are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision. In practice, the Committee often expresses its employment objective in terms of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. Currently, FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run normal unemployment rate, as publicly reported in the quarterly Summary of Economic Projections, range from 5.2 to 6 percent. 3 As I noted, explicit objectives are most useful when accompanied by provisional plans for achieving them. Many central banks supplement their announced objectives with published forecasts that, implicitly or explicitly, lay out plans for achieving their goals. Although the size and diversity of the Federal Reserve's policymaking committee has made achieving a single consensus forecast difficult, the quarterly Summary of Economic Projections reports each FOMC participant's view of the most likely future paths of inflation, unemployment, and output growth, conditional on that individual's view of appropriate monetary policy. In recent years, this survey has also included participants' projections of the path of future short-term interest rates they see as most likely to achieve the Committee's goals. In general, the Committee's two objectives of maximum employment and price stability are complementary. When they are not, the FOMC has stated that it will pursue a balanced approach in the pursuit of its dual mandate, working to ensure that both inflation and employment are close to their desired values in the longer term. In short, the Federal Reserve, like many central banks around the world, has made significant progress in recent years in clarifying its goals and policy approach, and in providing regular information about the future path of policy that it views as most likely to attain its objectives. This increased transparency about the framework of policy has aided the public in forming policy expectations, reduced uncertainty, and made policy more effective. The financial crisis and its aftermath, however, have raised even greater challenges for, and demands on, the Federal Reserve's communication. We have had to contend with the persistent effects of the seizing-up of the financial system, the collapse of housing prices and construction, new financial shocks in Europe and elsewhere, restrictive fiscal policies at all levels of government, and, of course, the enormous blows to output and employment associated with the worst U.S. recession since the Great Depression. Moreover, for the first time since the FOMC began using the federal funds rate as its policy interest rate, that rate is effectively at zero and thus cannot be lowered meaningfully further. Consequently, to provide needed support to the economic recovery and minimize the risk of deflation, the Federal Reserve has had to adopt new policy tools, which bring their own communication challenges. In the remainder of my talk, I will discuss how the Federal Reserve has used communication to try to further inform the public's expectations about how the FOMC will employ what are currently its two principal policy tools: its plans regarding its short-term policy interest rate and its large-scale purchases of securities. Forward Guidance about Policy Interest Rates As the economy weakened over 2008, the FOMC repeatedly cut its target for the federal funds rate, its short-term policy rate. In December of that year, the target for the funds rate was reduced to a range of zero to 1/4 percent, and money market rates declined nearly to zero. Thus, using the standard means of further easing monetary policy--cutting the target interest rate--was no longer possible. The so-called zero lower bound on the FOMC's policy interest rate was not the only challenge the Committee faced. First, the depth of the recession, combined with ongoing concerns about the functioning of the financial system, raised significant uncertainties about both the likely pace of recovery and the effectiveness of monetary policy in supporting growth. The recoveries from most post-World War II U.S. recessions had been relatively rapid, with production, unemployment, and other key variables returning to close to normal levels within six to eight quarters. In such cases, the policy horizon most relevant to financial markets might be the next several quarters. In the aftermath of the recent crisis, however, the Committee had to consider the possibility that a highly accommodative policy might be required for a number of years. Second, a federal funds rate effectively at zero created an important asymmetry for policy planning. On the one hand, if the economy were to recover rapidly and inflation were to increase, monetary policymakers would be able to respond in the normal way, by raising the federal funds rate. But, on the other hand, if the economy were to remain weak or recover only gradually--the case we actually faced--the FOMC would not be able to cut the funds rate further. Moreover, in the latter case, the economy could face an increased risk of deflation--falling prices. As the case of Japan illustrates, deflation may impede economic growth while being very difficult to escape. To try to preempt such outcomes, a strong case existed for monetary policy to be more accommodative than suggested by standard policy rules calibrated to normal times. 4 So the Committee faced a situation in which more monetary policy accommodation was needed, and possibly for quite a long time--yet its basic policy tool, the federal funds rate target, had been pushed to its limit. To put the Committee's problem another way, standard policy rules and a range of other analyses implied that, to achieve the FOMC's objectives, the target for the federal funds rate should be set well below zero, which, of course, was not feasible. Fortunately, as I discussed earlier, the degree of accommodation provided by monetary policy depends not just on the current value of the policy rate, but on public expectations of future settings of that rate. The Committee accordingly realized that it could ease policy further--and reduce uncertainty about future policy--by assuring the public and markets that it intended to keep the policy rate low for some time, and for a longer period than the public initially expected. At first, the Committee employed purely qualitative language to send this message: After the FOMC stated in December 2008 that it would likely be appropriate for the federal funds rate to remain near zero for "some time," it changed the formulation in March 2009 to "an extended period." 5 However, such language did not convey very precisely the Committee's intentions. In August 2011, the Committee introduced a specific date into its guidance, stating that conditions would likely warrant keeping the federal funds rate target near zero at least through mid-2013. 6 This date-based guidance was more precise than the qualitative language the Committee had been using, and it appears to have been effective in communicating the FOMC's commitment to a highly accommodative policy. In particular, following the introduction of dates into the FOMC statement, interest rates and survey measures of policy expectations moved in ways broadly consistent with the guidance. 7 Although the date-based forward guidance appears to have affected the public's expectations as desired, it did not explain how future policy would be affected by changes in the economic outlook--an important limitation. Indeed, the date in the guidance was pushed out twice in 2012--first to late 2014 and then to mid-2015--leaving the public unsure about whether and under what circumstances further changes to the guidance might occur. 8 In December of last year, the FOMC addressed this issue by tying its forward guidance about its policy rate more directly to its economic objectives. 9 Introducing so-called state-contingent guidance, the Committee announced for the first time that no increase in the federal funds rate target should be anticipated so long as unemployment remained above 6-1/2 percent and inflation and inflation expectations remained stable and near target. 10 This formulation provided greater clarity about the factors influencing the Committee's thinking about future policy and how that thinking might change as the outlook changed. 11 As my colleagues and I have frequently emphasized, the conditions stated in this guidance are thresholds, not triggers. Crossing one of the thresholds will not automatically give rise to an increase in the federal funds rate target; instead, it will signal only that it is appropriate for the Committee to begin considering whether an increase in the target is warranted. This threshold formulation helps explain why the Committee was willing to express the guidance bearing on the labor market in terms of the unemployment rate alone, instead of following its usual practice of considering a broad range of labor market indicators. In the judgment of the Committee, the unemployment rate--which, despite some drawbacks in this regard, is probably the best single summary indicator of the state of the labor market--is sufficient for defining the threshold given by the guidance. However, after the unemployment threshold is crossed, many other indicators become relevant to a comprehensive judgment of the health of the labor market, including such measures as payroll employment, labor force participation, and the rates of hiring and separation. In particular, even after unemployment drops below 6-1/2 percent, and so long as inflation remains well behaved, the Committee can be patient in seeking assurance that the labor market is sufficiently strong before considering any increase in its target for the federal funds rate. Large-Scale Asset Purchases and Related Communication Because of the severity of the recession and the disruptions in financial markets, and because short-term interest rates were near the zero lower bound, it became clear early on that more monetary accommodation would be needed than could be provided through the management of short-term rates alone, even with guidance that those rates would be kept low well into the future. Accordingly, at about the same time that the FOMC reduced its target for the federal funds rate close to zero, it began supplementing its rate policies and forward rate guidance with large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs)--specifically, open market purchases of longer-term U.S. Treasury securities and securities issued by the government-sponsored enterprises, primarily mortgage-backed securities (MBS). Both LSAPs and forward guidance for the federal funds rate support the economy by putting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, but they affect longer-term rates through somewhat different channels. To understand the difference, it is useful to decompose longer-term interest rates into two components: One reflects the expected path of short-term interest rates, and the other is called a term premium. The term premium is the extra return that investors require to be willing to hold a longer-term security to maturity compared with the expected yield from rolling over short-term securities for the same period. As I have noted, forward rate guidance affects longer-term interest rates primarily by influencing investors' expectations of future short-term interest rates. LSAPs, in contrast, most directly affect term premiums. As the Federal Reserve buys a larger share of the outstanding stock of longer-term securities, the quantity of these securities available for private-sector portfolios declines. As the securities purchased by the Fed become scarcer, they should become more valuable. Consequently, their yields should fall as investors demand a smaller term premium for holding them. This argument depends importantly on the assumption that the longer-term Treasury and MBS securities that the Fed buys are not perfectly substitutable with other types of assets, an assumption that seems well supported in practice. 12 As both forward rate guidance and LSAPs affect longer-term interest rates, the use of these tools allows monetary policy to be effective even when short-term interest rates are close to zero. However, the Committee does not view these two tools as entirely equivalent. One reason is that we have much less experience with policies designed to operate on term premiums, as LSAPs do. As a result, though a strong majority of FOMC members believes that both the forward rate guidance and the LSAPs are helping to support the recovery, we are somewhat less certain about the magnitudes of the effects on financial conditions and the economy of changes in the pace of purchases or in the accumulated stock of assets on the Fed's balance sheet. Moreover, economists do not have as good an understanding as we would like of the factors determining term premiums; indeed, as we saw earlier this year, hard-to-predict shifts in term premiums can be a source of significant volatility in interest rates and financial conditions. LSAPs have other drawbacks not associated with forward rate guidance, including the risk of impairing the functioning of securities markets and the extra complexities for the Fed of operating with a much larger balance sheet, although I see both of these issues as manageable. 13 In deciding to employ LSAPs, the FOMC has accordingly remained attentive to the possible costs and risks as well as to the efficacy of this less familiar tool, a point the Committee has regularly noted in its post-meeting statements. Of course, elevated unemployment, below-target inflation, lingering economic fragility, and the harmful effects of long-term unemployment on our society and economic potential also pose significant costs and risks, and the Committee has, thus far, judged that the balance favors the use of LSAPs. Between November 2008 and June 2012, the FOMC announced or extended a series of asset purchase programs, in each case specifying the expected quantities of assets to be acquired under the program. Like the use of date-based forward guidance, announcing a program of predetermined size and duration has advantages and disadvantages. On the one hand, a fixed program size is straightforward to communicate; on the other hand, a program of fixed size cannot so easily adapt to changes in the economic outlook and the consequent changes in the need for policy accommodation. In announcing its fixed-size programs, the FOMC did state a general willingness to do more if needed--and, indeed, it has followed through on that promise‑‑but such statements left considerable uncertainty regarding the conditions that might warrant changes in an existing program or the introduction of a new one. In a step roughly analogous to the shift from date-based guidance to the contingent, thresholds-based guidance now in use for the federal funds rate target, in September 2012 the FOMC announced a program of asset purchases in which the total size of the purchase program would not be fixed in advance but instead would be linked to the Committee's economic objectives. In particular, the Committee initiated purchases of agency MBS at the rate of $40 billion per month and stated its intention to continue purchases until the outlook for the labor market improved substantially in a context of price stability. 14 In December 2012, when a program to extend the maturity of the Fed's portfolio of Treasury securities came to an end, the FOMC added purchases of $45 billion per month in longer-term Treasury securities to the new program, bringing the monthly purchase rate to $85 billion, where it remains today. As I noted, the Committee set a criterion of substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market as the condition for ending the new purchase program. The Committee also signaled its expectation that it would end the purchases and return to an emphasis on rates policy and forward guidance before it had fully attained its dual mandate objectives, stating that "the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and the economic recovery strengthens." 15 The reason for this sequencing choice, again, was the greater uncertainty about the costs and efficacy of LSAPs, relative to the more familiar tool of managing the current short-term interest rate and, through forward guidance, expectations of future short-term interest rates. Moreover, to the extent that the use of LSAPs engenders additional costs and risks, one might expect the tradeoff between the efficacy and costs of this tool to become less favorable as the Federal Reserve's balance sheet expands. Having seen progress in the labor market since the beginning of the latest asset purchase program in September 2012, the Committee agreed in June of this year to provide more-comprehensive guidance about the criteria that would inform future decisions about the program. Consequently, in my press conference following the June FOMC meeting, I presented a framework linking the program more explicitly to the evolution of the FOMC's economic outlook. In particular, I noted the Committee's expectation at the time that improvements in the job market would continue, supported by a moderate pickup in growth that would support those gains. The Committee additionally expected that inflation would be moving back toward its 2 percent objective over time. If the incoming data were broadly consistent with that outlook, the Committee would likely begin measured reductions in the pace of asset purchases later in 2013. If the economy evolved as anticipated, the end of purchases would occur around midyear 2014. I also emphasized that the path of purchases would depend on incoming data and could be slower or faster than envisioned in the modal scenario--indeed, I noted that the pace of purchases could be increased for a time, if warranted. The framework I discussed in June implied that substantial additional asset purchases over the subsequent quarters were likely, with even more purchases possible if economic developments proved disappointing. However, following the June meeting and press conference, market yields moved sharply higher. For example, between the FOMC meetings of June and September, the 10-year Treasury yield rose about 3/4 percentage point and rates on MBS increased by a similar amount. Financial market movements are often difficult to account for, even after the fact, but three main reasons seem to explain the rise in interest rates over the summer. First, improvements in the economic outlook warranted somewhat higher yields--a natural and healthy development. Second, some of the rise in rates reportedly reflected an unwinding of levered positions--positions that appear to have been premised on an essentially indefinite continuation of asset purchases--together with some knock-on liquidations of other positions in response to investor losses and the rise in volatility. Although it brought with it some tightening of financial conditions, this unwinding and the associated rise in term premiums may have had the benefit of reducing future risks to financial stability and, in particular, of lowering the probability of an even sharper market correction at some later point. Third, market participants may have taken the communication in June as indicating a general lessening of the Committee's commitment to maintain a highly accommodative stance of policy in pursuit of its objectives. In particular, it appeared that the FOMC's forward guidance for the federal funds rate had become less effective after June, with market participants pulling forward the time at which they expected the Committee to start raising rates, in a manner inconsistent with the guidance. 16 To the extent that this third factor--a perceived reduction in the Fed's commitment to meeting its objectives--contributed to the increase in yields, it was neither welcome nor warranted, in the judgment of the FOMC. This change in expectations did not correspond to any actual lessening in the FOMC's commitment or intention to provide the high degree of monetary accommodation needed to meet its objectives, as Committee participants emphasized in subsequent communications. At its September 2013 meeting, the FOMC applied the framework communicated in June. The Committee's decision at that meeting to maintain the pace of asset purchases was appropriate and fully consistent with the earlier guidance. The Committee was looking for evidence that job market gains would continue, supported by a pickup in growth. As it happened, the implications for the outlook of the evidence reviewed at the September meeting were mixed at best, while the ongoing fiscal debates posed additional risks. The Committee accordingly elected to await further evidence supporting its expectation of continued improvement in the labor market. 17 Although the FOMC's decision came as a surprise to some market participants, it appears to have strengthened the credibility of the Committee's forward rate guidance; in particular, following the decision, longer-term rates fell and expectations of short-term rates derived from financial market prices showed, and continue to show, a pattern more consistent with the guidance. In coming meetings, in evaluating the outlook for the labor market, we will continue to consider both the cumulative progress since September 2012 and the prospect for continued gains. We have seen meaningful improvement in the labor market since the latest asset purchase program was announced in September 2012. At the time, the latest reading on the unemployment rate was 8.1 percent, and both we and most private-sector economists were projecting only slow reductions in unemployment in the coming quarters. Recent reports on payroll employment had also been somewhat disappointing. However, since the program was announced, the unemployment rate has fallen 0.8 percentage point, and about 2.6 million payroll jobs have been added. Looking forward, we will of course continue to monitor the incoming data. As reflected in the latest Summary of Economic Projections and the October FOMC statement, the FOMC still expects that labor market conditions will continue to improve and that inflation will move toward the 2 percent objective over the medium term. If these views are supported by incoming information, the FOMC will likely begin to moderate the pace of purchases. However, asset purchases are not on a preset course, and the Committee's decisions about their pace will remain contingent on the Committee's economic outlook. As before, the Committee will also continue to take into account its assessment of the likely efficacy and costs of the program. When, ultimately, asset purchases do slow, it will likely be because the economy has progressed sufficiently for the Committee to rely more heavily on its rate policies, the associated forward guidance, and its substantial continued holdings of securities to maintain progress toward maximum employment and to achieve price stability. 18 In particular, the target for the federal funds rate is likely to remain near zero for a considerable time after the asset purchases end, perhaps well after the unemployment threshold is crossed and at least until the preponderance of the data supports the beginning of the removal of policy accommodation. Conclusion I began my time as Chairman with the goal of increasing the transparency of the Federal Reserve, and of monetary policy in particular. In response to a financial crisis and a deep recession, the Fed's monetary policy communications have proved far more important and have evolved in different ways than I would have envisioned eight years ago. The economy has made significant progress since the depths of the recession. However, we are still far from where we would like to be, and, consequently, it may be some time before monetary policy returns to more normal settings. I agree with the sentiment, expressed by my colleague Janet Yellen at her testimony last week, that the surest path to a more normal approach to monetary policy is to do all we can today to promote a more robust recovery. 19 The FOMC remains committed to maintaining highly accommodative policies for as long as they are needed. Communication about policy is likely to remain a central element of the Federal Reserve's efforts to achieve its policy goals. References Bernanke, Ben S. (2012). " Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis ," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008). " FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount Rate Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and San Francisco ," press release, December 16. ------ (2009). " FOMC Statement ," press release, March 18. ------ (2011). " FOMC Statement ," press release, August 9. ------ (2012a). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, January 25. ------ (2012b). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, September 13. ------ (2012c). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, December 12. ------ (2013a). " Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee Release Economic Projections from the September 17-18 FOMC Meeting ," press release, September 18. ------ (2013b). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, September 18. ------ (2013c). Transcript of Chairman Bernanke's Press Conference (PDF) , transcript, June 19. Campbell, Jeffrey R., Charles L. Evans, Jonas D.M. Fisher, and Alejandro Justiniano (2012). " Macroeconomic Effects of FOMC Forward Guidance ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , vol. 43 (Spring), pp. 1-54. Carpenter, Seth B., Jane E. Ihrig, Elizabeth C. Klee, Daniel W. Quinn, and Alexander H. Boote (2013). " The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-01. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January. Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Michael Woodford (2003). " The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , no. 1, pp. 139-211. Femia, Katherine, Steven Friedman, and Brian Sack (2013). " The Effects of Policy Guidance on Perceptions of the Fed's Reaction Function ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 652. New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, November. Friedman, Milton (2000). " Canada and Flexible Exchange Rates (PDF) ," speech delivered at "Revisiting the Case for Flexible Exchange Rates," a conference sponsored by the Bank of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, November. Posen, Adam (2012). " Comments on ‘Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound' by Michael Woodford (PDF) ," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Raskin, Matthew D. (2013). " The Effects of the Federal Reserve's Date-Based Forward Guidance ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-37. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). " Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 32 (November), pp. 936‑66. Swanson, Eric T. and John C. Williams (2013). " Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 2012-02. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, January. Tobin, James (1965). "The Monetary Interpretation of History," American Economic Review , vol. 55 (June), pp. 464-85. ------ (1969). " A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 1 (February), pp. 15-29. Yellen, Janet (2013). " Confirmation Hearing ," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, D.C., November 14. 1. To be clear, although monetary policy has limited influence on the level of employment that can be sustained in the longer run, it can be used to help eliminate gaps between the current level of employment and its sustainable level--as policy is doing today. Return to text 2. The January 2013 statement is available on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf . Return to text 3. The central tendency of the projections for the longer-run normal unemployment rate (which drops the three highest and three lowest values submitted by FOMC participants) was 5.2 to 5.8 percent in September. For the most recent FOMC projections, see www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20130918ep.htm on the Board's website. Return to text 4. See, for example, Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) and Reifschneider and Williams (2000). Return to text 5. See Board of Governors (2008, 2009). Return to text 6. See Board of Governors (2011). Return to text 7. Evidence that this is the case has been provided by Campbell, Evans, Fisher, and Justiniano (2012), Swanson and Williams (2013), Raskin (2013), and by a recent study of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's survey of primary dealers (Femia, Friedman, and Sack, 2013). Return to text 8. See Board of Governors (2012a, b). Return to text 9. See Board of Governors (2012c). Return to text 10. See Board of Governors (2012c). Specifically, the guidance says that the Committee anticipates that its 0 to 1/4 percent target range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored. The FOMC asserted in its statement that it viewed the new thresholds to be consistent with the earlier, date-based guidance. Femia, Friedman, and Sack (2013) present evidence that respondents to the survey of primary dealers largely shared this assessment. Return to text 11. An advantage of the state-contingent formulation is that it increases the tendency of financial market conditions to act as an automatic stabilizer for the economy. For example, bad news about the labor market, which tends to lengthen the amount of time the public expects to be required for the unemployment rate to reach the threshold, should likewise increase the length of time that the public expects policy to remain highly accommodative. In response to this shift in policy expectations, interest rates should fall and asset prices should rise, thus easing financial conditions and helping to offset the adverse change to the outlook. Return to text 12. I discussed this effect more fully in Bernanke (2012). As I noted then, both Milton Friedman (2000) and James Tobin (1965, 1969) made this argument. LSAPs may affect financial conditions through other channels as well; see Bernanke (2012) for a more complete discussion. One such channel is a "signaling channel," which works to the extent that the direct action of buying securities increases the credibility of communication tools like forward rate guidance (Posen, 2012). Return to text 13. An additional concern that some have raised about the Federal Reserve's expanded balance sheet is the possibility that financial conditions could evolve in a way that significantly reduces the Fed's net interest income on its portfolio for a time, which in turn could lead to a period during which the Fed is not remitting income to the Treasury; see Carpenter and others (2013) for an analysis. Such a situation, though unlikely, could have reputational costs and possibly increase risks to the Federal Reserve's independence. Although these costs must be taken into account, careful analysis suggests that, in fact, LSAPs almost certainly will result in improved government finances: First, even if a period of no payments to the Treasury occurs, it is highly likely that the payments over the period of unconventional monetary policy will be significantly higher than they would have been without LSAPs; indeed, since 2009, the Fed has remitted more than $350 billion to the Treasury, about the same total as it remitted during the 18 years prior to the crisis (1990-2007 inclusive). Second, a complete accounting of the fiscal effects of LSAPs should take into account the beneficial effects of a stronger economy on tax receipts, interest payments, and government spending; the reduction in the budget deficit from these sources will certainly outweigh the effects on the deficit of any changes in the pace of Fed payments. Finally, while fiscal effects are important, the full effect of the FOMC's policies also includes important additional benefits of increased economic growth and employment and of greater price stability. Return to text 14. This criterion was expressed in slightly different ways in the FOMC statements between September 2012 and January 2013. Since March 2013, the statement has included the sentence, "The Committee will continue its purchases of Treasury and agency mortgage-backed securities, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate, until the outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability." FOMC statements are available at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm . Return to text 15. See Board of Governors (2012c). Return to text 16. For example, the Eurodollar futures rate for mid-2015 rose about 40 basis points in the few days following the June FOMC meeting, far more than could be explained by revisions to the economic outlook. Return to text 17. See Board of Governors (2013a, b). Return to text 18. By the logic described earlier, the Fed's maintenance of a large balance sheet (by reinvesting principal paydowns and rolling over maturing securities) should continue to put downward pressure on term premiums and longer-term interest rates, even after purchases end. Also, as I noted at my June press conference, a strong majority of the Committee now expects that there will be no sales of agency MBS during the process of normalizing monetary policy, although in the longer run limited sales could be used to reduce or eliminate residual MBS holdings. See Board of Governors (2013c). Return to text 19. See Yellen (2013). Return to text Last Update: November 19, 2013 Back to Top
