The Federal Reserve System and Community Development: The Why, The How, and The What Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 2017 Policy Summit on Housing, Human Capital, and Inequality: Transforming Regional Economies: Growth and Equity through Policy and Practice Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Philadelphia, and Minneapolis Cleveland, OH June 23, 2017 1 Introduction Let me take this opportunity to offer my thanks to all of you for actively participating in this year’s Policy Summit, and to Mary Helen Petrus and Bonnie Blankenship of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Theresa Singleton of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, and Michael Grover of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis for taking the lead in creating this year’s program. Over the past 14 years, the Policy Summit has brought together community development practitioners, researchers, funders, policymakers, and others interested in strengthening our communities so that all people have the opportunity to productively engage in our economy and to share in its benefits. As is clear from the many conversations we’ve had over the past two days – and over the past 14 years of this summit – there are no easy answers. But there are some answers, and I have confidence that your dedication, expertise, and collaboration will result in effective solutions being implemented more widely and even better solutions being devised. I hope that the discussions over the past two days have inspired you to continue the important work you are doing. Today, I want to talk about the Federal Reserve’s role in the community development arena. I will touch on “the why, the how, and the what” of this work: why we at the Fed see our community development efforts as important to our mission of fostering a healthy economy, how we go about doing this work, and some of what we are focusing on. As always, the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Structure of the Fed To begin, it helps to know a little bit about the structure of the Federal Reserve System. To say that the Fed is an “interesting” institution is an understatement. I’ve spent my career at the Fed, and I am still learning arcane things about the Fed’s structure and history. The Federal Reserve System was established by an act of Congress that was signed into law in 1913. We like to say that the Federal Reserve is a 2 decentralized central bank, which is independent within the government but not independent from the government. The structure is one of balance. Congress designed the Fed to alleviate concerns that it would become dominated by financial interests in New York or political interests in Washington or by any particular individual group. The design includes representation from the entire nation, balancing public-sector and private-sector interests, and Wall Street and Main Street concerns. The Federal Reserve System has 12 regional Reserve Banks that are distributed across the country and a seven-member Board of Governors in Washington that oversees those Banks. The governors, who serve the public, are appointed by the president of the United States and confirmed by the Senate. The Reserve Banks also operate in the public interest. Each has a nine-member board of directors whose members are chosen in a nonpolitical process to represent business, agricultural, industrial, bank, and public interests in the Districts they serve. The nonbank directors are responsible for choosing the Bank’s president, who is subject to approval by the Fed’s Board of Governors. Some of the Reserve Banks also have Branches with boards, and each Reserve Bank has a number of advisory councils drawing membership from various sectors and geographies in their Districts. This regional and balanced structure has served the country well for more than 100 years. The U.S. is very diverse, encompassing large cities, small towns, and rural areas, with a mix of different industries and occupations. The Fed’s structure allows decisions on monetary policy, financial system regulation and supervision, and payments to take into account the diversity of the American economy and its people. We recognize that our policy decisions affect Main Streets and communities all across the country. As a participant at Federal Open Market Committee meetings, I can attest to the fact that the members of the Board of Governors and Reserve Bank presidents do bring different perspectives to the table. My own perspectives are informed not only by economic and financial data and models but also by the information gleaned from a diverse set of business, consumer, and labor contacts throughout the Fourth 3 District, which includes the state of Ohio, the western part of Pennsylvania, the eastern part of Kentucky, and the northern panhandle of West Virginia. By design, the discussions at our meetings contain a mosaic of economic information and analysis from all parts of the country. The FOMC does not suffer from group think. We come together, share our different perspectives, and work to develop a consensus to set national monetary policy in pursuit of our monetary policy goals of price stability and maximum employment, goals that Congress gave us. Congress has also given the Fed independence in making monetary policy decisions. Neither Congress nor the U.S. president has to approve monetary policy decisions, so the decisions are insulated from short- run political considerations. At the same time, the Fed is held accountable for its decisions when it regularly communicates the rationale for its policy decisions in testimony before Congress, and in policy statements, meeting minutes, reports, and speeches. This system of accountable independence has been shown to yield better policy decisions and better economic outcomes for the country. The regional, private-public structure of the Federal Reserve System helps to reinforce this system of independence and accountability by ensuring that diverse information from all sectors of the economy and all parts of the country is brought into monetary policy discussions, with the policymakers themselves distributed across the nation and not concentrated in one location. Federal Reserve System and Community Development: The Why In addition to aiding monetary policymaking, the Fed’s structure allows us to perform our other functions more effectively, too. Of course, one of those is near and dear to everyone in this room: the Federal Reserve System’s role in identifying effective community development policies and best practices for promoting economic progress and access to credit in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. The origin of the Fed’s community development work lies with the passage of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) in 1977. At the time, many people thought that limited access to credit and 4 illegal practices such as redlining contributed to the deterioration in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods throughout the U.S. The CRA was meant to help ensure equitable access to credit for all individuals and neighborhoods by reaffirming that insured depository institutions must serve the communities in which they are chartered to do business.1 In 1981, the Board of Governors asked each Reserve Bank to appoint a Community Affairs Officer, and from there, the Fed built a function to provide technical training and support to depository institutions to help bolster compliance with the CRA. Over time, the Fed’s interest and activities in community development have grown. Partly this reflects the desire to promote consistent implementation of the CRA across the nation, recognizing that, to do this, we need a good understanding of all of the interrelated challenges facing lower-income communities. But another motivation is the fact that our community development activities at the local level, facilitated by the Fed’s regional structure, have allowed us to gain valuable reconnaissance on the economic health of people and communities across our Districts. Even if the Federal Reserve, along with other federal regulators, were not charged with implementing the CRA, our community development activities would remain an important component of the Fed’s work because they help us monitor the health of the economy across various segments of the population and geographies, which is an important component of setting appropriate monetary policy. The financial crisis and ensuing recession provide a vivid illustration of this interconnectedness and the importance of local engagement. As the housing market slowed and the number of subprime mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures began to rise, the Federal Reserve began monitoring these developments more intensively. No doubt, at the beginning, we underestimated the negative effects that problems initially centered in the subprime mortgage market would ultimately have on the broader economy. 1 For more on the historical context of the CRA, see Sandra F. Braunstein, “The Community Reinvestment Act,” testimony before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, February 13, 2008. 5 However, members of the Fed’s community development staff were already engaged with industry and consumer advocates who were focused on helping troubled borrowers. These staff members were able to provide first-hand knowledge and objective information to Fed policymakers, raising their awareness that the problems were not insignificant. Fed staff with expertise in mortgage markets and housing in the community development, economic research, and bank supervision functions were mobilized. Our regular contact with local organizations across the country indicated that a lack of data on delinquencies and foreclosures was impeding progress. So Federal Reserve staffs across the country began collecting data; they analyzed delinquency and foreclosure trends and helped to evaluate policies and programs aimed at aiding troubled borrowers and addressing the growing problem of foreclosures. Ohio had one of the highest foreclosure rates in the country, coupled with high numbers of vacant and abandoned properties, so the Cleveland Fed was particularly active in this analysis, working with government agencies, financial institutions, and community-based organizations – perhaps with many of you in this room.2 While our community development work gives us insights into the economic health of communities, which helps inform our monetary policy, monetary policy is not the right tool to address the many challenges facing lower-income households and neighborhoods. What monetary policy can do is promote greater economic stability overall by focusing on price stability and maximum employment, and thereby lower the risk of recessions, which disproportionately harm the more vulnerable parts of our society. But an interconnected set of factors determines the economic vitality of households and neighborhoods, including access to credit, capital, and financial services, affordable housing, workforce development, job training and education, health and wellness services, and infrastructure, including transportation and broadband services. While monetary policy cannot address issues such as income inequality, the longer- 2 The Cleveland Fed’s 2008 annual report essay, “Breaking the Housing Crisis Cycle,” focused on the magnitude of the housing crisis in the region and the nation and discussed potential policy responses. 6 run issues of workforce development, or the distributional effects of globalization and technological change, other government policies and private-public programs, if they are well-designed, can. This is where the Federal Reserve’s community development work comes in. Federal Reserve System and Community Development: The How The Fed is not the entity that can set these policies or implement these programs, but the Fed is committed to increasing knowledge about the economic challenges facing low- and moderate-income households and communities and helping to identify effective policies and best practices to address these challenges. I believe the structure of the Federal Reserve System gives us some advantages in doing this work. In particular, our regional structure insulates us from political influence, so we are viewed as a trusted and objective party. We hold that public trust very dearly, and always strive to maintain our credibility. That is why we aim to conduct our research with the utmost rigor and the highest quality standards, looking objectively at all sides of an issue and potential solutions. Our reputation for objectivity helps us play an important role as a “convener” and, I would add, as a “catalyst.” We all know that the issues facing lower-income regions in a dynamic economy such as ours are complex ones. Many of the solutions will be complex as well. At the very least, they will take committed and collaborative actions from various stakeholders, and probably some compromises, too. The Fed plays a useful role here by convening forums and workshops with the groups needed to effect change. Such forums foster a common understanding of the magnitude and breadth of the issues, allow best practices to be shared, spur quicker dissemination of insights, and can catalyze action that ultimately leads to more effective economic policies and programs. The Fed values the relationships we have built with key organizations working to improve the economic outcomes of people in communities across the country. I have had the privilege of meeting with many dedicated community development practitioners and engaging with people who live and work in lower-income areas in our region. I have seen first-hand that the information my Fed colleagues and I glean from such interactions has informed our research and 7 has helped us learn about the promising programs many of you lead throughout the country. For example, the Atlanta, Cleveland, and Philadelphia Reserve Banks’ project to identify “opportunity occupations,” those occupations that pay higher than the median wage but don’t require a bachelor’s degree, grew out of our hearing repeatedly from various parties of the need for these types of jobs.3 We have also seen that practitioners and policymakers have used Federal Reserve research, so there are important synergies to be gained by actionable research coupled with convening meetings and workshops. Just as getting all stakeholders together can help yield more effective solutions, the Federal Reserve System recognizes that Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors can achieve more by working together on community development issues without sacrificing the focus each Reserve Bank has on particular issues affecting its individual District. The System-wide approach allows us to deploy resources more efficiently, to develop more in-depth expertise that can be shared, to identify those issues that loom large in many parts of the country, and to track emerging economic developments in a way that we couldn’t if we weren’t regionally distributed and didn’t work together. Federal Reserve System and Community Development: The What I would like to spend the remainder of my time discussing some of the Fed’s community development work. As I mentioned earlier, many factors influence the economic vitality of households and neighborhoods, including access to credit and capital workforce development, affordable housing, infrastructure, and health services. There is ongoing research and engagement across the Federal Reserve System in each of these topic areas – far too much work to summarize in my remaining time. One focus has been on areas of concentrated poverty, which exist in both urban and rural settings. The Minneapolis Fed’s Center for Indian Country Development; the Dallas Fed’s Colonias project on neighborhoods along 3 “Identifying Opportunity Occupations in the Nation’s Largest Metropolitan Economies,” Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Cleveland, and Atlanta, September 2015. 8 the U.S.-Mexico border; the St. Louis Fed’s Delta Communities Initiative, which is working with distressed communities across the Arkansas and Mississippi Delta regions; the efforts of the Atlanta, Cleveland, and Richmond Feds in Appalachia; and the joint efforts among several Reserve Banks in the industrial heartland and older cities have pointed to some key issues affecting the economic vitality of the people and communities in these areas. Workforce development is one of those issues that span regions, and so considerable efforts are underway across the Federal Reserve System and with our community partners to find solutions to ensure that people have access to the education and skill-development programs needed to ensure that they can be productive members of the modern workforce. 4 Our activities focused on workforce development have improved our understanding of the labor market outcomes of different groups and communities and of labor markets more broadly; this work has obvious spillovers to the Fed’s need to understand labor market conditions when setting monetary policy. Of course, to make progress on any of the issues facing distressed communities you need to be able to measure the scale of the problems. In addition, you need to ensure that those with funds and an interest in effecting solutions are brought together with those with effective programs in need of financing. Let me discuss some of the contributions the Fed is making in these two areas. Providing data and data tools As was clear during the foreclosure crisis, inadequate data can be a sizable impediment to understanding challenges and finding solutions. So the Fed’s community development function is providing data and analytical tools to the public. These disaggregated data help us understand emerging issues that can be masked by looking only at aggregate statistics. The Fed’s Small Business Credit Survey is a good 4 For a description of some of the community development efforts underway in the Federal Reserve System , see Janet L. Yellen, “Addressing Workforce Development Challenges in Low-Income Communities,” remarks at Creating a Just Economy, the 2017 annual conference of the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C., March 28, 2017, and Lael Brainard, “Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter to America’s Economic Strength,” remarks at the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, MN, May 22, 2017. 9 example.5 This survey started as individual surveys conducted by a few Reserve Banks, but under the New York Fed’s leadership, it became a common national survey in 2016, with more than 15,000 small business respondents. This survey could not have been carried out without the 400 organizations, including chambers of commerce and economic development agencies, that partnered with the Fed to gather responses. The results allow us to track access to credit from several individual segments of the small business population, including minority-owned businesses, women-owned businesses, startups, microenterprises, and the self-employed. Another example of data gathering is the Board of Governors’ Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, which has been conducted since 2013 and provides data to help track the economic well-being of households.6 The survey contains information on access to credit, retirement savings, student loans, and other evidence on how households are faring financially. A third example is the data provided by the Dallas Fed and Cleveland Fed on broadband access. Broadband internet access has become a necessity in our connected world, allowing for higher income growth rates and lower unemployment rates in areas with higher adoption rates. 7 But both access and adoption rates vary with household income levels, with a considerably smaller proportion of lower- 5 For the 2016 results and further information on the survey, see the Federal Reserve Small Business Credit Survey . 6 For further information about the survey and the 2016 results, see the Board of Governors’ Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking. 7 A recent report issued by Cornell University found that nonmetropolitan counties that have had a high rate of broadband adoption have also experienced higher growth in median household income and lower rates of job loss than similarly situated counties that have had low broadband adoption. (See Brian Whitacre , Roberto Gallardo, and Sharon Strover, “Broadband’s Contribution to Economic Health in Rural Areas,” Issue Number 64, Research and Policy Brief Series, Community and Regional Development Institute, Department of Development Sociology, Cornell University, February 2015.) 10 income households using broadband at home compared to higher-income households.8 There is also wide disparity in broadband access, especially access to higher-speed broadband, between rural and urban areas, putting the growth prospects of rural areas at a disadvantage. Recent revisions to the CRA rules recognize that a reliable communications infrastructure, such as broadband internet service, can help to revitalize or stabilize underserved nonmetropolitan middle-income areas. So depository institutions now receive credit for investing in this infrastructure for the purposes of meeting the CRA requirement of serving the needs of low- and moderate-income communities.9 The Dallas Fed produced a comprehensive guide for financial institutions to help them understand how broadband can benefit the communities they serve and how their planned investments could qualify for CRA credit. The guide includes several tables and maps, based on U.S. Census bureau data, measuring broadband access at the national level and in the Dallas Fed’s District.10 The Cleveland Fed has provided similar data from the Federal Communications Commission for the Fourth District.11 In addition to data, the Federal Reserve is providing tools to help the public use the data. Let me mention three of these. Last month, the Philadelphia and Cleveland Feds released the Home Mortgage Explorer tool.12 Based on Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data, this tool allows users to track trends in mortgage lending at the national, state, metropolitan, and nonmetropolitan levels, by purpose and type of loan. 8 A 2013 federal government report indicated that fewer than half of households with incomes below $25,000 a year use broadband at home, compared with over 90 percent of households with annual incomes exceeding $100,000. (See “Four Years of Broadband Growth,” Office of Science and Technology Policy and the National Economic Council, The White House, Washington, D.C., June 2013.) 9 See page 48510 of the Federal Register notice, “Community Reinvestment Act; Interagency Questions and Answers Regarding Community Reinvestment; Guidance,” Federal Register, vol. 81, no. 142, Monday, July 25, 2016, Rules and Regulations. 10 See Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, “Closing the Digital Divide: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations,” July 2016, Revised December 2016. 11 See Shruthi Arvind and Kyle Fee, “Broadband and High-speed Internet Access in the Fourth District,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, December 8, 2016. 12 For further information, see the Home Mortgage Explorer. 11 Information is provided on the reasons a loan application was denied and on applicant and neighborhood income. Recently, the Chicago Fed launched the Peer City Identification Tool. This tool allows a user to easily determine which cities, among the 300 included in the data set, are experiencing similar trends or challenges along four key themes: racial and socioeconomic composition; economic change and labor market conditions; demographic and economic outlook; and housing affordability, tenure, and housing- stock age.13 The themes were determined based on areas of concern cited by city leaders in more than 200 interviews across 10 cities. Users of the tool can determine which cities among the 300 are considered peers with respect to the particular theme, and the values of the theme’s indicators for each of the peer cities. The underlying data on the 28 indicators for all 300 cities are downloadable so people can use the data in other analyses as well. A third data tool, Following the Money, was created by the Atlanta and Philadelphia Feds, based on data from the Foundation Center. 14 Foundation grants are becoming a more important source of funding for community development, and this tool allows the user to see the distribution of foundation grants across 366 metropolitan areas across the U.S., or for a user-defined selection from among these metro areas. Data on the grant volume per capita, on the types of activities the grants are funding, and on the number of community and economic development nonprofits in the metro areas are provided. 13 The 300 cities included in the tool’s data set are those that had a population of at least 50,000 in 1960. City peer groups are determined using cluster analysis based on a set of indicators for each theme. For example, according to the tool, Trenton, New Jersey, and East St. Louis, Illinois, among other cities, are housing peers of Cleveland. The three cities are similar in that a large share of their housing stock was built pre-1980, and they share similar vacancy rates, home value to income ratios, homeownership rates, and share of renter households that spend more than 30 percent of their gross monthly income on rent each month. For further information on the tool and its construction, see the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago’s Peer City Identification Tool. 14 For more information on this tool, see Following the Money. 12 Improving access to funding As the Following the Money tool reminds us, once potential solutions for challenges affecting lower- income communities are found, those solutions need to secure funding. While the Federal Reserve cannot make those investments, the Fed’s community development function has been working to improve access to credit and capital by helping to match funders to those programs and projects that research has shown to be effective in helping low- and moderate-income households and communities. The Dallas Fed’s work on broadband and the CRA fits this theme by giving banks guidance in determining which broadband projects are CRA-eligible. Another very good example is the Boston Fed’s Working Cities Challenge, which began in 2013.15 Boston Fed research on small and mid-sized cities that lost manufacturing employment found that “resurgent cities,” meaning those that successfully reinvigorated their economies, exhibited a high degree of leadership and collaboration among key institutions and individuals, including nonprofits, private citizens, corporations, and government.16 Informed by this research and designed in partnership with the Boston Fed’s network of community development stakeholders, the Working Cities Challenge is a grant competition aimed at strengthening civic collaboration and partnerships to help low-income areas. Eligible cities can make one proposal for an idea or program that will unite the public, private, and nonprofit sectors, and community members in improving the lives of low- and moderate-income people in an enduring way. There are four rounds underway – two in Massachusetts, one in Rhode Island, and one in Connecticut – with $10 million in funding to be awarded. In a related effort, the San Francisco Fed is now engaged with the Strong, Prosperous, and Resilient Communities Challenge (SPARCC), which is modeled on the Working Cities Challenge. 15 Further information on the Boston Fed’s Working Cities Challenge is available on its website. 16 “Reinvigorating Springfield’s Economy: Lessons from Resurgent Cities,” Public Policy Discussion Paper No. 09- 6, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, October 1, 2009. 13 My last example of a successful Federal Reserve effort enabling better access to funding is the Kansas City Fed’s Investment Connection program.17 In their discussions with the Kansas City Fed, banks had indicated they were having trouble identifying CRA-eligible investment opportunities in their service areas, and community leaders were saying they were having trouble getting funding. Seeing a potential opportunity to improve the situation, the Kansas City Fed created the Investment Connection program. Under the program, community and economic development organizations in the District can have project proposals pre-screened by Kansas City Fed staffers to determine whether they are CRA-eligible, and then get a chance to pitch their proposals to potential funders, including banks and foundations. So far, the Kansas City Fed has facilitated connections between nearly 60 community organizations and almost 100 funders. Given the regional structure of the Federal Reserve System, a successful program like this one can now potentially be expanded into other regions. Conclusion I hope that this review of “the why, the how, and the what” of the Federal Reserve System’s community development efforts has been helpful. I have the privilege of chairing the committee that oversees the community development efforts at the Federal Reserve Banks. I can assure you that the professionals in the community development function at the Fed are dedicated to this work and realize that little could be accomplished without the productive relationships and partnerships they have with the many groups represented in this room, including government agencies, financial institutions, foundations, academia, research centers, and community-based organizations. Going forward, the Fed will continue to leverage the benefits from its regional structure. This structure allows the Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors to uncover common issues and find solutions for the challenges facing low- and moderate- income communities and individuals across the country while allowing each Reserve Bank to remain 17 Further information on the Kansas City Fed’s Investment Connection program is available on its website. 14 focused on the particular needs in its specific region. We look forward to our continued collaboration with you to make the economy work well for all.

Perspectives on the Economic Outlook and Banking Supervision and Regulation Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Community Bankers Association of Ohio Annual Convention Cincinnati, OH August 2, 2017 1 Introduction I thank the Community Bankers Association of Ohio for the opportunity to speak at your annual convention and for your ongoing engagement with the Federal Reserve. That engagement actually goes back to the very beginnings of the Federal Reserve System. It might surprise some of you to know that in 1913, Elvadore Fancher, a vice president with Union National Bank of Cleveland, wrote to Congress suggesting how the regional Reserve Banks might be structured. A year later, Fancher was chosen to be the first head of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, a position in which he served for two decades. 1 Today, I enjoy the fruits of the strong relationship that has developed between Ohio bankers and the Cleveland Fed. The bankers who serve on our Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC) and on our board of directors generously provide me with their valuable insights into regional economic and banking conditions. As you all know, community banks play a vital role in the economic health of their communities, providing creditworthy businesses the wherewithal to prosper and households the ability to improve their financial standing and quality of life. Because of their important work, community bankers are among the most knowledgeable about changes in conditions on the ground in local areas. Such information often takes much longer to show up in official statistical reports. So I find the insights gained from speaking with bankers to be especially valuable as part of the mosaic of information I use in formulating my views on appropriate monetary policy. Of course, from time to time, I also hear from community bankers about matters pertaining to banking regulation and supervision. Recently, these conversations have highlighted the burden of the regulatory changes put in place since the financial crisis. I am grateful to the bankers who willingly discuss both the economy and regulation with me, and today I would like to return the favor and provide you with some of 1 For further information about Elvadore Fancher, see https://www.federalreservehistory.org/people/elvadore_r_fancher. 2 my perspectives on both. Of course, the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy The economic expansion turned eight years old this summer. It got off to a slow start from a very weak place, but now this expansion is one of the longest on record. The sustainability of the expansion through various economic shocks is a testament to the U.S. economy’s resiliency, and I believe the underlying fundamentals supporting the economic expansion remain sound. While the quarterly pattern has had its share of ups and downs, it is usually a good idea to smooth through this volatility when trying to assess underlying conditions. Over the expansion, output growth has maintained a moderate pace of a bit more than 2 percent, on average. This year, growth in the first quarter was a bit soft, but it picked up in the second quarter. Favorable fundamentals should support GDP growth over the next year at somewhat above trend, which I estimate at 2 percent. These fundamentals include accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, a sound U.S. banking system, improved household balance sheets and income growth, continued strength in the U.S. labor market, and improving conditions in the economies of our trading partners. In 2016, the economy added over 2.2 million jobs, about 187,000 per month on average. So far this year, that strength has been sustained, with an average increase of 180,000 jobs per month. The pace is well above estimates of trend employment growth, which range from around 75,000 to 120,000 per month, depending on what one assumes about labor force participation. The trend pace of employment growth is lower than it was a few decades ago because there has been a downward trend in participation, reflecting demographic factors, including the aging of our population. The fact that the participation rate has been basically stable for the past three years in the face of a declining trend is another sign of strength in the labor market. 3 Over the expansion, as the economy has added jobs, the unemployment rate has been moving down. The unemployment rate peaked at 10 percent after the Great Recession. In June, it stood at 4.4 percent, matching the lowest level reached in the previous expansion. In addition, broader measures of the unemployment rate, which track the number of part-time workers who would rather work full time and the number of people who have been discouraged from looking for a job, have also fallen significantly since their business cycle peaks. Given the progress that has already been made, payroll job growth is likely to slow a bit from its current pace, but I expect that over the next year the unemployment rate will stay below my estimate of its longer-run rate, which I now estimate at 4-3/4 percent. I recently lowered my estimate from 5 percent, and even though this change is not statistically significant, I thought it was time to acknowledge that even as labor markets continue to tighten, inflation has remained moderate. Inflation has had its ups and downs over the expansion. It has moved up from the very low levels seen in 2015 when it was held down by falling oil and import prices. But the last couple of readings were on the weak side and inflation continues to run below the Fed’s goal of 2 percent. In assessing where we are relative to the goal, it’s always a good idea to look through transitory movements in the numbers, both those above and those below our goal, and focus on where inflation is going on a sustained basis. Some of the weakness in recent inflation reports reflects special factors, like the drop in the prices of prescription drugs and cell phone service plans. It may take a couple of months for these factors to work themselves through, but these types of price declines aren’t signaling a general downward trend in consumer prices. I’ll be scrutinizing incoming inflation data and reports from my business contacts, but at this point, my assessment is that the conditions remain in place for inflation to gradually return over the next year or so to our symmetric goal of 2 percent on a sustained basis. These conditions include growth that’s expected to be at or slightly above trend, continued strength in the labor market, and reasonably stable inflation expectations. 4 Based on the economic outlook and risks around the outlook, the Fed has begun to normalize the stance of monetary policy by removing some of the extraordinary accommodation that was necessary in the wake of the financial crisis and Great Recession. Appropriate adjustments in monetary policy are those that will sustain the expansion so that our longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment are met and maintained. We can’t wait until the goals are fully met because monetary policy affects the economy with a lag. We need to remain focused on the medium-run outlook, and risks around the outlook, assessing what incoming economic reconnaissance implies about the outlook and risks. If economic conditions evolve as anticipated, I believe further removal of accommodation via gradual increases in the fed funds rate will be needed. The gradual path that the FOMC has communicated for some time is appropriate given the outlook will help prolong the expansion, not curtail it. A gradual removal of accommodation helps avoid a build-up of risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy is allowed to overheat, as well as risks to financial stability if interest rates remain too low and encourage investors to take on excessively risky investments in a search for yield. The gradualism has allowed us to follow a consistent strategy even as the data on the economy and inflation have shown some fluctuations. I see benefits to this consistency: it removes some ambiguity and it underscores the fact that we set monetary policy systematically, with a focus on the medium-run outlook and risks around the outlook and their implications for our policy goals. It’s important to notice that the gradual path I anticipate does not entail an increase at each FOMC meeting, and last week, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1 to 1-1/4 percent; it also announced that economic conditions are expected to evolve in a way that will warrant further gradual increases. Normalizing the stance of monetary policy also means taking steps to normalize the Fed’s balance sheet in terms of the size and composition of assets. The balance sheet grew when, to address the Great 5 Recession, the Fed undertook several programs to purchase longer-term assets, including longer-maturity Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). These purchases aimed to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates once the FOMC’s traditional policy tool, the fed funds rate, had been reduced to effectively zero. As a result of the purchases, the Fed’s balance sheet has grown from nearly $900 billion in assets in 2007 to about $4.5 trillion today, and its composition has changed from mainly short-term Treasury securities to mainly longer-maturity Treasuries and agency MBS. From the very start of using the nontraditional tools, the FOMC recognized it would need to eventually return to a more normal balance sheet. In June, the FOMC described its program for normalizing the balance sheet by gradually reducing the amount of reinvestments it is making in a predictable way.2 Last week, the FOMC said it expected to begin implementing the program relatively soon.3 Once started, the plan is to allow up to $6 billion a month of maturing Treasuries and $4 billion a month of principal payments of agency MBS and agency debt to run off the balance sheet. These caps would be increased by $6 billion and $4 billion per month, respectively, every three months, until they reach $30 billion per month for Treasuries and $20 billion per month for agency MBS and agency debt. Thereafter, those caps would be maintained and the balance sheet would gradually decline. The gradual, predictable decline allows balance-sheet normalization to run in the background and monetary policy to focus on setting the appropriate level of the funds rate, our conventional monetary policy tool. Regarding the ultimate size of the balance sheet, the intention is to reduce it over time to the smallest size needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. We know the balance sheet will be 2 See “FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System press release, June 14, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170614c.htm). 3 See the FOMC post-meeting statement of July 26, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170726a.htm). 6 larger than it was prior to the financial crisis for the simple reason that the public’s demand for currency is rising over time.4 But it will also likely be considerably smaller than it is today. Just how much smaller depends on how the FOMC implements monetary policy in the future. The FOMC has not yet decided whether its long-run framework will be one in which bank reserves are scarce, as was the case before the financial crisis, or one in which reserves are abundant.5 However, because it will take several years to reduce the size of the balance sheet through asset run-off, the FOMC can begin normalizing the balance sheet before we have decided on the balance sheet’s ultimate size. It’s important to remind everyone that there are risks around the economic outlook, and because of that, monetary policy is not pre-set. In March, the FOMC began providing confidence bands around its economic and policy path projections. 6 These are visual reminders to both the public and policymakers that there is always a lot of uncertainty around economic forecasts. Policy needs to remain systematic in how it reacts to incoming information relevant to the outlook, but not be dogmatic should the outlook indeed materially change. That said, I view the steps the FOMC is taking to normalize monetary policy – 4 Since the financial crisis, currency has doubled in quantity, from about $770 billion in 2007 to about $1.5 trillion today. For projections of the Fed’s balance sheet, see “Projections for the SOMA Portfolio and Net Income,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July 2017 (https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/omo/SOMAPortfolioandIncomeProjections_July2017Up date.pdf). 5 For an accessible description of frameworks for implementing monetary policy, see Jane E. Ihrig, Ellen E. Meade, and Gretchen C. Weinbach, “Rewriting Monetary Policy 101: What’s the Fed’s Preferred Post-Crisis Approach to Raising Interest Rates?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (Fall 2015), pp. 177-198 (http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.29.4.177). For discussions of the pros and cons of different frameworks for implementing monetary policy, see George A. Kahn, “Monetary Policy Under a Corridor Operating Framework,” Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Fourth Quarter 2010 (https://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/econrev/pdf/10q4Kahn.pdf); Todd Keister, “Corridors and Floors in Monetary Policy,” Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April 4, 2012 (http://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2012/04/corridors-and-floors-in-monetary-policy.html); and Ben S. Bernanke, “Should the Fed Keep its Balance Sheet Large?” Brookings Institution Blog, September 2, 2016 (https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2016/09/02/should-the-fed-keep-its-balance-sheet-large/). 6 See the confidence band charts in the Summary of Economic Projections portion of the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14-15, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20170315.pdf ). 7 both the fed funds rate and the balance sheet – as a welcome acknowledgment that the economy is transitioning back to normal after being in the abyss of the financial crisis and Great Recession. Financial System Regulation As everyone in this room knows, the crisis and its aftermath were very dark times for households, businesses, banks, and policymakers. That the financial system was at the heart of the crisis attests to the fact that a sound financial system is a vital part of a vibrant economy. The 2008 financial crisis exposed gaps in the regulatory and supervisory architecture in the U.S., which contributed to a buildup in financial imbalances and systemic risk. In response to the crisis, changes were made to how banks are regulated and supervised, and banks themselves have made changes in how they monitor risks and run their businesses. As a result, the U.S. financial system is considerably stronger and more resilient than it was leading up to the financial crisis. This strength and resiliency benefit the economy and must be preserved. However, just as the improved economy affords us the opportunity to begin to normalize monetary policy, the improved health of the banking industry makes this an opportune time to consider whether any adjustments to the regulatory and supervisory framework could make it even more effective. I won’t keep you in too much suspense: the Federal Reserve and the other financial regulatory agencies are already taking steps to improve the effectiveness of their supervision. Before I discuss some of the steps that are particularly relevant for community banks, it might be helpful to review why banks are regulated and the basic approach to effective regulation. A risk-based approach to bank regulation and supervision Banks play an important role in the economy by providing funding to creditworthy borrowers, both businesses and households, by offering customers methods to save and make payments, and by helping people and firms manage their financial affairs. Community banks play a crucial role in their local economies, and particularly so in many small towns and rural areas where the choices of financial 8 services are limited.7 Small businesses rely heavily on community banks for credit, and given the important role that small businesses play in the economy, it isn’t hard to see that serving these types of firms helps to promote growth.8 In addition, community banks tend to have close ties to the communities and customers they serve, and this allows them to offer products and services tailored to their customers’ needs.9 But banks of all sizes are able to provide these valuable credit, payment, and financial management services because they are designed to take risks and are highly leveraged compared with nonfinancial businesses. This risk-taking and leverage raise the possibility of systemic problems that could threaten the functioning of the financial system, hurt real economic activity, and impose significant economic costs. The bank regulatory and supervisory framework is meant to address the potential problem of systemic risk, as well as the safety and soundness of individual institutions. The framework aims to foster a financial system that’s resilient: one in which financial institutions remain strong enough to continue to lend and offer other valuable services through the ups and downs of the business cycle. 7 See, for example, “The Role of Community Banks in the U.S. Economy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Review, Second Quarter 2003, pp. 15-43 (https://www.kansascityfed.org/Publicat/econrev/Pdf/2q03keet.pdf). 8 Three-quarters of U.S. businesses have fewer than 10 employees. Over a quarter of U.S. private-sector jobs are at firms with fewer than 50 employees, and over half are at firms with fewer than 500 employees (based on data from supplemental tables F and G of the National Business Employment Dynamics Data, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, available at http://www.bls.gov/bdm/bdmfirmsize.htm). For further discussion of the role small businesses play in the U.S. economy, see Loretta J. Mester, “The National and Regional Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” remarks at the African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania Annual Business Luncheon, Pittsburgh, PA, November 30, 2016 ( https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom%20and%20events/speeches/sp%2020161130%20the%20national%20and %20regional%20economic%20outlook%20and%20monetary%20policy). 9 See Allen N. Berger and Gregory F. Udell, “Small Business Credit Availability and Relationship Lending: The Importance of Bank Organisational Structure,” Economic Journal 112, February 2002, pp. 32-53 (working paper version available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2001/200136/200136pap.pdf ), and Allen N. Berger, Christa Bouwman, and Dasol Kim, “Small Bank Comparative Advantages in Alleviating Financial Constraints and Providing Liquidity Insurance Over Time,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming (working paper version available at http://sc.edu/study/colleges_schools/moore/documents/finance/berger/small_bank_comparative_advantages.pdf). 9 Post-crisis regulatory changes focused on increasing resiliency in two ways: first, by lowering the probability of another financial crisis, and second, by reducing the costs imposed on the rest of the economy when a shock hits the financial system. Important components of the regulatory-supervisory framework include capital requirements, liquidity requirements, stress tests, living will resolution plans, and resolution methods that allow systemically important institutions to fail without causing problems for the entire financial system. The focus on risk management means that institutions that pose the most systemic risk should face enhanced prudential standards and supervisory attention. The Dodd-Frank Act took a step in this direction and the Federal Reserve takes a tiered approach to banking supervision. Aligning oversight with risk helps to ensure that institutions aren’t burdened by rules that make it more costly for them to serve their customers but that do little to further the goal of a healthy and resilient financial system. Community banks generally don’t impose costs on the rest of the financial system or create the kinds of contagion that can put the entire financial system at risk, so their oversight should differ from that of systemically important institutions. At the same time, as the savings and loan crisis in the 1980s and the commercial real estate crisis in the late 1980s and early 1990s remind us, when many smaller institutions get in trouble at the same time, this can also harm the economy. So maintaining the safety and soundness of smaller institutions cannot be neglected. It’s a matter of aligning oversight with potential risk. Steps to reduce the regulatory burden on community banks without sacrificing financial resiliency, safety, and soundness This tiering of oversight by risk adds some complexity to the financial system’s regulatory framework. But the U.S. financial system is quite complex and ever-changing, with various types of banks and nonbank providers of financial services. So some complexity is to be expected. To paraphrase H.L. Mencken: “For every complex problem there is a solution that is clear, simple, and wrong.” That said, it’s important that the regulatory framework avoid excessive complexity, which can complicate 10 supervision, risk monitoring, compliance, and enforcement. Too much complexity can make it harder for banks to understand the standards they are being asked to meet, and harder for regulators to assess compliance and overall risk. Better aligning our regulation and supervision with the risks imposed could allow simplifications without sacrificing safety, soundness, and resiliency. The Volcker rule is perhaps an obvious example of this. Dodd-Frank generally limits banks from engaging in proprietary trading of financial instruments and investing in hedge funds and private equity funds. But the rule is quite complex. Given that community banks are not likely to participate in such activities, there doesn’t appear to be much to gain from having them maintain a compliance program. So I support exempting community banks from the Volcker rule. Other simplifications are already taking place. Earlier this year, the federal banking agencies completed their decennial review of banking regulations to identify provisions that are outdated or unnecessary.10 As a result of the review, 78 guidance letters were deemed out-of-date and were eliminated, and the data- reporting requirements for small community banks were reduced and simplified, resulting in a shorter Call Report. In addition, exam frequency has been reduced for a large set of institutions. Now, 83 percent of all insured depository institutions qualify to be examined every 18 months rather than every 12 months, as a result of a provision in the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (FAST) Act that raised the asset threshold from $500 million to $1 billion. 10 This review is required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act. See the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council’s Joint Report to Congress on Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act, March 2017 for additional details (https://www.ffiec.gov/pdf/2017_FFIEC_EGRPRA_Joint-Report_to_Congress.pdf). 11 The agencies are also working to develop a simplified capital framework for community bank organizations.11 For large banks, the combination of risk-based capital requirements, a leverage ratio requirement as a back stop, liquidity requirements, and annual stress testing is appropriate. But one has to ask whether the compliance costs faced by small community banks in adhering to a complicated risk- based capital regime outweigh the benefits in terms of safety, soundness, and financial system resiliency, compared to an alternative regime comprising a leverage ratio requirement based on high-quality capital, combined perhaps with a simplified risk-weighted capital requirement. The guiding principle of aligning the degree of prudential oversight with risk applies not only to community banks but also to larger banks. Dodd-Frank requires that banks with assets between $10 billion and $50 billion be subject to company-run stress tests and that banks with assets of $50 billion or more be subject to annual supervisor-administered stress tests, capital planning, living will, and other enhanced prudential requirements. I support some increase in the thresholds but also believe that the combination of these requirements at systemically important banks has led to a stronger and more resilient financial system and should be maintained.12 Some of the amendments I’ve mentioned would require legislation; others would require coordinated action across the bank regulatory agencies. But the Fed is also working to improve its own supervisory processes to make them better aligned with risk and more efficient so that speedier decisions can be made. Since 2014, the Fed has used a risk-focused consumer compliance examination framework for community 11 See a summary of some of the steps being considered in the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council’s Joint Report to Congress on Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act, March 2017 (https://www.ffiec.gov/pdf/2017_FFIEC_EGRPRA_Joint-Report_to_Congress.pdf). 12 The Fed has already exempted nonsystemic banks with less than $250 billion in assets and less than $75 billion in nonbank activities from the qualitative, capital planning part of the stress-testing process. See “Federal Reserve Board Announces Finalized Stress Testing Rules Removing Noncomplex Firms from Qualitative Aspect of CCAR Effective for 2017,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System press release, January 30, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20170130a.htm). 12 banks that helps examiners focus their attention on more serious compliance issues.13 While this has been helpful, I have heard from several community bankers that it is still taking too long to close compliance examination findings. In looking at the timelines, even though some of the cases are complex, I have to agree that we can and should do a better job of reaching decisions in a reasonable period of time. Clarifying supervisors’ expectations with respect to consumer compliance and community development rules would also be a good step. The Fed is also undertaking a comprehensive review of its safety and soundness examination framework for community banks, and developing analytical tools so that we can better focus our supervisory efforts on the highest risks while reducing the regulatory burden on low-risk community banks. I hope this brief review illustrates that the Federal Reserve is committed to following the guiding principle of aligning regulatory and supervisory oversight with the level of potential risk. This will allow us to reduce undue regulatory burden without compromising the health and resiliency of the financial system, an approach that will benefit banks of all sizes and the overall economy. Conclusion The financial crisis and ensuing Great Recession took a toll on all of us. Now, the economy and financial system have returned to health, and the goal is to keep both of them there. Monetary policymakers need to set policy appropriately to ensure that the expansion continues and our policy goals of maximum 13 Jeffrey Drum, “Risk-Focused Consumer Compliance Supervision Program for Community Banks,” Consumer Compliance Outlook, Second Quarter 2014 (https://consumercomplianceoutlook.org/2014/second-quarter/risk- focused-consumer-compliance-supervision-program-for-community-banks/), and “Community Bank Risk-Focused Consumer Compliance Supervision Program,” June 2014 Update to the Consumer Compliance Handbook, Federal Reserve Board of Governors Division of Consumer and Community Affairs (https://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/SupManual/cch/announce/201406cch_update.htm). 13 employment and 2 percent inflation are met and sustained. In my view, that means continuing on the path of gradually normalizing interest rates and the balance sheet. With respect to financial regulation and supervision, it means ensuring that the financial system remains resilient, with an appropriate focus on limiting systemic risk and the costs such risks impose on the economy when they are realized, helping to ensure that banks remain sound and able to extend financial services to their communities through the ups and downs of the business cycle, and avoiding regulations that impose burdens but do not further these goals. Getting the right balance entails a tiered approach to banking supervision and regulation. This tiered approach recognizes that the risk a banking organization poses to the financial system is likely to vary according to its size, range of activities, and complexity, and so supervision and regulation should vary along these dimensions as well. The rules and oversight that apply to community banks should not be the same as those that apply to systemically important institutions. The Federal Reserve has been taking steps to right-size its oversight of banking institutions consistent with the risks they pose to the financial system because a sound financial system conveys benefits on households and businesses. Bankers have also taken important steps to better monitor their risks so that they can better deliver services to their customers. At the end of the day, the public will be the judge of whether we have successfully met the challenges. According to the Financial Trust Index, published by the business schools at the University of Chicago and Northwestern University, there is still a ways to go. 14 While there has been some improvement since 2008, still only about 27 percent of those polled for the index said they trusted their financial institutions, broadly defined to include banks, the stock market, mutual funds, and large corporations. Lest I leave you on that disappointing note, I want to mention that the survey results differ significantly by type of 14 The Financial Trust Index is based on an annual survey of a representative sample of about 1,000 American households. For further information, see the website: http://www.financialtrustindex.org/index.htm . 14 institution. Nearly 60 percent of the people polled said they trusted their local bank.15 This is an encouraging sign that by focusing on safety, soundness, resiliency, and customer service, we can create a financial system that the public views as beneficial, and one that truly is. 15 The 2015 results by bank category are available on the Financial Trust Index website at http://www.financialtrustindex.org/resultswave24.htm. I thank Professor Luigi Zingales at the University of Chicago for providing the updated results for 2016. In the 2016 survey, while 38 percent of respondents reported trusting their banks, 57 percent indicated that they trust their local bank.

Views on the Economy and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Economic Club of Pittsburgh, the World Affairs Council of Pittsburgh, CFA Society Pittsburgh, and the Pittsburgh Association for Financial Professionals Pittsburgh, PA September 7, 2017 1 Introduction I thank the organizers for inviting me to share my views on the economy and monetary policy. This is a very opportune time for me to be here. The Federal Open Market Committee, the monetary policymaking body within the Fed, meets in less than two weeks. Traveling to Pittsburgh allows me to hear first-hand from people in this part of the Fourth Federal Reserve District, which comprises western Pennsylvania, Ohio, eastern Kentucky, and the northern panhandle of West Virginia. Of course, as an economist, I look at data and economic models to help formulate my views, but the information on emerging issues that the Cleveland Fed staff and I gather directly from contacts throughout the District is also very important in assessing how the economy is doing. The FOMC spends considerable time discussing regional economic conditions at our meetings, and this information from all across the country helps us set national monetary policy. In addition to providing an opportunity to hear from you, my talk today also lets me explain my views on monetary policy. Congress has given the Fed its monetary policy goals of maximum employment and price stability. At the same time, Congress has also wisely granted the Fed independence in setting monetary policy in pursuit of those goals, meaning that policy decisions are insulated from short-run political considerations. But accountability must go hand in hand with that independence. I call this “accountable independence.” In order for the public and Congress to have the information they need to hold the Fed accountable for monetary policy decisions, it is important for Fed policymakers to regularly communicate their views. So I value this time with you today. At this point, it is probably a good idea to remind people that the views I’ll provide today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. 2 The Economic Outlook The economic expansion is now in its ninth year, one of the longest on record. But as everyone knows, age does not always indicate maturity. It’s good to remember that the economy had to climb out of a very deep hole after the financial crisis and Great Recession, and it took some time for the expansion to gain traction. Of course, there have been some ups and downs along the journey. Our thoughts are with the people in Texas and along the Gulf Coast, and all those coping with the destruction in the wake of Hurricane Harvey. We are gathering information from our contacts, but it is still too early to assess the full economic impact of the storm. Experience suggests that soon after the storm passes, clean-up and rebuilding begin, oil refineries are assessed and brought back on-line, and shipping channels reopen. These are huge undertakings and I expect we will see fortitude and resilience as this hard work proceeds. One help is that the underlying fundamentals supporting the economy remain sound. These fundamentals include accommodative monetary policy and financial conditions, a stronger U.S. banking system, improved household balance sheets and income growth, continued strength in the U.S. labor market, and improving conditions in the economies of our trading partners. Economic growth Over the expansion, output growth has maintained a moderate pace of a bit more than 2 percent, on average, and I anticipate that GDP will expand over the next year or so at a pace somewhat above trend, which I estimate at 2 percent. The hurricane in the Gulf will likely dampen economic activity in the current quarter, with subsequent rebuilding efforts adding to growth in subsequent quarters. Although storms like Harvey and Irma are atypical – thank goodness – quarterly variation in the data is not unusual. Consumer spending, which makes up over two-thirds of output, slowed in the first quarter but picked up in the second quarter. The outlook for household spending remains sound. Readings on consumer sentiment and confidence remain high, but more important for spending, personal incomes are growing because labor markets continue to improve. Household balance sheets are in much better shape since the Great Recession, reflecting a combination of deleveraging and increased savings, coupled with 3 cumulative increases in stock and house prices. Although not true for every homeowner, in the aggregate, the equity households have in housing is now back to what it was at the peak. The recovery in the housing market has taken some time. Buyers, sellers, developers, and bankers were all wary about reentering the market, and rightfully so, given the fallout from the housing bust. But with support from low interest rates and the improved financial condition of households and lenders, we’ve seen a gradual increase in housing construction and sales over the expansion. In some places, demand for housing is outpacing supply, putting upward pressure on home prices, which are rising at about a 6 percent pace, on average, nationally.1 Overall, I expect activity in the housing sector to continue to expand at a sustainable pace. An encouraging sign in the economy is the strengthening in business activity and investment this year, after subdued readings in 2015 and 2016. In recent years, oil prices and the value of the dollar have been important influences on business spending. You’ll recall that there was a sharp drop in oil prices from over $100 per barrel in mid-2014 to around $30 in early 2016. This led to a sharp pullback in activity in the mining and drilling sector and its suppliers, including the steel industry. At the same time, a sharp 20 percent appreciation of the dollar hurt manufacturers and other firms dependent on exports. Since then, conditions supporting business spending have improved. The rebound in oil prices to around $50 per barrel and the rise in natural gas prices have spurred a strong recovery in mining and drilling activity. The modest appreciation in the dollar over the second half of 2016 and depreciation since the start of this year reflect improved conditions in the economies in our trading partners. This has led to a pickup in U.S. manufacturing activity and in our exports to other countries. 1 As has been typically the case, house prices in the Pittsburgh metropolitan area are growing less rapidly than the national average, in the 3 to 4 percent range. 4 Currently, business sentiment remains at high levels and supportive of continued spending, but some of my business contacts report that mounting political and fiscal policy uncertainty has begun to temper some of that optimism. There are scattered reports from a few firms that they are delaying some of their planned investment until the picture becomes clearer. We’ll need to keep a watch on whether this wait- and-see attitude spreads and begins to weigh more broadly on spending and investment decisions. A pullback on investments in physical and human capital or in research and development leading to innovations would be particularly troubling because these investments can have a positive effect on productivity growth, which measures how effectively the economy combines its labor and capital inputs to make output. Productivity growth is a key determinant of an economy’s longer-run output growth and of living standards. But the U.S. economy has been struggling with very low productivity growth. Over the expansion, annual growth in labor productivity, measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector, has averaged 1 percent. This is a step down from the 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent pace seen over the prior two expansions. Low productivity growth, coupled with slower growth of the labor force, helps to explain why the trend economic growth rate, which I estimate at 2 percent, is lower than the 3 to 3-1/2 percent rate seen over the 1980s and 1990s. It also helps to explain why the acceleration in wages since 2013 has been relatively subdued despite the strength we’ve seen in labor markets and reports of shortages of qualified workers in many occupations. Labor markets As the economic expansion has progressed, firms have been adding people to their payrolls. So far this year, job increases have averaged 176,000 per month, a bit under last year’s pace. This rate exceeds most estimates of trend employment growth, which fall in the range of 75,000 to 120,000 per month. The unemployment rate peaked at 10 percent after the Great Recession, but as the economy has added jobs at an above-trend pace, the unemployment rate moved down. For the past five months, the unemployment rate has stabilized, with monthly readings bouncing between 4.3 and 4.4 percent; the rate is now 5 essentially at the lowest level reached during the last expansion. Of course, to gauge labor market conditions, we look at more than payroll employment growth and this headline measure of the unemployment rate. We examine a broad set of indicators, including job opening and turnover rates, and broader measures of the unemployment rate, such as those that include the number of part-time workers who would rather work full time and the number of people who have been discouraged from looking for a job. These measures also indicate that substantial progress has been made in the labor market. Although we may see a weaker payroll employment number for September due to the hurricane, I expect that labor market conditions will remain healthy and that over the next year the unemployment rate will stay below 4-3/4 percent, my current estimate of its longer-run rate. Granted, there is considerable uncertainty around estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate. The relatively modest acceleration in wages, from under 2 percent earlier in the expansion to 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent in recent quarters, suggests to some that there is still considerable slack in labor markets and that the longer-run unemployment rate is lower than the current rate. For me, a more salient factor in the relatively slow growth in wages is the low level of productivity growth.2 Firms have indicated that there isn’t much slack in the labor market, and we are hearing more frequent reports from our labor and business contacts across a broad set of industries that businesses are having trouble finding qualified workers, both in high-skill occupations and in lower-skill jobs. Some of these firms report they are responding by raising wages and offering other benefits to attract and retain workers. These increases should eventually find their way into the aggregate compensation measures, but unless productivity growth picks up, I wouldn’t expect to see a strong acceleration in wages. 2 Although actual wage setting is a complicated process, in economic models of competitive markets, real wages reflect the marginal product of workers. For a discussion of wages and their relationship to productivity growth over the expansion, see Roberto Pinheiro and Meifeng Yang, “Wage Growth after the Great Recession,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Economic Commentary, March 21, 2017 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and- events/publications/economic-commentary/2017-economic-commentaries/ec-201704-wage-growth-after-great- recession.aspx). 6 So my assessment is that from the standpoint of the cyclical conditions that monetary policy can address, we have achieved the maximum employment part of the Fed’s monetary policy mandate. At the same time, there are some longer-run structural issues in the labor market that cannot be addressed by monetary policy but that the country must tackle. Technological advances and globalization are changing the nature of available jobs and the skill sets needed to perform those jobs. While the overall economy will eventually benefit from these forces, many individuals and some regions are adversely affected by these structural trends. Government policies and programs and public-private partnerships can and should be brought to bear to help people gain the skills needed for jobs in the modern economy and to help communities make the transition. This is already happening in Pittsburgh. The Allegheny Conference on Community Development has published an in-depth analysis of the expected supply and demand for labor in the Pittsburgh region over the next decade and has made a number of recommendations to help the region prepare for the coming changes. 3 The study drew on some of the work being conducted by the Federal Reserve System’s community development function. In October, the Fed will hold a capstone conference on a collaborative initiative that has focused on reframing workforce development efforts as investments, allowing for larger-scale solutions with increased accountability for outcomes.4 Inflation Price stability is the other part of the Fed’s mandate. Inflation has had its ups and downs over the expansion. It has moved up from the very low levels seen in 2015, when it was held down by falling oil and import prices. But the last couple of readings were on the weak side and inflation continues to run 3 “Inflection Point: Supply, Demand and the Future of Work in the Pittsburgh Regi on,” report prepared by Burning Glass Technologies and the Council for Adult and Experiential Learning with Allegheny Conference on Community Development, May 2016 (http://www.alleghenyconference.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/InflectionPoint.pdf). 4 The initiative, “Investing in America’s Workforce: Improving Outcomes for Workers and Employers,” is a Federal Reserve System initiative in collaboration with the John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University, the Ray Marshall Center of the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas, and the W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. The capstone conference will be held on October 4-6, 2017 in Austin, Texas. More information on the initiative and the conference is available at https://www.investinwork.org/. 7 below the Fed’s goal of 2 percent. The year-over-year increase in PCE inflation stood at 1.4 percent in July, up from about 1 percent a year ago. Most people understand why high inflation is a problem: it erodes the purchasing power of their money. But inflation that is too low is also a problem: it can lead consumers and businesses to delay purchases and it increases debt burdens, either of which could slow the economy. In assessing where we are relative to the inflation goal, it’s always a good idea to look through temporary movements in the numbers, both those above and those below our goal, and focus on where inflation is going on a sustained basis. For example, when assessing the underlying trend in inflation, we should look through a temporary increase in gasoline prices stemming from disruptions caused by Hurricane Harvey. Similarly, some of the weakness in recent inflation reports reflects special factors, like the drop in the prices of prescription drugs and cell phone service plans earlier in the year. It may take a couple more months for these factors to work themselves through, but these types of price declines aren’t signaling a general downward trend in consumer prices from weak demand. Instead, they reflect supply-side factors and relative price changes. At the same time, we need to recognize that weak inflation numbers, no matter what the source, can become a problem if they start to undermine the public’s expectations about future inflation. If inflation expectations were to become unanchored and began steadily declining, it would be much more difficult to raise inflation back to the Fed’s goal. I don’t expect the economy to get to that point, and my current assessment is that inflation will remain below our goal for somewhat longer but that the conditions remain in place for inflation to gradually return over the next year or so to our symmetric goal of 2 percent on a sustained basis. These conditions include growth that’s expected to be at or slightly above trend, continued strength in the labor market, and reasonably stable inflation expectations. 8 We need to recognize that there are risks around any inflation projection – both upside risks, considering the current and future expected strength in labor markets, and downside risks, given the softness in recent inflation readings. In fact, inflation is difficult to forecast: based on historical forecast errors over the past 20 years, the 70 percent confidence range for forecasts of PCE inflation one year ahead is plus or minus 1 percentage point,5 and a significant portion of the variation in inflation rates comes from idiosyncratic factors that can’t be forecasted.6 Indeed, since the 1990s, assuming that inflation will return to 2 percent over the next one to two years has been one of the most accurate forecasts. In the recent period, this is perhaps a testament to the importance of well-anchored inflation expectations and of the FOMC’s commitment to its 2 percent symmetric inflation goal. In any case, I will be scrutinizing incoming data on inflation and inflation expectations and the reports from my business contacts to help me assess the inflation outlook. Economic developments in Pittsburgh As I mentioned at the start of my talk, evaluating regional economic conditions plays an important role in setting national monetary policy, so let me spend a few minutes discussing the Pittsburgh-area economy. For some time, this region’s economy has been transitioning from one that is largely dependent on steel, coal mining, and heavy industry, to one that is diversifying into health care, education, financial services, and technology.7 This is a promising development because regions that remain dependent on one 5 See “Table 2. Average Historical Projection Error Ranges,” in the Summary of Economic Projections portion of the Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 13-14, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20170614.pdf). 6 See Janet Yellen, “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” remarks delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24, 2015 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/yellen20150924a.pdf). 7 Pittsburgh has a higher share of employment in the service-producing sector than does the U.S., and this share has risen over time, from about 71 percent of employment in the 1990s to about 77 percent today. The comparable shares in the U.S. are 64 percent and 71 percent, respectively. The share of employment in the education and health services component of the service sector in Pittsburgh is higher than in the U.S., and it has shown considerable growth over time. In Pittsburgh, this share rose from 17 percent in the 1990s to 21 percent today. The comparable shares in the U.S. are 11 percent and 16 percent, respectively. (Author’s calculations using payroll employment data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.) 9 particular industry have fared less well over time than those that have been able to diversify their industrial bases and adapt to changing economic forces. Nonetheless, Pittsburgh’s industrial mix and the types of shocks that hit the economy played a role in how the area has fared over the expansion. The Great Recession took its toll on the region but Pittsburgh was an early achiever in the expansion. In 2012, Pittsburgh was one of the first major U.S. metropolitan areas to see payroll jobs move back up to pre-Great Recession levels. The U.S. as a whole didn’t achieve that milestone until mid-2014, and Pennsylvania, not until 2015. The unemployment rate in the Pittsburgh metropolitan area peaked at around 8-1/2 percent in 2010 and had fallen to about 5-1/4 percent by the end of 2014. But the decline in energy prices and the appreciation of the dollar in 2014 to 2016 took a toll on the region, causing a contraction in energy exploration and production, and steel production. Though job losses in these sectors were offset by continued increases in service-sector jobs, the unemployment rate began to rise. The good news is that once energy prices and the dollar stabilized, the unemployment rate began falling again to its current level of just over 5 percent, and overall employment began growing again. Certain sectors are still losing jobs, but the pace of job cuts in mining and drilling has slowed and job cuts in manufacturing have stabilized. Losses in these sectors are being more than offset by gains in the service sector, where we see relatively strong growth in scientific R&D jobs in the metro area. Monetary Policy As I mentioned earlier, the FOMC will be meeting later this month to discuss the economy and decide on monetary policy. We will also be releasing a new round of economic projections, something we do four times a year. Based on the economic outlook and risks around the outlook, the FOMC has begun to normalize the stance of monetary policy by removing some of the extraordinary accommodation that was 10 necessary in the wake of the financial crisis and Great Recession. Appropriate adjustments in monetary policy are those that will sustain the expansion, not curtail it, so that our longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment are met and maintained. Because we know that it takes some time for monetary policy to work itself through the economy, we can’t wait until these policy goals are fully met to act. We need to assess what incoming information is telling us about where the economy is going over the medium run, and the risks around that medium-run outlook, and set policy appropriately. In my view, if economic conditions evolve as anticipated, I believe further removal of accommodation via gradual increases in the fed funds rate will be needed and will help sustain the expansion. A gradual removal of accommodation helps avoid a build-up of risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy is allowed to overheat, as well as risks to financial stability if interest rates remain too low, encouraging investors to take on excessively risky investments in a search for yield or engendering other financial imbalances. The gradual approach to normalization allows for the kind of fluctuations we’ve seen in the data on the economy and inflation without having to change our strategy. I see this consistency as a positive in that it underscores our systematic approach to promoting our policy goals and it removes policy ambiguity at a time when uncertainty seems to be rising on other fronts. It’s important to notice that the gradual path I anticipate does not entail an increase at each FOMC meeting. At its July meeting, the FOMC decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1 to 1-1/4 percent. It also announced that economic conditions are expected to evolve in a way that will warrant further gradual increases; the pace of those increases will depend on what incoming information implies about the medium-run outlook. 11 Normalizing the stance of monetary policy also means taking steps to normalize the Fed’s balance sheet in terms of the size and composition of assets. To address the Great Recession, the Fed undertook several programs to purchase longer-term assets, including longer-maturity Treasuries and agency mortgage- backed securities (MBS). These purchases aimed to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates once the FOMC’s traditional policy tool, the fed funds rate, had been reduced to effectively zero. As a result of the purchases, the Fed’s balance sheet grew, from nearly $900 billion in assets in 2007, or 6 percent of nominal GDP, to about $4.5 trillion today, or 23 percent of nominal GDP.8 In addition, the composition of the Fed’s assets has changed from mainly short-term Treasury securities to mainly longer- maturity Treasuries and agency MBS. In tandem with the increase in Fed assets, there was a sizable increase in Fed liabilities, namely, depository institution deposits, or reserves, held at the Fed. Reserves have increased from about $11 billion in 2007 to over $2 trillion today. In October 2014, the Fed stopped the program to increase the size of its balance sheet, but since then, we’ve been reinvesting the returns from maturing securities, thereby maintaining the balance sheet’s large size. The FOMC’s intention is to reduce the size of the balance sheet over time to the smallest size needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively and, in the longer run, to hold primarily Treasury securities. 9 In June, the FOMC described its program for normalizing the balance sheet by gradually reducing the amount of reinvestments it is making in a predictable way.10 The gradual, predictable decline allows balance-sheet normalization to run in the background and monetary policy to focus on 8 The comparable figures for the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan, which are also using asset purchases to increase accommodation, are 38 percent and 91 percent, respectively. (Balance-sheet data for the European Central Bank from the Eurosystem are available at https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/wfs/2017/html/ecb.fs170808.en.html. Balance-sheet data for the Bank of Japan are available at https://www.boj.or.jp/en/statistics/boj/other/acmai/release/2017/ac170731.htm/. ) 9 See “Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” FOMC, September 17, 2014 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm). 10 See “FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System press release, June 14, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170614c.htm). 12 setting the appropriate level of the fed funds rate, our conventional monetary policy tool. The FOMC expects to begin implementing the program relatively soon,11 and I favor doing this in the near future. First, by design, it will be a very gradual process of decreasing the amount of assets reinvested each month, with balance sheet normalization taking several years.12 Second, the plan has been well telegraphed in advance. Both of these aspects make it less likely that we will see a sudden or sizable increase in long-term yields as a result of the announcement of the start of implementation. Indeed, in my view, other factors, including the ongoing discussions about the debt ceiling, rising geopolitical tensions, and political uncertainty, would be more likely to influence Treasury yields in the near term. Regarding the ultimate size of the balance sheet, we know the balance sheet will be larger than it was prior to the financial crisis for the simple reason that the public’s demand for currency is rising over time.13 But it will also likely be considerably smaller than it is today. How much smaller depends on how the FOMC decides to implement monetary policy in the future.14 But because it will take several years to reduce the size of the balance sheet through asset run-off, there is no reason to delay the start of normalization until this decision is made. 11 See the FOMC post-meeting statement of July 26, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170726a.htm). 12 Once started, the plan is to allow up to $6 billion a month of maturing Treasuries and $4 billion a month of principal payments of agency MBS and agency debt to run off the balance sheet. These caps would be increased by $6 billion and $4 billion per month, respectively, every three months, until they reach $30 billion per month for Treasuries and $20 billion per month for agency MBS and agency debt. Thereafter, those caps would be maintained and the balance sheet would gradually decline. (See “FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System press release, June 14, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20170614c.htm) ). For projections of the Fed’s balance sheet under various scenarios, see “Projections for the SOMA Portfolio and Net Income,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, July 2017 (https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/omo/SOMAPortfolioandIncomeProjections_July2017Up date.pdf). 13 Since the financial crisis, currency has doubled in quantity, from about $770 billion in 2007 to about $1.5 trillion today. 14 For an accessible description of frameworks for implementing monetary policy, see Jane E. Ihrig, Ellen E. Meade, and Gretchen C. Weinbach, “Rewriting Monetary Policy 101: What’s the Fed’s Preferred Post-Crisis Approach to Raising Interest Rates?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (Fall 2015), pp. 177-198 (http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.29.4.177). 13 As a final remark, it’s important to remind everyone that there are risks around the economic outlook, and because of that, monetary policy is not pre-set. The confidence bands the FOMC is now providing around its economic and policy path projections are visual reminders to both the public and policymakers that there is always a lot of uncertainty around economic forecasts. Policy needs to remain systematic in how it reacts to incoming information relevant to the outlook, but not be dogmatic should the outlook indeed materially change. That said, I view the steps the FOMC is taking to gradually normalize monetary policy – both the fed funds rate and the balance sheet – as a welcome acknowledgment that the economy itself has normalized.
