Governor Lael Brainard At the Urban Institute, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Share Watch Live It is a pleasure to be back at the Urban Institute with Sarah Rosen Wartell to discuss the Federal Reserve's efforts to strengthen the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulation. 1 Today the Federal Reserve Board unanimously approved an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) that would strengthen, clarify, and tailor the CRA regulation to better meet the law's core purpose. 2 The CRA's History and Purpose in Relation to Today's Challenges The CRA was one of several landmark civil rights laws to address systemic inequities in credit access. 3 The CRA was intended to reinforce the other statutes in addressing redlining, wherein banks declined to make loans or extend other financial services in neighborhoods of largely Black and other minority households, in part based on government maps that literally delimited these neighborhoods in red as high credit risks ( figure 1 ). By enacting the CRA, lawmakers aimed to reverse the disinvestment associated with years of government policies and market actions that deprived lower-income and predominantly minority areas of credit and investment. Even with these critical laws, the legacy of discriminatory lending and systemic inequity in credit access remains in evidence today. The typically minority neighborhoods demarcated in red in the old color-coded maps tend to be characterized by worse economic performance and opportunity even today. 4 Beyond these specific neighborhoods, research and surveys indicate that there are ongoing racial disparities in access to credit. As of 2019, small businesses with Black ownership were only half as likely as those with White ownership to have obtained bank financing in the previous five years ( figure 2 ). 5 In 2016, the "wealth gap [was] roughly the same as in 1962, two years before the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964." And the gap in homeownership rates between Black and White households remains significant today, even when controlling for differences in income and education. 6 Recent events have highlighted and exacerbated these challenges. When I last joined you at the Urban Institute to discuss the CRA, 7 we did not know the tremendous hardship and heartache the COVID-19 pandemic would cause, especially for groups with thin financial buffers, including many low- and moderate-income (LMI) neighborhoods, Black and Latinx workers, and workers and entrepreneurs affiliated with small businesses. 8 In parallel, the tragic death of George Floyd has ignited a national discussion about racial injustice and a renewed commitment to take action to address systemic inequity. 9 The CRA is a seminal statute that remains as important as ever as the nation confronts challenges associated with racial equity and the COVID-19 pandemic. We must ensure that the CRA is a strong and effective tool to address ongoing systemic inequities in access to credit and financial services for LMI and minority individuals and communities. By conferring an affirmative obligation on banks to help meet the credit needs in all of the neighborhoods they serve, the CRA prompts banks to be not only more active lenders in LMI areas but also important participants in broader efforts to revitalize communities across the country. Research shows the CRA has positive effects on access to capital and financial services for communities, including home mortgages, small business loans, and services offered at local bank branches. 10 Reforms to the CRA should strengthen the engagement between banks and their communities and advance the law's core purpose of addressing disinvestment and unequal access to credit. The ANPR that the Federal Reserve released today incorporates ideas from public comments on past rulemaking notices, research, and our discussions with the other banking agencies. Our proposal also reflects extensive outreach through the 29 CRA roundtables we held across the country with community and industry leaders and community members. I traveled to Colorado to participate in the first roundtable and to hear from women and minority small business owners about the loans that are enabling their businesses to thrive and the bankers who are providing credit and community development activities in their communities. 11 I made similar visits to communities in areas ranging from El Paso's colonias to Kansas City, from Pine Ridge to Milwaukee, from the Mississippi Delta to Ferguson, Missouri, and from Hazard, Kentucky, to Rochester, New York. Despite wide variations, in all of these places, I met people working to strengthen their communities. To ensure its continued effectiveness in supporting these efforts, the CRA regulation must evolve along with the landscape of banking and community development. To that end, the Board's ANPR seeks to advance the CRA's core purpose of addressing inequities in credit access and ensuring an inclusive financial services industry. In addition, the ANPR seeks to provide more certainty and consistency, tailor expectations to local conditions and bank business models, and minimize burden. Finally, we intend for the feedback on the ANPR to provide a foundation for the banking agencies to converge on a consistent regulatory approach that has broad support among stakeholders. Guided by these broad goals, I will discuss the key changes we are proposing. Advancing the Core Purpose of the CRA Promoting Financial Inclusion We seek to modernize the CRA in a way that significantly expands financial inclusion. By being inclusive in their lending and investing, banks help their local communities to thrive, which in turn benefits their core business. The recognition of this mutually beneficial relationship between banks and their local communities is one of the core strengths of the CRA. To strengthen the CRA's role in financial inclusion, the ANPR proposes to expand and clarify CRA-eligible activities that support minority depository institutions (MDIs), community development financial institutions (CDFIs), women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions. Given the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on communities of color, it is important to support the institutions that have a mission to serve the families, entrepreneurs, and homeowners in these communities. In May, Governor Miki Bowman and I heard from leaders of Federal Reserve-regulated MDIs about how COVID had hit their communities and the proactive efforts MDIs were taking to bolster their communities' resilience by extending credit to existing and new customers, calling each borrower that applied for a Paycheck Protection Program loan to help them navigate the process, and working with customers to modify and defer payments on existing loans. 12 The Board's proposal would clarify that banks can receive credit for partnerships with MDIs and other mission-oriented institutions on a nationwide basis, and that such activities would be considered as part of a potential pathway to an "outstanding" rating. Furthermore, for regulated MDIs, investments in other MDIs and in their own institutions could be considered as enhancing their CRA performance. Moreover, the ANPR proposes to designate certain areas, based on persistent inequities, where banks could receive credit for community development activities that often lie beyond the boundaries of a bank's branches. For instance, many of the places that I have visited, such as in the colonias, the Mississippi Delta, Appalachia, and Indian Country, have few bank branches and are located outside of branch-based assessment areas. Banks need to be confident about receiving CRA credit to seek out activities and investments in these areas. The ANPR raises a variety of additional ideas that could be significant for financial inclusion. It proposes giving banks greater certainty that their community development activities will be considered in broader statewide and regional areas, in addition to activities within their local communities, so that banks could help address needs in "credit deserts" if they have the capacity to do so. In considering economic development, the ANPR considers that loans to the smallest businesses, smallest farms, and minority-owned small businesses might be considered impactful and responsive to community needs. In addition, the ANPR proposes elevating the focus on the availability of checking account and savings account products in serving LMI communities. Finally, in considering how the CRA's purpose and history relate to the nation's current challenges, the Board seeks feedback on what other modifications and approaches would strengthen the CRA regulation in addressing systemic inequities in credit access for minority individuals and communities. Meeting the Needs of LMI Individuals and Communities It is important for the CRA to ensure that a wide range of LMI banking needs are met. We heard from stakeholder feedback that both retail and community development activities are important in meeting LMI banking needs. Accordingly, we propose to assess large retail banks using a separate Retail Test and a Community Development Test with separate financing and services subtests ( figure 3 ). Separate assessments of retail lending, retail services, community development financing, and community development services will support robust bank engagement with communities through a variety of channels. Stakeholder feedback has highlighted that each of these areas is essential to LMI communities. The standalone Retail Lending Test is important to stay true to the CRA's core focus on providing credit in underserved communities. Retail lending is the channel through which a family can get a mortgage to buy its first house and an entrepreneur can get a loan for a small business. Retail services are the channel through which an LMI household might get access to essential services from a local bank branch, such as a low-cost checking account. Community development financing captures bank lending and investments that create and maintain affordable housing, promote economic development, and revitalize and stabilize LMI communities. Community development services include financial counseling for low-income families and important volunteer activities undertaken by bank staff, such as serving on the board of a local nonprofit. Some of these activities lend themselves primarily to a qualitative review. For example, the ANPR highlights essential banking services that are responsive to community needs, such as customer support that is provided in multiple languages and flexible branch hours to accommodate LMI customers' work schedules. Although we concluded that the value of services to a local community does not lend itself easily to a monetary value metric, the ANPR proposes introducing quantitative benchmarks where appropriate, such as indicators of whether branch locations are maintained or increased in underserved areas. Addressing Changes in the Banking Industry The ANPR proposes to modernize CRA assessment areas in recognition that reliance on mobile and internet banking has increased in the 25 years since the CRA regulation was last substantially revised. The ANPR still maintains a focus on branches, given their importance to individuals and communities. It also proposes to tailor the facility-based assessment area definition based on bank size. For large banks that conduct a significant amount of lending and deposit-taking outside of their facility-based assessment areas, the ANPR presents options for determining where banks should be assessed outside of where their branches are located. Defining lending-based assessment areas is one option, but the preliminary analysis of this approach provided in the ANPR finds that banks' lending outside of their current assessment areas is widely dispersed and often occurs in places that are already well served. Defining deposit-based assessment areas is another option, but it would entail some additional data reporting burden, and we do not currently have the data to analyze this option closely. For internet banks, which lend across a broad area with few or no branch locations, a nationwide assessment area may advance the CRA's goals more effectively than the current practice of assessing these banks solely where they have a headquarters office. Providing Certainty and Consistency, Minimizing Burden, and Tailoring Expectations Providing Clarity, Consistency, and Transparency The ANPR seeks to provide greater clarity and consistency through tailored performance evaluations. Responding to calls for greater certainty regarding how banks are assessed and rated, the ANPR introduces a metrics-based approach that is calibrated based on over 6,000 written public CRA evaluations. 13 Separating the Retail Test and the Community Development Test provides greater scope to tailor the metrics to local market conditions, which often differ for retail lending and community development financing. This approach would create clear quantitative thresholds for the level of retail lending and community development financing that is needed to achieve a "satisfactory" CRA rating. For the Retail Lending Subtest, which would apply to large retail banks and any small banks that choose to opt in, banks could earn a presumption of a "satisfactory" performance conclusion in an assessment area by reaching clear thresholds of lending to LMI borrowers and neighborhoods in each of their major product lines. The thresholds would be tailored to local market conditions and adjust automatically to reflect changes over the business cycle. They would be based on local data that reflect the credit needs and opportunities among LMI individuals, communities, small businesses, and small farms and on market data that reflect the level of LMI lending in the area by all lenders. Federal Reserve analysis confirms there are large differences in LMI lending opportunities among assessment areas, which illustrates the importance of tailoring the retail lending thresholds to the needs of the local community ( figure 4 ). The ANPR also considers using the same metrics relative to performance ranges to produce a recommended Retail Lending Subtest conclusion of "outstanding," "satisfactory," "needs to improve," or "substantial noncompliance." We encourage commenters to make use of the CRA Analytics Data Tables that we published in March in order to evaluate the presumption threshold options and performance ranges and provide feedback. For the Community Development Financing Subtest, the Board is proposing to measure a large retail bank's community development loans and investments relative to its deposits in each assessment area. The thresholds for the Community Development Financing Subtest would be calibrated using local and national data. When we looked at past performance evaluations, we found that community development financing varies widely across different assessment areas, likely reflecting different levels of community development capacity and the unique needs and challenges of different communities. For example, in San Diego, California, the total dollar amount of banks' community financing activities relative to their deposits is three times higher than in Little Rock, Arkansas ( figure 5 ). In addition, metropolitan areas overall have a higher level of community development financing relative to deposits than rural areas overall. For these reasons, it is important to tailor the Community Development Financing Subtest using thresholds that account for these differences and adjust automatically to changes over time. To provide certainty and transparency, the retail lending and community development financing thresholds would be made available in simple, regularly updated dashboards that banks could use to compare their level of activity to the thresholds in each assessment area ( figure 6 ). For example, a dashboard for the Retail Lending Subtest could show the thresholds that a large retail bank should reach for each of its major product lines to receive the presumption of "satisfactory," including the percentage of loans to LMI borrowers and the percentage of loans to LMI neighborhoods. Tailoring Performance Evaluations to Bank Size and Business Model The proposed separate subtests would also ensure expectations are tailored to the size and business models of different banks. It is important for smaller banks to be able to remain under the current more qualitative approach if they so choose. Accordingly, small retail banks could continue to be evaluated under the current CRA framework, but they would have the option to have their retail lending evaluated under the metrics-based Retail Lending Subtest. Small banks could also elect to have their retail services and community development activities evaluated. Wholesale and limited purpose banks would be evaluated only on their community development activities. The ANPR solicits feedback on options for additional tailoring and flexibility for these institutions, which do not lend themselves to evaluation under the same metrics that would be applicable to large retail banks. Minimizing Data Collection and Reporting Burden The ANPR seeks comment on striking an appropriate balance between providing greater certainty for how banks are assessed through the increased use of metrics and minimizing the associated data collection and reporting burden. In an effort to reduce burden, the proposed metrics would rely to the greatest extent possible on existing data collections and public data sources, and the approach would exempt small banks from deposit and certain other data collection requirements. Large banks currently report community development loans at an aggregated level. A bank may also share information with its examiner on its community development loans and investments in a specific assessment area during a CRA exam. However, the bank does not formally report data on these activities for each assessment area, nor are the data currently available through other sources. Without reporting data more consistently to provide the basis for comparison, it would be difficult to measure and evaluate a large bank's community development performance in a more consistent and predictable way. Clarify and Expand Eligible CRA Activities to Focus on Communities The ANPR proposes updating and clarifying which community development activities qualify in order to provide greater certainty to banks and communities about what counts. The ANPR proposes to publish and regularly update an illustrative, but not necessarily exhaustive, list of qualifying activities. To provide additional certainty, the Board also seeks feedback on a preapproval process, so that banks can propose a community development activity to their examiner to determine whether it will qualify before proceeding with the loan, investment, or service activity. This additional certainty could help promote greater investment by banks while retaining a focus on LMI communities. In addition, the ANPR seeks feedback about clarifying the definitions of qualifying activities and broadening certain definitions in targeted ways. For example, the Board is considering defining CRA-eligible activities that create or preserve naturally occurring affordable housing and is considering whether to broaden the set of volunteer activities that would qualify in rural areas. The Board is also clarifying when a government or tribal plan is required to qualify activities that revitalize and stabilize communities. This is especially important in Indian Country, where we want to encourage banks to make impactful investments that have the support of tribal governments and to increase certainty about how these activities qualify for CRA credit. Recognizing the Special Circumstances of Small Banks in Rural Areas Stakeholder feedback emphasized that smaller retail banks play a vital role in many underserved communities, such as in rural areas. Accordingly, the ANPR provides small banks in rural areas operating in just a portion of a large county greater clarity and flexibility in tailoring the facility-based assessment area definition. The ANPR proposes that a small bank would not be required to expand the delineation of an assessment area to include parts of counties where it does not have a physical presence and where it either engages in a de minimis amount of lending or there is substantial competition from other institutions, except in limited circumstances. In addition, the ANPR proposes to revise the definition of community development services to include a wider range of volunteer activities to address the particular needs of rural areas. The Path Ahead It has been 25 years since the last significant revision to the CRA regulation, so it is important to get reform right. We are providing an extended 120-day comment period to allow ample time for thoughtful feedback from a broad set of stakeholders. The input from stakeholders thus far has been tremendously valuable, and we appreciate the care and concern expressed in the many comment letters and other forms of input on this important regulation. In the weeks and months ahead, we look forward to reviewing your comments and analyzing options for greater impact, including changes to address the inequities and challenges faced by minority communities and individuals. This feedback is critically important, and we are ready to listen. Stakeholders have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize the CRA. By reflecting stakeholder views and providing a long period for public comment, the ANPR is intended to build a foundation for the banking agencies to converge on a consistent approach to strengthening the CRA that has broad support among stakeholders. With your continued ideas and engagement, I am confident we can come together on a stronger, transparent, and tailored approach to the CRA that will benefit LMI communities across the country for years to come. 1. I am grateful to Taz George of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and Amanda Roberts, Joseph Firschein, and Carrie Johnson of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Federal Reserve Board, " Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: the Community Reinvestment Act ," (September 21, 2020). Return to text 3. The Equal Credit Opportunity Act and the Fair Housing Act are fair lending laws that are designed to combat discrimination on prohibited bases such as race, and the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act is designed to bring transparency to mortgage lending practices. Return to text 4. See, e.g., Daniel Aaronson, Daniel Hartley, and Bhashkar Mazumder, " The Effects of the 1930s HOLC 'Redlining' Map ," Working Paper No. 2017-12 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, revised August 2020). Return to text 5. Specifically, 46 percent of firms with non-Hispanic White ownership have obtained bank funds in the past five years, compared to 23 percent of firms with non-Hispanic Black ownership. See Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Small Business Credit Survey: 2020 Report on Employer Firms (2020), p. 3. Return to text 6. See Dionissi Aliprantis and Daniel Carroll, "What Is Behind the Persistence of the Racial Wealth Gap?" Economic Commentary , no 2019-03, February 28, 2019. See also Jung Hyun Choi, " Breaking Down the Black-White Homeownership Gap ," Urban Wire: Housing and Housing Finance (blog), Urban Institute, February 21, 2020, which finds that the homeownership rate among White households is 30 percentage points higher than for Black households, and a large gap remains after controlling for differences in income levels. Return to text 7. See Lael Brainard, " Strengthening the Community Reinvestment Act by Staying True to Its Core Purpose" (speech at the Urban Institute, January 8, 2020) . Return to text 8. The Census Household Pulse Survey indicates that 23 percent of non-Hispanic Black renters and 20 percent of Hispanic renters reported they were not caught up on their rent in August 2020, compared to 11 percent of non-Hispanic White renters. The Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) indicates that one-fourth of workers in low-income families, with incomes below $40,000, who experienced a layoff said they had returned to work for the same employer by July, compared to 32 percent of middle-income and 39 percent of high-income workers, with incomes of between $40,000 and $100,000, and greater than $100,000, respectively. See also Federal Reserve System, FedListens: Perspectives from the Public , (Federal Reserve System, June 2020); Claire Kramer Mills and Jessica Battisto, "Double Jeopardy: COVID-19's Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities" (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020); and Nishesh Chalise et al., Perspectives from Main Street: The Impact of COVID-19 on Low- to Moderate-Income Communities and the Entities Serving Them (Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, August 2020). Return to text 9. See Raphael Bostic, "A Moral and Economic Imperative to End Racism" Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (website), June 12, 2020. Return to text 10. See Raphael W. Bostic and Hyojung Lee, "Small Business Lending under the Community Reinvestment Act," Cityscape , 19, no. 2 (2017): 63-84. See also Hyojung Lee and Raphael W. Bostic, "Bank Adaptation to Neighborhood Change: Mortgage Lending and the Community Reinvestment Act," Journal of Urban Economics 116 (March 2020); and Lei Ding and Carolina K. Reid, "The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and Bank Branching Patterns," Housing Policy Debate 30, no. 1 (November 2019): 27-45. Return to text 11. See Lael Brainard, " Community Investment in Denver " (speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Denver Branch, October 15, 2018). Return to text 12. Minority Depository Institutions Leadership Forum via Webex with Governors Miki Bowman and Lael Brainard (May 13, 2020). Return to text 13. Federal Reserve staff created a database based on over 6,000 written public CRA performance evaluations from a sample of 3,700 banks of varying asset sizes, business models, geographic areas, and bank regulators. The database includes the location, number, and amount of CRA-eligible loans and investments and the ratings associated with each bank's performance from 2005 to 2017. See Federal Reserve Board, " CRA Analytics Data Tables ," March 6, 2020. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: September 21, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard To the Independent Community Bankers of America Fall Leadership Meeting (via webcast) Share Thank you for inviting me here today to take part in your Fall Leadership Meeting. 1 We recognize that community banks play a vital role in the communities you serve. Your insights into local conditions and your long-standing customer relationships afford you a deep understanding of the needs and characteristics of the households and small businesses in your communities, and enable you to meet their credit needs effectively. The value of these relationships has never been more evident than during this crisis—a fact that my colleague, Governor Michelle Bowman, highlighted yesterday when she said "it is no surprise that community banks are standing shoulder to shoulder with their customers, on the front lines." Governor Bowman referred to an Independent Community Bankers of America (ICBA) report that cites preliminary data on the Paycheck Protection Program that community banks have been the main source of lending for minority-owned small businesses during the pandemic and noted the same is true for veteran-owned businesses. 2 As you know, last week, the Federal Reserve Board unanimously voted to approve an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) on the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA). 3 The ANPR is built on ideas advanced by stakeholders. Throughout this process, the ICBA has been an important source of information, which has provided the Federal Reserve valuable insights into the unique role and needs of community banks as you invest in your communities. We have benefited from the ICBA's engagement on CRA both in the form of detailed comment letters and through a number of meetings to discuss different aspects of CRA reform. We thank you for your robust engagement and trust that you see your input reflected in the ANPR. Throughout our outreach, we consistently heard from both bankers and community groups that they value the CRA and that they want to see it improved and updated. This was important feedback as we contemplated how to modernize the regulations, while still staying true to the core purpose of the statute to meet the broad range of banking needs in low- and moderate-income (LMI) communities and address inequities in credit access. Our first major goal for the ANPR was to strengthen the regulations in alignment with the CRA statute. This means strengthening the regulations to ensure that a wide range of LMI banking needs are being met. It also entails promoting financial inclusion by, among other things, providing credit for activities in areas with unmet needs outside of assessment areas, such as Indian Country. Additionally, we aim to create incentives for investment in minority depository institutions and community development financial institutions, many of whom are ICBA members. We know that banking has evolved over the past 25 years, so we also sought to update standards in light of changes to banking over time, including mobile and internet banking. Lastly, we wanted to continue to promote community engagement to inform the examination process. Our second major goal for the ANPR was to provide greater certainty, tailor regulations, and minimize burden. The ANPR seeks feedback on several approaches designed to make the rules clearer, more transparent, and less subjective. For example, the proposed metrics for the retail test and the community development test would provide more clarity and transparency on how bank ratings are determined. In talking with community banks, Federal Reserve staff and I also heard about the need for clearer standards and greater limitations on the size of assessment areas—especially for small banks operating just in a portion of a large county or only making a few loans in a part of a county. The ANPR offers ideas to provide greater clarity in response to these concerns. Importantly, the ANPR proposes to tailor CRA to bank size and business model. In discussing CRA reform with bankers and community organizations, it has been clear that there is a need for a tailored approach for small banks and better outcomes for rural communities. I am encouraged that the ANPR offers ideas that advance these objectives. So let me say a bit more about the proposals in the ANPR that are tailored to small banks. Small retail banks could continue to have their retail lending activities evaluated under the current framework, or they could elect to be evaluated under the proposed retail lending metric. Small banks that opt for the retail lending metric can also elect to have other activities considered. Additionally, the ANPR minimizes data collection and reporting burden by relying on existing data as much as possible, as well as exempting small banks from deposit and certain other data collection requirements. We also heard from stakeholders like ICBA that rural areas, and banks in rural areas, have particular needs. Therefore, the ANPR proposes providing incentives for banks in rural areas to participate in beneficial civic and other nonprofit activities (e.g., serving on a board of a civic institution) that may not have a primary purpose of community development. In rural areas, bank participation in these kinds of activities can make a difference in supporting economic development. The ANPR also seeks feedback on providing CRA credit for bank volunteer activities in rural areas that do not involve the provision of financial or related services but have a clear community development purpose and greatly impact local communities, like helping to build affordable housing. Our final major goal of the ANPR is to provide a foundation for the agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has broad support among stakeholders. Stakeholders such as the ICBA have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize CRA. By reflecting stakeholder views and providing an appropriately long period for public comment, we hope the ANPR advances the goal of building a foundation for the banking agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has the broad support of stakeholders. All three regulators have benefited from stakeholder input provided through comment letters, roundtables, and meetings. There is significant interagency agreement on the objectives of CRA reform, and many of the ideas in the ANPR reflect interagency discussions and regulatory proposals. In closing, we look forward to modernizing the CRA in a way that strengthens the regulations to advance the core purposes of the statute, while providing greater certainty, tailoring regulations, and minimizing burden. We have appreciated the ICBA's strong engagement throughout this process, and we look forward to your continued engagement as we seek to converge on a consistent approach that has broad stakeholder support. Thank you. 1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts, Nancy Riley, and Joseph Firschein of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Independent Community Bankers of America, " Data Show Community Banks Lead Economic Recovery ," news release, August 19, 2020. Also see, Michelle W. Bowman, " Community Banks Rise to the Challenge " (speech at the "Community Banking in the 21st Century" Research Conference, St. Louis, MO, September 30, 2020). Return to text 3. See Federal Reserve Board, " Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking: the Community Reinvestment Act (PDF) ," (September 21, 2020). Return to text Last Update: October 01, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard To the National Bankers Association (via webcast) Share I want to thank Kim Saunders and Kenneth Kelly for inviting me to join members of the National Bankers Association (NBA) for a conversation today. 1 As mission-driven financial institutions with a focus on serving minority households and businesses, you see the significant racial disparities in our economy every day. Going into the crisis, Black and Latinx households had significantly smaller wealth cushions to fall back on than the average American household. For instance, Federal Reserve research based on the Survey of Consumer Finances notes that, in 2019 "the typical White family has eight times the wealth of the typical Black family and five times the wealth as the typical Hispanic family." 2 The COVID-19 crisis has made existing racial disparities even worse. Low-wage and minority workers have experienced disproportionate harm to both their lives and livelihoods as a result of the COVID-19 crisis. As you know from the communities you serve, the crisis has exacerbated pre-existing disparities in the labor market. Black employment, in particular, is recovering at a much slower pace than employment in the overall population, and unemployment for Black and Hispanic/Latinx workers remains higher than for the workforce as a whole. As of last month, the overall unemployment rate had come down to 7.9 percent, which was a marked improvement from 14.7 percent in April. However, the September unemployment rate for Black Americans was still 12.1 percent, more than 4 percentage points higher than the overall unemployment rate. 3 Research confirms that the COVID-19 pandemic has inflicted substantial harm on small businesses, particularly minority-owned businesses. For example, recent research documented that the number of working Black and Latinx small business owners declined in the early months of the crisis by even more than White small business owners. According to this research, the nation saw a 22 percent decline in small business owners between February and April overall, as compared with an even more precipitous 41 percent decline in Black business owners and 32 percent decline in Latinx business owners. 4 Contributing to this perfect storm, minority individuals are suffering worse health outcomes as a result of COVID-19. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) report significant disparities in the infection rate of COVID-19 by race and ethnicity, with Black, Latinx, and Native American individuals contracting COVID-19 at over two and a half times the rate of White, non-Hispanic individuals. For those who do contract COVID-19, African Americans are suffering twice the mortality rate of White, non-Hispanic individuals. 5 The disparities in COVID-19 health risk reflect in part differences in the ability to work remotely, with minority individuals more likely to work in front line jobs that put their health at risk. Black and Latinx workers are overrepresented in the fields of work that entail high contact and pose greater risks of exposure to infection. For example, Black and Latinx workers are overrepresented in most essential positions, including nursing home staff, grocery store workers, bus drivers, postal workers, and warehouse workers. 6 Against that challenging backdrop, the national conversation we are having right now about racial justice and racial equity ignited by the tragic death of George Floyd could not be more urgent. 7 And the NBA's "mission of creating an inclusive financial services industry and a vibrant business environment for minority business institutions, their customers and the communities they serve" could not be more important. 8 Minority depository institutions (MDIs) are important actors in serving the financial needs of minority customers and small businesses, as well as providing community development resources to invest in minority communities. The COVID-19 pandemic only heightens the importance of the role you are playing. Your firsthand experiences of working with minority borrowers and your knowledge of local communities make you essential partners in better targeting our tools to assist low-income and minority small businesses and communities. You have provided valuable input on Federal Reserve programs, from the Paycheck Protection Program Liquidity Facility (PPPLF) to the Main Street Lending Program, to Community Reinvestment Act reform. Over the last month alone, the Federal Reserve Board has held three sessions with representatives of MDIs, community development financial institutions (CDFIs), and vulnerable groups to discuss the challenges faced by underserved communities. We have heard about the extraordinary measures MDIs have taken to keep their banks accessible, modify loans, and extend Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans to new and existing customers, predominantly small, minority-owned businesses. Preliminary data from an Independent Community Bankers of America report indicate that your work, and the work of other community banks, has been a critical source of lending to minority-owned small businesses, accounting for 73 percent of all PPP loans made to minority-owned small businesses. 9 In addition, some mission-focused institutions have participated in the Main Street New Loan Facility, and we continue to welcome your feedback on how to support institutions reaching the businesses and communities most in need. In addition, we are hearing of greater commitments to promote MDIs and CDFIs on the part of large institutions. A number of Black-owned banks, including NBA member banks, are involved in new partnerships to address racial disparities in access to credit and provide wealth-building opportunities. 10 These recent developments are only the latest chapter in how your sector continues to grow and lean into the challenges this nation faces. The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) is one of the most powerful tools we have for addressing systemic inequities in credit access for minority individuals and communities. Last month, the Federal Reserve Board unanimously voted to approve an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) on the CRA. The ANPR is built on ideas advanced by a broad set of stakeholders, including the NBA and MDIs. It has been 25 years since we last reformed CRA, so it is important that we get it done right. The CRA is a critical law, enacted along with other complementary federal civil rights laws during the late 1960s and 1970s, to address redlining and systemic inequities in access to credit and other financial services for minority communities that contributed to dramatic differences in economic access and overall financial well-being. Even with these critical laws, the legacy of discriminatory lending and systemic inequity in credit access remains in evidence today. A foundational goal for the ANPR is to advance the core purpose of the CRA statute. Right at the outset, the ANPR asks for open-ended feedback on a foundational question: how should CRA's regulatory implementation be modified or changed to address systemic inequity in credit access to minority individuals and communities? As leaders in this field, we welcome your feedback on how to strengthen CRA implementation to further the statute's core purpose. Advancing the CRA's core purpose includes strengthening the regulations to ensure that a wide range of low-income and minority banking needs are being met. As part of this objective, CRA modernization provides a unique opportunity to carefully examine the MDI provisions in the CRA statute to ensure proposed changes to the regulation maximize the benefit and impact for MDI banks and the customers and communities they serve. In the ANPR, we placed a priority on strengthening the special consideration for MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions in the current regulation, as well as adding new proposals based on your feedback. The Board believes that any provisions to assist MDIs should be clearly defined and applied in CRA performance assessments. We consistently heard from MDIs and larger banks that there is a lack of awareness of the existing MDI provisions in the CRA regulations or a lack of understanding of how collaboration with MDIs ultimately "count" in a CRA examination. In response, the Board plans to highlight all MDI special provisions and make the credit they receive more prominent and clear in revised regulation, examination guidance, and other public documentation. In addition, in the ANPR, we proposed four specific new MDI provisions. First, the ANPR proposes giving banks credit for activities with MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions located outside their assessment areas at either the state or institution level, which would ensure that there is a clear "place" for such activities to be counted. Though majority-owned institutions currently can get CRA consideration for activities with MDIs outside of the majority-owned institution's assessment areas(s), we have heard feedback that there can be a lack of clarity about where and how these activities will count in their CRA rating. As a result, stakeholders like NBA have indicated that such activities are not common. The second proposal would explicitly designate activities in MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions as a potential pathway to achieving an "outstanding" CRA rating. The purpose of this provision would be to elevate the profile of and create more incentives for activities with these mission-oriented institutions. The third proposal would provide credit for MDIs and women-owned financial institutions investing in other MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions. Currently, only majority-owned institutions can receive CRA consideration for investing in MDIs. We know that MDIs vary greatly in size, and we have heard from MDIs that there could be mutually beneficial partnerships between MDIs. Finally, the ANPR proposes providing credit for MDIs and women-owned financial institutions investing in limited activities to improve their own banks. Eligibility could be limited to activities that demonstrate meaningful investment in the business, such as staff training, hiring new staff, opening new branches in minority neighborhoods, or expanding products and services. In addition to activities specific to MDIs, the ANPR seeks to strengthen CRA's core purpose in other ways. This includes proposals to promote greater financial inclusion, such as allowing banks to get credit for community development activities outside of assessment areas but in designated areas with persistent unmet needs. An example mentioned in the ANPR is activities in Indian Country. Native American MDIs have been working diligently to serve Indian Country for years with limited resources; we hope that our proposals will bring additional capital into Indian Country to complement the work of Native American MDIs. Our second major goal for the ANPR is to provide greater certainty, tailor regulations based on bank size and business model, and minimize burden. There are a number of proposals to advance these objectives. Most MDIs are small banks, so let me say a bit more about the proposals in the ANPR that are tailored to small banks. Under the ANPR proposals, small retail banks would continue to have their retail lending activities evaluated under the current CRA framework unless they elect to be evaluated under the proposed Retail Lending Subtest using a metrics-based approach. Small banks that opt for the metrics-based approach would also have the option to submit retail services and community development activities for consideration, and we are interested in feedback on how to do this. Additionally, the ANPR proposes ways to minimize data collection and reporting burden by relying on existing data as much as possible, as well as exempting small banks from deposit and certain other data collection requirements. Our third major goal for the ANPR is to provide a foundation for the agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has broad support among stakeholders. Stakeholders like NBA have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize CRA. By reflecting stakeholder views and providing an appropriately long period for public comment, the ANPR advances the goal of building a foundation for the banking agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has the broad support of stakeholders. All three regulators have benefitted from the stakeholder comments provided through comment letters, roundtables, and meetings. There is significant interagency agreement on the objectives of CRA reform and many of the ideas in the ANPR reflect interagency discussions and regulatory proposals. In closing, we look forward to modernizing the CRA in a way that strengthens the regulations to advance the core purpose of the statute, while providing greater certainty, tailoring regulations, and minimizing burden. We have appreciated the NBA's strong engagement throughout this process, and we look forward to your continued engagement as we seek to converge on a consistent approach that has broad stakeholder support. Our Partnership for Progress Program seeks ways to preserve and promote MDIs through engagement, technical assistance, and research in recognition of your institutions' continued innovation and flexibility in adapting to the ever-changing financial needs of your communities. We see CRA modernization as a significant opportunity to strengthen further the ability of MDIs to serve their communities, and we hope that you will provide us with feedback on how to modernize the CRA regulations in a way that supports MDIs and the communities you serve. Thank you. 1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts, Carrie Johnson, and Joseph Firschein of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Neil Bhutta, Andrew C. Chang, Lisa J. Dettling, and Joanne W. Hsu, "Disparities in Wealth by Race and Ethnicity in the 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances" (Washington: Board of Governors, September 2020). Return to text 3. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, "Employment status of the civilian noninstitutional population by race, Hispanic or Latino ethnicity, sex, and age, seasonally adjusted," Current Population Survey (Washington: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, October 2020). Return to text 4. Robert W. Fairlie, "The Impact Of Covid-19 On Small Business Owners: Evidence Of Early-Stage Losses From The April 2020 Current Population Survey" (PDF) (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, June 2020). Return to text 5. "COVID-19 Hospitalization and Death by Race/Ethnicity," Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, last modified August 18, 2020. Return to text 6. Steven Brown, "How COVID-19 is Affecting Black and Latino Families' Employment and Financial Well-Being," The Urban Institute, last modified May 6, 2020. Return to text 7. See Raphael Bostic, "A Moral and Economic Imperative to End Racism," Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (website), last modified on June 12, 2020, and "Series on Racism and the Economy," Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, and Minneapolis, last modified on October 7, 2020. Return to text 8. https://www.nationalbankers.org/ Return to text 9. Independent Community Bankers of America, "Data Show Community Banks Lead Economic Recovery," news release, August 19, 2020. Return to text 10. Broadway Financial Corporation and CFBanc Corporation ,"Broadway Financial Corporation and CFBanc Corporation to Combine to Create the Largest Black-Led Minority Depository Institution in the U.S.," (PDF) news release, August 26, 2020. Return to text Last Update: October 16, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the National Housing Conference National Advisory Council Meeting Share Watch Live I want to thank David Dworkin for inviting me to participate in this discussion. I am pleased to be with you to talk about Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) modernization and how this process can help address the housing challenges facing minority and low- and moderate-income (LMI) communities around the country. 1 The National Housing Conference (NHC) is an important voice in housing and community development policy, so I look forward to hearing from you. During the mortgage foreclosure crisis, many families around the country suffered the devastating loss of their home through no fault of their own, and homeownership rates have not recovered to pre-crisis levels for the affected groups. Now, the COVID-19 pandemic is raising a new set of housing challenges for renters and the rental market. The current crisis is hitting LMI households with limited financial resources the hardest, and this is especially true for Black and Latinx households. Data from the Census Household Pulse Survey indicate that 25 percent of Black renters and 22 percent of Hispanic renters were behind on their rent payments as of September, along with 12 percent of White renters. 2 Among homeowners, Black and Hispanic households have been "significantly more likely to miss or defer monthly mortgage payments and experience uncertainty about making next month's payment than white households" during the pandemic. 3 Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act emergency payments and supplemental unemployment benefits provided vital support to households in the initial stages of the crisis, and the mortgage forbearance period of up to 360 days in the Act and eviction moratoriums at the federal, state, and local level have provided vital stop-gap stability for many families. There is growing concern about what will happen to individuals who may be behind on their rent or mortgage payments as a result of job loss or reduced hours when eviction moratoriums and mortgage forbearance programs come to an end, especially given uncertainty about whether there will be further fiscal support. The housing challenges resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic are layered on top of existing challenges in both the homeownership and rental markets. Affordable housing is essential to providing low-income households the stability necessary to engage in employment and schooling, provide for essential needs, and accumulate some financial cushion for emergencies. However, the need for affordable housing has grown at a faster pace than the supply. 4 With limited supply of lots and other challenges, new construction in many places has been oriented to higher-end units, leaving more limited supply for households with lower incomes, especially in higher cost cities. Many households have been unable to purchase a home since the last financial crisis due to a confluence of factors, including higher home prices and stricter lending standards. 5 For those who have purchased a home, higher home prices have translated into higher debt levels relative to household income. For renters, available subsidies or programs for affordable housing have fallen short of the need, particularly in higher cost cities, while new higher-end rental housing has increased significantly since the financial crisis. The high cost of renting leaves many families paying a higher share of their income for housing. American Community Survey data from 2019 show that 45 percent of renter households spend more than 30 percent of their monthly income on rent. 6 While 22 percent of renters pay more than half of their income toward rent, this figure jumps to nearly 38 percent for renters earning below $50,000. 7 This leaves families with little to no room to save for emergencies, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. This growing shortage underscores the importance of the incentives provided by the CRA for the production and rehabilitation of affordable housing. With the demand for affordable units significantly exceeding supply, it is essential to strengthen the incentives for these loans and investments as part of CRA modernization. Increasing access to affordable housing is critical to creating opportunities for homeownership for LMI households and with it the chance to build wealth through home equity. Here too, CRA plays a role, not only in providing incentives for the provision of affordable housing, but also in encouraging access to credit for homeownership for LMI households and communities. Indeed, mortgage lending has long been at the center of evaluating CRA performance. The challenges facing LMI and minority renters and would-be homeowners underscore the importance of getting CRA modernization right. The Federal Reserve Board unanimously voted to approve an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) about CRA modernization on September 21, 2020. 8 The ANPR was published yesterday in the Federal Register , and the comment period will end on February 16, 2021. 9 By providing a 120-day comment period, we hope to receive comments from a wide range of stakeholders and build on the already robust feedback that informed the development of the ANPR. Throughout this process, NHC has provided the Federal Reserve with valuable insights into the unique role and needs of affordable housing providers. Your members support community development projects in communities throughout the country, and we have benefited from the engagement of NHC and its members both in the form of detailed comment letters and through meetings to discuss different aspects of CRA reform. The CRA is a critical law, enacted along with other complementary federal civil rights laws during the late 1960s and 1970s. The intent of these laws was to address redlining and systemic inequities in access to credit and other financial services for LMI and minority communities. The core purpose of CRA remains as important as ever, especially given the national conversation we are having about racial equity in our society and the disproportionate impact that COVID-19 is having on LMI and minority communities. Even with these critical laws, the wealth gap remains stubbornly wide. 10 The Survey of Consumer Finances for 2019 found that the typical White family has eight times the wealth of the typical Black family. 11 For many American families, homeownership is the single most important component of their wealth. In 2019, the homeownership rate for Black households was 42.1 percent, as compared to the 73.3 percent for White households. 12 This homeownership gap of 31.2 percent is 3.1 percentage points wider than a decade ago. The Board's ANPR seeks to advance the law's core purpose of addressing unequal access to credit for LMI and minority communities and disinvestment in underserved communities. A modernized CRA should help move the needle on credit access, wealth building, and the availability of community development financing. This includes strengthening the regulations to ensure that a wide range of low-income and minority banking needs are being met. It also includes promoting financial inclusion by proposing incentives for further bank investments in Minority Depository Institutions, Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs), and community development activity in designated areas of need outside of assessment areas, such as Indian Country. The ANPR also seeks to provide greater certainty, tailor regulations based on bank size and business model, and minimize burden. For example, the ANPR introduces a metrics-based approach that would separately evaluate retail lending and community development financing activity. The use of standardized metrics would provide greater clarity and transparency on how lending and investment activity is evaluated. These proposed metrics would also use thresholds that are tailored to local market conditions, while also retaining a focus on targeted performance context factors. Lastly, we hope the ANPR will provide a foundation for the agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has broad support among stakeholders. Stakeholders, including the NHC, have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize CRA. By reflecting stakeholder views and providing a long public comment period, we believe that the ANPR provides the basis for the agencies to establish a consistent approach that has broad support. Before concluding, I want to highlight a few proposals in the ANPR that have particular relevance to affordable housing. First, the ANPR proposes two separate tests for evaluating the CRA performance of large retail banks—a Retail Test and a Community Development Test—in response to the overwhelming stakeholder feedback we heard about the vital importance of both retail and community development activities. In the ANPR, each of these tests would have a subtest that focuses on financing and a subtest that focuses on services, resulting in four overall subtests for large retail banks. Second, the ANPR proposes evaluating a bank's retail lending in its major product lines using metrics that measure the number of loans a bank makes, not the dollar-value of these loans. As a result, a larger mortgage loan would count the same as a smaller-dollar mortgage under the proposed metrics. We think this is important to avoid providing incentives to serve borrowers seeking to finance higher-priced homes at the expense of lower-income borrowers seeking finance for lower-priced homes. Third, the ANPR proposes combining consideration of community development loans and qualified investments, including originations and purchases, into one metrics-based Community Development Financing Subtest. We believe this could encourage the provision of patient capital because both new originations and those already on the balance sheet would be included in the evaluation metric. Fourth, stakeholders have emphasized the critical importance of CRA-motivated capital as a source of funding for affordable rental and single-family housing for LMI populations. Given the significant unmet need for affordable housing, the ANPR provides an opportunity to carefully reconsider how we define affordable housing in the CRA regulations and how we can strengthen existing provisions for the creation and preservation of affordable housing, both rental and owner-occupied. The ANPR proposes new regulatory language that would specify that a housing unit would be considered affordable if it is purchased, developed, rehabilitated, or preserved in conjunction with a federal, state, local, or tribal government affordable housing program or subsidy, with the bona fide intent of providing affordable housing. This definition is intended to capture a wide variety of subsidies, including tax credit programs (such as the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit), federal government direct subsidies, and state and local government direct subsidies for the production or preservation of affordable housing. These programs could be for rental housing or homeownership. The suggested language is also intended to capture programs that do not provide monetary subsidies, but that have the express intent of producing or preserving affordable housing, such as a loan in support of a land bank program. In addition, many stakeholders have noted the importance of preserving unsubsidized housing that is affordable to LMI households and ensuring units retain their affordability in gentrifying areas. In response to these concerns, the ANPR seeks to clarify the criteria under which banks can receive CRA consideration for investing in unsubsidized, or naturally-occurring, affordable housing. We are also considering other options to ensure that housing-related community development financing activities maintain long-term affordability, limit displacement, and encourage affordable housing located in all communities. As experts in this field, we look forward to receiving your feedback on what specific data sources and criteria we should consider to promote the preservation of naturally-occurring, affordable housing. Fifth, the ANPR seeks feedback on the appropriate CRA treatment of mortgage-backed securities (MBS) that are backed by loans that finance subsidized multifamily rental housing, loans for mixed-income housing that includes affordable housing for LMI families, or loans to LMI borrowers. While issuance of qualifying MBS can improve liquidity, and thereby increase capacity for lenders that make home mortgage loans to LMI borrowers, some stakeholders have expressed concern that MBS purchases may be undertaken in lieu of other more impactful community development financing activities that may require greater effort. Finally, the ANPR seeks feedback on extending to CDFIs the status that is extended to Minority Depository Institutions, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions. Such an approach would effectively give banks CRA consideration for loans, investments, or services in conjunction with a CDFI anywhere in the country. Additionally, the ANPR discusses granting automatic CRA community development consideration for qualified activities in conjunction with U.S. Department of the Treasury-certified CDFIs for activities in a bank's assessment area(s). We hope that you will provide us with feedback on how to modernize the CRA in a way that supports affordable housing and promotes housing-related credit and investments to LMI and minority individuals and communities. We thank you for your engagement and look forward to hearing more from you and your members through the rulemaking process. 1. I am grateful to Lisa Robinson of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. United States Census Bureau, Week 14 Household Pulse Survey: September 2 – September 14 . Data are staff calculations from data in the U.S. Census Household Pulse Survey. Return to text 3. Jung Hyun Choi, " Six Facts You Should Know about Current Mortgage Forbearances ," Urban Wire: Housing and Housing Finance (blog), Urban Institute, August 18, 2020. Return to text 4. Joint Center for Housing Studies, State of the Nation's Housing 2019 (PDF) (stating "[j]ust as the recent housing downturn was longer and deeper than any other since the Great Depression, the residential construction rebound has been slower. Since reaching bottom in 2011 at just 633,000 new units, additions to the housing stock have grown at an average annual rate of just 10 percent. Despite these steady gains, completions and placements totaled only 1.2 million units last year—the lowest annual production, excluding 2008–2018, going back to 1982… according to Joint Center for Housing Studies estimates, annual construction should now be on the order of 1.5 million units, or about 260,000 higher than in 2018."). Return to text 5. See Elliot Anenberg, Aurel Hizmo, Edward Kung, and Raven Molloy, "Measuring mortgage credit availability: A frontier estimation approach," Journal of Applied Economics, 34 (6), 865-882; Laurie Goodman, Jun Zhu, Taz George, " Four million mortgage loans missing from 2009 to 2013 due to tight credit standards ," Urban Wire: Housing and Housing Finance (blog), Urban Institute, April 2, 2015. Return to text 6. United States Census Bureau, American Community Survey (2019 ACS 1-year estimates, Table: B25074). Return to text 7. See United States Census Bureau, American Community Survey in note 6. Return to text 8. Federal Reserve Board issues Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on an approach to modernize regulations that implement the Community Reinvestment Act , September 21, 2020. Return to text 9. 85 Fed. Reg. 66,410 (PDF) , October 19, 2020. Return to text 10. Lael Brainard, " Strengthening the CRA to Meet the Challenges of Our Time ," (remarks delivered via webcast at the Urban Institute, Washington, D.C., October 1, 2020). Return to text 11. Neil Bhutta, Andrew C. Chang, Lisa J. Dettling, and Joanne W. Hsu, " Disparities in Wealth by Race and Ethnicity in the 2019 Survey of Consumer Finances " (Washington: Board of Governors, September 2020). Return to text 12. United States Census Bureau, Current Population Survey , Housing Vacancies and Homeownership, March 10, 2020. Return to text Last Update: October 20, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the "Post-COVID—Policy Challenges for the Global Economy" Society of Professional Economists Annual Online Conference (via webcast) Share I want to express my appreciation to Kevin Daly for inviting me to participate in the Society of Professional Economists Annual Online Conference. 1 The U.S. economy saw a strong initial bounceback from the depths of the COVID-19 (coronavirus disease 2019) crisis, aided by significant targeted support. The recovery remains highly uncertain and highly uneven—with certain sectors and groups experiencing substantial hardship. These disparities risk holding back the recovery. The Federal Reserve is committed to providing sustained accommodation to achieve a broad-based recovery. Further targeted fiscal support will be needed alongside accommodative monetary policy to turn this K-shaped recovery into a broad-based and inclusive recovery. K-Shaped Recovery? Targeted interventions, along with adaptations in the behavior of households and businesses, have enabled economic activity to recover. All told, after an unprecedented contraction in the first half of the year, U.S. gross domestic product appears likely to have reversed more than one-half of that decline in the third quarter. But within the overall improvement, some groups and sectors continue to see depressed employment, income, and revenues. Sustained disparities can hold back the recovery and lead to worse overall outcomes. Over the past month, the Federal Reserve Board has held three meetings with community groups, mission-oriented lenders, and representatives of frontline workers to hear about these disparities and their implications for the recovery. Overall, total consumer expenditures in the United States have recovered about three-fourths of their spring decline through August. Interest-sensitive sectors such as residential real estate and autos have rebounded strongly—a welcome reminder of the power of monetary accommodation, especially when coupled with necessary fiscal support. Consumer spending on goods posted robust gains over the summer, and August levels exceeded those in January. In sharp contrast, however, consumer spending on services through August has recovered only about 60 percent of its spring decline and remains well below pre-COVID-19 levels. At the aggregate level, indicators of business investment, including shipments of capital goods, have been stronger than anticipated and point to a solid increase in equipment and investment spending in the third quarter. In contrast, investment on nonresidential structures remains depressed. Activity in some sectors remains substantially below pre-COVID-19 levels. For instance, airline passenger traffic is still 60 percent below its pre-pandemic level, contributing to the decline in aircraft orders this year, and hotel revenue per available room is only half the level of a year earlier. Our actions have helped promote the flow of credit to households and businesses. Borrowing costs are low along the yield curve, and liquidity is abundant. Amid historically low corporate bond yields, gross issuance of both investment- and speculative-grade corporate bonds was strong in the third quarter. In contrast to the favorable financing conditions for large businesses with access to capital markets, financing conditions for small businesses remain tight, with lower lending activity and signs of deteriorating loan performance. Small businesses tend to be concentrated in sectors that entail high direct contact, operate with relatively tight cash buffers, and rely on bank credit rather market-based finance. In the most recent Census Bureau Small Business Pulse Survey from early October, more than 30 percent of small businesses report having one month or less of cash on hand. The most recent Federal Reserve Small Business Lending Survey indicates that the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) provided a critical lifeline for small and medium-sized businesses, but also that credit availability has otherwise tightened. Driven primarily by PPP-related loans, originations of new small business commercial and industrial loans in the second quarter of 2020 were more than nine times the size of originations in either the first quarter of 2020 or the second quarter of 2019. 2 However, 44 percent of respondents, on net, indicate loan standards tightened over the second quarter. About 43 percent of respondents, on net, reported a deterioration in the credit quality of small business applicants—the largest decline since the inception of the survey and only the second time in which respondents of all bank sizes, on net, reported a decline. Minority small businesses have been particularly hard hit. According to recent research, between February and April, the economy saw a 41 percent decline in Black business owners and a 32 percent decline in Latinx business owners, compared with a 22 percent overall decline. 3 The labor market recovery to date has been more rapid than the initial pace following the Global Financial Crisis, but it has been uneven, and the easiest improvements are likely behind us. The pace of labor market improvement is decelerating at a time when employment is still far short of its maximum level. As of September, total nonfarm payroll employment had recovered about half of the jobs that were lost in March and April, and it remained about 11 million jobs below its February level. Private payroll gains in September were less than in July and August and came in far below the gains posted in May and June. Although the number of persons on temporary layoff has dropped back sharply from the highs in the spring to a level of 4.6 million in September, the number of permanent job losers has been rising since February and was at a level of 3.8 million in September. The job-finding rate for those who are permanently laid off is less than half the rate of those on temporary layoff, so the speed of labor market improvement is likely to decelerate further if these trends continue. Similarly, after seeing large declines during much of the summer, initial claims for unemployment insurance have crept up recently and remain elevated. The 1/2 percentage point decline in the unemployment rate in September to 7.9 percent was accompanied by a 0.3 percentage point decline in the labor force participation rate (LFPR). 4 The recent decline in prime-age labor force participation has been due primarily to women. September marks the third consecutive monthly decline in the prime-age female LFPR since it bounced back in May and June. The decline in September, when many schools moved to virtual instruction, was especially pronounced for women ages 35 to 44. Indeed, the fraction of prime-age respondents to the Current Population Survey in September with children ages 6 to 17 who reported being out of the labor force for caregiving reasons was about 14 percent, up nearly 2 percentage points from a year earlier. 5 If not soon reversed, the decline in the participation rate for prime‑age women could have longer-term implications for household incomes and potential growth. The COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating existing disparities in labor market outcomes. Although employment fell sharply for all groups between February and April, the decline was steeper for Black and Hispanic workers than for white and Asian workers, steeper for women than for men, and steeper for non-college-educated workers than for college graduates. At 12.1 percent, the unemployment rate for Black workers is more than 4 percentage points higher than the aggregate. 6 Occupation and industry affiliation can explain only part of these COVID-19 labor market disparities. 7 In the years before the pandemic, I was encouraged to see prime-age individuals in all demographic groups drawn into the strong labor market, reversing the previous decline in participation and boosting the productive capacity of the economy. 8 Persistent spells out of employment risk harming not only the prospects of these individuals, but also the economy's potential growth rate. Regarding the other side of our dual mandate, the 12-month change in total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) prices picked up from 0.5 percent in April to 1.4 percent in August. Over the same period, core PCE price inflation picked up from 0.9 percent to 1.6 percent, supported lately by increases in prices of durable goods, including those for used cars and household appliances. 9 While inflation may temporarily rise to or above 2 percent on a 12-month basis next year when the March and April price readings fall out of the 12-month calculation, my baseline forecast for inflation over the medium term is for it to remain short of 2 percent over the next few years. Support for a Broad-Based and Inclusive Recovery Recent research indicates that the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act played a significant role in supporting aggregate demand in the spring and summer. Enhanced unemployment benefits offset the lost income of many lower-wage and services workers, in some cases at greater-than-wage-replacement rates. Household spending stepped up in mid-April, coinciding with the first disbursement of stimulus payments to households and a ramp-up in the payout of unemployment benefits, and showed the most pronounced increases in the states that received more benefits. 10 The Survey of Consumer Finances indicates that cash-constrained households make up a significant fraction of the population. With unemployment and reduced hours likely to persist, many of these households are unlikely to be able to sustain recent levels of consumption without additional fiscal support as well as extended loan forbearance and eviction moratoriums. The financial security of displaced workers will depend importantly on whether unemployment benefits will be extended or supplemented—and if this will occur before any remaining savings accrued from the CARES Act funding run out. 11 Analogous questions arise with regard to the many hard-hit small businesses that were sustained early in the crisis by PPP loans, whose finances are becoming increasingly strained as revenue shortfalls persist. Similarly, the state and local governments that were able to weather tax-and-fee revenue shortfalls early in the crisis are likely to find it more difficult to sustain employment and spending levels the longer the pandemic persists in the absence of further fiscal support. Continued targeted support to replace lost incomes will be an important factor in determining the strength of the recovery. Apart from the course of the virus itself, the most significant downside risk to my outlook would be the failure of additional fiscal support to materialize. Too little support would lead to a slower and weaker recovery. Premature withdrawal of fiscal support would risk allowing recessionary dynamics to become entrenched, holding back employment and spending, increasing scarring from extended unemployment spells, leading more businesses to shutter, and ultimately harming productive capacity. The recovery will be broader based, stronger, and faster if monetary policy and fiscal policy both provide continued support to the economy. While monetary policy has helped keep credit available and borrowing costs low, fiscal policy has replaced lost incomes among households experiencing layoffs and businesses and states and localities suffering temporary drops in revenue. Monetary Policy Finally, let me turn to how the new Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy will help monetary policy achieve its goals. The new statement on goals and strategy seeks to align monetary policy with key longer-run changes in the economy. 12 The combination of a low neutral interest rate, underlying trend inflation below 2 percent, and the low responsiveness of inflation to resource slack embodied in a flat Phillips curve reduces the amount we can cut rates to buffer the economy, weakens inflation expectations, and could lead to worse employment and inflation outcomes over time. Consequently, it is important to strengthen our ability to achieve our employment and inflation goals by committing to a path of policy and lowering borrowing costs along the yield curve. The new statement on goals and strategy makes several key changes that should significantly improve the way the Committee conducts monetary policy. It eliminates the previous reference to a numerical estimate of the longer-run normal unemployment rate and instead defines the statutory maximum level of employment as a broad-based and inclusive goal. It commits that the Committee will aim to eliminate shortfalls of employment from its maximum level, rather than the previous reference to deviations, which could be in either direction. By eliminating the rationale for removing accommodation preemptively when the unemployment rate nears estimates of the natural rate in anticipation of high inflation that is unlikely to materialize, the new framework will avoid an unwarranted loss of opportunity for many Americans. The broad-based and inclusive definition of maximum employment calls for a more comprehensive assessment of areas of slack in the labor market, such as the disparities in employment outcomes I discussed earlier. To address the downward bias associated with the proximity of the policy rate to its lower bound, the new statement on goals and strategy adopts a flexible inflation averaging targeting (FAIT) strategy that seeks to achieve inflation that averages 2 percent over time. Under an inflation averaging strategy, appropriate monetary policy will aim to achieve inflation moderately above 2 percent for a time to compensate for shortfalls during a period when it has been running persistently below 2 percent. The forward guidance adopted by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in September gives concrete expression to the new strategy outlined in the new statement of goals and strategy. The forward guidance sets out outcome-based criteria that it expects to be achieved before the Committee lifts the policy rate from the lower bound. The labor market must reach "levels consistent with the Committee's assessments of maximum employment." Inflation would need to rise to 2 percent, and, in addition, the Committee would need to assess that inflation is on track to moderately exceed 2 percent for some time. The new FAIT framework is implemented not only through these outcome-based conditions for the liftoff of the policy rate, but also through the commitment that monetary policy will remain accommodative after liftoff for some time in order to achieve "inflation moderately above 2 percent for some time so that inflation averages 2 percent over time," consistent with longer-term inflation expectations anchored at 2 percent. This implies there likely will be a period after liftoff when the policy rate remains below neutral to support the inflation makeup strategy and maximum employment. Research indicates that an important precondition for forward guidance to be effective is that the public understands and believes the policymakers' commitment to making it happen. 13 It will be important for the Committee to communicate clearly about our intentions and stay the course resolutely. How will we know if the new FAIT strategy is working? In addition to carefully monitoring labor market and inflation outcomes, it will be important to monitor a variety of indicators to see evidence that longer-term inflation expectations are moving sustainably to 2 percent. Inflation expectations are difficult to measure directly, so I generally consult a set of indicators to provide a more complete picture than any one measure on its own. Changes in expectations reported in surveys provide one important source of information. For instance, median 5- and 10-year PCE inflation expectations from the Survey of Professional Forecasters both dropped considerably in the second quarter and stand at 1.7 percent and 1.85 percent, respectively, for the third quarter, which are the second lowest, and lowest, readings, respectively, in each series. The median 5-to-10-year measure from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers moved down in October to 2.4 percent, toward the lower end of its range in recent years, which is almost 1/2 percentage point below its range before 2014. In addition to survey data that are available at a monthly or quarterly frequency, we monitor market-based measures of inflation expectations that are available daily. To use market-based measures of inflation compensation based on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) or inflation swaps, the signal on inflation expectations must be separated from liquidity and term premiums through model-based methods. 14 After making those adjustments, TIPS-based 5- and 10-year inflation expectations were 1.41 percent and 1.66 percent, respectively, on the final day of the third quarter, up from the lows experienced in March but well below their historical average. Finally, it is useful to consult measures of underlying trend inflation. 15 A variety of estimates using time-series models suggest that underlying trend inflation may have moved down by as much as 1/2 percentage point over the past decade. 16 It is difficult to anticipate how long it will take to achieve the conditions set out in the forward guidance. The September Summary of Economic Projections shows that most participants do not currently anticipate that the policy rate will depart from its lower bound by the end of 2023. When it does lift off, the policy rate could be expected to change only gradually, reflecting the commitment to remain accommodative until inflation has moderately exceeded 2 percent for some time. Of course, the pace of the recovery will dictate the actual path of monetary policy, as implied by the conditional outcome-based forward guidance adopted in September. Indeed, a key benefit of outcome-based forward guidance is that it conveys the Committee's monetary policy reaction function in a manner that is transparent and responsive to changes in economic conditions. 17 In conjunction with the forward guidance on the policy rate, the commitment to continue asset purchases at least at the current pace over coming months is also helping to achieve our goals by keeping borrowing costs low for households and businesses along the yield curve. As noted in the September FOMC minutes, in the months ahead, we will have the opportunity to deliberate and to clarify how the asset purchase program could best work in combination with forward guidance to support achievement of maximum employment and 2 percent average inflation. While the strong bounceback in activity from the initial devastation of COVID-19 was heartening, the recovery thus far has been highly uneven, and the path ahead is highly uncertain. By pledging to provide accommodation until shortfalls from maximum employment have been eliminated and average inflation of 2 percent has been achieved, the new forward guidance will ensure that the recovery reaches those who have been disproportionately affected, leading to a broad-based and strong recovery. Continued asset purchases will help achieve these outcomes by keeping borrowing costs low for households and businesses along the yield curve. This strong support from monetary policy—if combined with additional targeted fiscal support—can turn a K-shaped recovery into a broad-based and inclusive recovery that delivers better outcomes overall. 1. I am grateful to Kurt Lewis for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. The most recent Small Business Lending Survey (dated September 29, 2020) is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's website at https://www.kansascityfed.org/research/indicatorsdata/smallbusinesslendingsurvey . Return to text 3. See Robert W. Fairlie (2020), "The Impact of COVID-19 on Small Business Owners: Evidence of Early-Stage Losses from the April 2020 Current Population Survey," (PDF) NBER Working Paper Series 27309 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June). Return to text 4. The reported unemployment rates used here also reflect misclassification, although this is declining. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has indicated that the official unemployment rate has understated the extent of joblessness in recent months because many workers who were on temporary layoff were incorrectly reported as being employed but absent from work. The BLS estimated that this misclassification held down the unemployment rate by about 5 percentage points in April, declining to about 0.4 percentage point in September. Return to text 5. Staff calculations based on the microdata from the September Current Population Survey. Return to text 6. After declining by 11.5 percentage points between February and April, the employment-to-population ratio for Black prime-age individuals has recovered by 4.5 percentage points. The comparable numbers for White prime-age individuals was a 10.4 percentage point decline followed by an improvement of 6 percentage points. See U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020), "Employment Status of the Civilian Noninstitutional Population by Race, Hispanic or Latino Ethnicity, Sex, and Age, Seasonally Adjusted," table A-4, Current Population Survey (Washington: BLS, October). Return to text 7. Black and Latinx workers are overrepresented in the frontline fields of work that entail high contact and pose greater risks of exposure to infection. See Steven Brown (2020), "How COVID-19 Is Affecting Black and Latino Families' Employment and Financial Well-Being," Urban Institute, Urban Wire: Race and Ethnicity (blog), May 6. Despite this, Cortes and Forsythe find that the larger increases in job losses suffered by individuals from disadvantaged groups, such as Hispanics, younger workers, those with lower levels of education, and women, can be explained only in part by occupation and industry affiliation; see Guido Matias Cortes and Eliza C. Forsythe (2020), "The Heterogeneous Labor Market Impacts of the Covid-19 Pandemic," Upjohn Institute Working Paper Series 20-327 (Kalamazoo, Mich.: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, May). Return to text 8. See Lael Brainard (2017), "Why Persistent Employment Disparities Matter for the Economy's Health," speech delivered at "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, September 26, in addition to the citations therein; and Jerome H. Powell (2019), "Building on the Gains from the Long Expansion," speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the Greater Providence Chamber of Commerce, Providence, R.I., November 25. Return to text 9. The trimmed mean PCE inflation rate calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas over the 12 months ending in August was 1.9 percent; the data as of August 2020 are available on the Bank's website at https://www.dallasfed.org/research/pce . Return to text 10. Baker and others find that a panel of households responded quickly to CARES Act stimulus payments despite stay-at-home orders and social distancing; see Scott R. Baker, R.A. Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis (2020), "Income, Liquidity, and the Consumption Response to the 2020 Economic Stimulus Payments," NBER Working Paper Series 27097 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May). Kargar and Rajan as well as Chetty and others find similar responses to the CARES Act using different data. See Ezra Karger and Aastha Rajan (2020), "Heterogeneity in the Marginal Propensity to Consume: Evidence from Covid-19 Stimulus Payments," Working Paper Series 2020-15 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May; revised October 2020); and Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and the Opportunity Insights Team (2020), "The Economic Impacts of COVID-19: Evidence from a New Public Database Built from Private Sector Data," (PDF) Opportunity Insights Working Paper (Cambridge, Mass.: Opportunity Insights, September). Return to text 11. The notable increase in the personal saving rate raises questions about how much these savings might enable households with income losses to smooth consumption in the months ahead and whether a burst of consumption might occur once uncertainty around the pandemic is resolved favorably. These questions hinge on the distribution of the savings. Such effects might be diminished, for instance, to the extent that a substantial amount of the savings might be held by high-income consumers, reflecting reduced opportunities to consume in-person services. Return to text 12. The new statement is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf . Information about the review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications can also be found on the Board's website, at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm . In addition, see Lael Brainard (2020), "Bringing the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy into Alignment with Longer-Run Changes in the Economy," speech delivered at "How the Fed Will Respond to the COVID-19 Recession in an Era of Low Rates and Low Inflation," an event hosted by the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 1. Return to text 13. See Ben S. Bernanke, Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February), in addition to analytical work developed as part of the framework review: Jonas Arias, Martin Bodenstein, Hess Chung, Thorsten Drautzburg, and Andrea Raffo (2020), "Alternative Strategies: How Do They Work? How Might They Help?" (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-068 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August); and James Hebden, Edward P. Herbst, Jenny Tang, Giorgio Topa, and Fabian Winkler (2020), "How Robust Are Makeup Strategies to Key Alternative Assumptions?" (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-069 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August). Return to text 14. See Don Kim, Cait Walsh, and Min Wei (2019), "Tips from TIPS: Update and Discussions," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 21). Return to text 15. See Lael Brainard (2017), "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5. Return to text 16. Stock and Watson introduced an estimate of trend inflation that assumed time-varying volatility. Cecchetti and others provided an update of that model that estimated trend inflation for core PCE prices in 2017 as about 1-1/2 percent in the past few years, compared with readings above 2 percent in the 2006–08 period (see figure 4.1, p. 23). See James H. Stock and Mark W. Watson (2007), "Why Has U.S. Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (s1, February), pp. 3–33, available at https://scholar.harvard.edu/stock/publications/why-has-inflation-become-harder-forecast . See also Stephen G. Cecchetti, Michael E. Feroli, Peter Hooper, Anil K. Kashyap, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz (2017), Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics ,(PDF) report prepared for the 2017 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3. In more recent work, Ahn and Fulton find that an index of common inflation expectations has declined over the past decade, and Rudd finds that more stable measures of trend inflation have not declined significantly over that period but, nonetheless, stand below the Committee's 2 percent objective. See Hie Joo Ahn and Chad Fulton (2020), "Index of Common Inflation Expectations," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 2); and Jeremy Rudd (2020), "Underlying Inflation: Its Measurement and Significance," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 18). Return to text 17. Staff analysis conducted during the framework review indicates that date-based guidance may not give the Committee sufficient scope to respond to incoming data, and the strategy could lose credibility if the dates are revised frequently. Date-based guidance may also run a greater risk than outcome-based guidance of inadvertently signaling a pessimistic outlook. For further discussion, see Jeffrey Campbell, Thomas B. King, Anna Orlik, and Rebecca Zarutskie (2020), "Issues regarding the Use of the Policy Rate Tool," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-070 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August). Return to text Last Update: October 21, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the National Congress of American Indians 77th Annual Convention & Marketplace (via webcast) Share Watch Live Good afternoon and thank you to President Fawn Sharp and Kevin Allis of the National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) for inviting me to join your discussion. 1 As the oldest and largest American Indian and Alaska Native organization serving the broad interests of tribal governments and communities, your voice is vitally important on economic issues affecting Indian Country. 2 We appreciate your engagement on our work to reform the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) regulations to better address credit and investment needs in Indian Country. Two years ago, I had the pleasure of visiting with the Thunder Valley Community Development Corporation on the Pine Ridge Reservation of South Dakota. We toured the major housing, small business, and community development mixed-use project, which was under construction. Despite the importance of the Thunder Valley project to the community, banks were not among the funders listed for this important project. Their absence underscores the broader challenge underserved communities such as the Pine Ridge Reservation face when they are included in only one bank's CRA assessment area. I thought about this challenge frequently as we worked on the Board's proposal to reform CRA. We recognize the importance of engaging with Indian Country to inform research and policymaking at the Federal Reserve. The Center for Indian Country Development (CICD) at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is a key resource across the Federal Reserve System in fulfilling our responsibility to Indian Country. 3 The CICD is led by Casey Lozar, who is an enrolled member of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, and the CICD's Native staff have deep expertise in community and economic development in Indian Country. I greatly value the research and thought leadership of the CICD, as well as their input on policy decisions regarding Indian Country and work to deepen our engagement with tribal communities. The COVID-19 Pandemic The COVID-19 pandemic is bringing hardship to all our communities, and the health of tribal communities is suffering disproportionately. Hospitalization rates for Native Americans are 4.3 times the rate for Whites, adjusting for age, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 4 We are thinking about those in Indian Country who have lost loved ones and those who are struggling with the virus. The COVID-19 pandemic is also causing significant economic hardship in Indian Country, affecting the many small businesses that are the backbone of tribal economies. 5 Indian Country faces significant challenges associated with "various data collection and reporting issues, such as small sample size or large margins of error," which are sometimes referred to by the term Asterisk Nation. 6 This lack of data makes it challenging to evaluate how economic developments are impacting Indian Country. To assess the real-time economic impacts of COVID-19 on Indian Country's economic experience in the COVID-19 conversation, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis conducted a series of pulse surveys with tribal governments, tribally owned enterprises, and tribal member businesses, as well as hosted meetings with tribal leaders and national organizations. 7 The surveys found that two-thirds of businesses in Indian Country saw a revenue reduction of at least 20 percent, and one in six businesses reported losing all of their revenue due to the pandemic. 8 Tribal governments have experienced similar revenue declines, with over half of tribal government respondents anticipating continued declines of more than 20 percent over the next six months. Despite this, over 60 percent of tribal small businesses reported they had not laid off or furloughed workers. 9 Maintaining these employee/employer relationships will be critical for Indian Country economic recovery, but cash-strapped small businesses are finding it increasingly challenging to maintain payrolls as the pandemic continues. Only 20 percent of tribal small businesses reported they had enough cash on hand to maintain operations beyond a three-month period. 10 Emergency lending programs aimed at providing pandemic relief, such as the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) and our Main Street Lending Program, provide critical support to small businesses, so it was extremely important to make sure they were accessible to tribal enterprises. Valuable feedback from tribal leaders and lending institutions led us to change requirements in the Main Street program to allow tribally owned enterprises to participate in Main Street lending while still continuing to provide distributions back to their tribal governments. Similarly, we expanded the PPP Liquidity Facility to include non-depository community development financial institutions (CDFIs) because of their ability to reach minority small business owners, including those in Indian Country. Financial Access The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated an already challenging landscape for financial access in Indian Country, where Native minority depository institutions (MDIs), credit unions, and CDFIs are making exceptional efforts to serve Native Americans on and off tribal lands. 11 In 2018, the Board worked with the CICD to convene Native American financial institutions on the Flathead Indian Reservation in Montana and discuss how best to collaborate to maximize the impact for their communities. We remain committed to helping these vital financial institutions provide critical financial services in their communities. Despite the significant efforts of Native banks, CDFIs, and credit unions, for many Native Americans, banking and credit access remain challenging. Over 16 percent of American Indians and Alaska Natives were unbanked in 2019, and survey research finds that only one in three Native American respondents have a strong or very strong relationship with lenders. 12 One reason for these low levels of banking relationships is a lack of proximate bank branches. Majority-Native American counties, on average, have only 3 bank branches, which is below the 9-branch average in nonmetro counties, and well below the 26-branch overall average for all counties. 13 This is exacerbated by low rates of broadband and cellular access in Indian Country, where it is reported that 28 percent of tribal lands and 48 percent of rural tribal lands are not covered by broadband. 14 Native small businesses struggle to access bank capital even during normal economic times. Native-owned small businesses also struggle to access CRA-motivated loans. From 2014 to 2018, the total dollar amount of CRA small business and small farm lending per capita in majority-Native American or Alaska Native census tracts was less than half of what it was in majority-non-Hispanic White areas. 15 These data make it clear that we still have a long way to go in improving access to banking services and capital in Indian Country. CRA Reform Let me spend a few minutes talking about how CRA reform might help address these systemic economic inequities in Indian Country. Over 45 percent of the American Indian and Alaskan Native population live in low- and moderate-income (LMI) or distressed or underserved census tracts. 16 Yet, feedback from stakeholders like yourselves indicates that many of these locations fall outside of where banks currently serve. In September, the Federal Reserve Board unanimously voted to approve an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) on the CRA. The ANPR proposes reforming CRA regulations based on ideas advanced by a broad set of stakeholders, including the NCAI. I hope you will continue to engage throughout the rest of this process. It has been 25 years since the banking agencies last substantially reformed CRA, so it is important that we get it done right. The Board's ANPR seeks to advance the law's core purpose of addressing unequal access to credit for LMI and minority communities and disinvestment in underserved communities. A modernized CRA should improve credit access and the availability of community development financing. This includes strengthening the regulations to ensure that a wide range of banking needs are being met. Another key objective the Federal Reserve has focused on in the ANPR is providing greater certainty, tailoring regulations based on bank size and business model and local conditions, and minimizing burden. For example, the ANPR proposes using a complementary set of metrics to separately evaluate retail-lending activity (like mortgage lending) and community development financing activity (like investing in affordable rental housing). Looking at these activities separately helps to ensure that we are comprehensively evaluating bank activity and that we are taking both retail and community development activity into consideration. Third, we also hope the ANPR will provide a foundation for a consistent approach that has broad support among stakeholders. Stakeholders have expressed strong support for the agencies to work together to modernize CRA. By reflecting stakeholders' views and providing a long public comment period, we believe the ANPR provides the basis for the agencies to establish a consistent approach that has broad support. As we embark on CRA reform to strengthen the law's core purpose, we have a unique opportunity to design a regulation that better addresses the needs of individuals and communities in Indian Country. There are several proposals in the ANPR that I would like to highlight that advance that goal. First, we have specific proposals in the ANPR that would allow banks to receive credit for eligible CRA activities in Indian Country, even when those activities are outside of a bank's assessment area(s). For instance, the ANPR proposes providing CRA credit for retail lending activity like mortgage lending or small business lending in Indian Country, even when it takes place outside of CRA assessment areas. 17 For example, under the ANPR's proposals, a mortgage, small business, small farm, or consumer loan made by a bank on the Flathead Indian Reservation in Montana could be qualified as part of that bank's overall rating, even without the loan being within the assessment area of any bank. In addition, the ANPR proposes expanding consideration of CRA community development activities to specific areas of need outside of a bank's assessment area(s), with Indian Country being one of the proposed designations. As a result, the Board's proposal makes clear that a bank in any part of the country could receive credit for community development activities in Indian Country. Banks could receive credit for investments in affordable rental housing, broadband expansion, or building community and elder centers in rural areas and other areas of persistent economic distress. We hope that this proposal responds to stakeholders' feedback emphasizing the critical importance of community development in banking deserts, and we look forward to feedback on this during the comment period. The Board understands that broadening eligibility of CRA activities in Indian Country beyond assessment areas is only part of what is required to address structural economic inequities. We are particularly mindful of the importance of community voice on community development projects, especially in Indian Country. Given this, the ANPR seeks feedback on how best to incorporate government or tribal planning in qualifying community development consideration for revitalization and stabilization projects. This is critically important to increase banks' certainty that they will receive CRA credit when they make impactful investments that have the support of tribal governments and leaders, and to increase certainty about how these activities qualify for CRA credit. Second, the ANPR proposes to encourage and reward banks for activities that are responsive to community needs, particularly in harder to serve areas. The ANPR proposes the use of impact scores for community development activities as a way to ensure that performance evaluations adequately reflect the relative importance of loans and investments within communities. Under the proposed approach, examinations would assess the impact of a bank's community development activities, including those in Indian Country. We hope that this approach will encourage banks to extend additional CRA activities to areas with unmet needs, such as in Indian Country. The ANPR also proposes clear steps to ensure that eligible activities taking place outside of assessment areas are adequately reflected in a bank's CRA ratings. Third, the ANPR contains several proposals that better support mission-focused partners, including those working in Indian Country, to address challenges in credit access and wealth building. Although a significant portion of household wealth is held through homeownership for the U.S. overall, buying a home on trust land can be a complicated transaction. 18 Section 184 Indian Home Loan Guarantee Program loans from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) are designed to help Native Americans purchase homes, but the required application process can require special expertise. 19 Many Native MDIs have developed the requisite Section 184 expertise and are experienced in working with Native Americans across the country to purchase homes on and off tribal lands. For example, the Chickasaw Community Bank in Oklahoma, which is both an MDI and a CDFI, has a mission of helping Native Americans around the country achieve homeownership and is one of the nation's largest HUD Section 184 lenders. 20 The ANPR includes several provisions to support MDIs like Chickasaw Community Bank. Activities with MDIs can receive credit nationwide even when they take place outside of assessment areas, and the ANPR asks for feedback on whether these activities with MDIs should be a potential pathway to an outstanding rating. In an effort to support mutually beneficial partnerships between MDIs, the ANPR also would provide credit for MDIs and women-owned financial institutions investing in other MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions, as well as in their own institutions. We believe these and other ideas to support MDIs can help provide incentives for majority-owned institutions to capitalize and to partner with these institutions, which will ultimately support more equitable financial access to low-income and minority consumers and communities. In addition, the Federal Reserve has consistently heard that bank partnerships with experienced CDFIs can play an important role in helping banks more effectively make Indian Country loans and investments. During the pandemic, Native CDFIs have played an outsized role in supporting tribal businesses and homeowners, providing financial counseling, or extending loan terms for borrowers. For example, Lakota Funds in South Dakota, led by Tawney Brunsch, helped 37 businesses access more than $100,000 in COVID-19 emergency relief funds and provided more than $120,000 in small grants to Native ranchers, businesses, and homeowners. 21 Despite their valuable work, Native CDFIs face substantial funding gaps. 22 To encourage bank partnerships that advance financial inclusion and address unmet credit needs, the ANPR seeks feedback on extending to CDFIs the status that is extended to MDIs, women-owned financial institutions, and low-income credit unions. This approach would effectively give banks CRA consideration for loans, investments, or services in conjunction with a CDFI anywhere in the country. We look forward to feedback on this potential approach, including the role this could play in Indian Country. In short, we recognize the challenges you face are great and we want to ensure CRA reform helps you to improve credit access and financial inclusion in tribal communities. I am hopeful that the changes the Federal Reserve is considering will help spur new partnerships and encourage greater bank investment for tribal communities that have had inequitable access to financial services for too long. We need your input on these proposals and we are ready to listen. Over the next three months, the Federal Reserve System will host CRA ANPR outreach meetings and listening sessions around the country, including in Indian Country. We encourage your feedback as part of these events, in addition to submitting written comments by the deadline of February 16, 2021. We thank you for your engagement thus far and look forward to hearing more from you and your members through the rulemaking process. 1. I am grateful to Amanda Roberts and Matthew Lambert of the Federal Reserve Board and Casey Lozar of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See http://www.ncai.org/about-ncai . Return to text 3. See https://www.minneapolisfed.org/indiancountry . Return to text 4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), COVIDView (Atlanta: CDC, November 5, 2020). Return to text 5. https://www.minneapolisfed.org/article/2020/indian-country-small-businesses-face-strong-headwinds-in-covid-19-recovery . September 8, 2020. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Return to text 6. "American Indians and Alaska Natives may be described as the 'Asterisk Nation' because an asterisk, instead of data point, is often used in data displays when reporting racial and ethnic data," according to the NCAI Policy Research Center (2020), " The Asterisk Nation ," 2020. Return to text 7. See Donna Feir, Chris James, Casey Lozar, and Ryan Nunn, " Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds in COVID-19 Recovery ," September 8, 2020; Casey Lozar, Donna Feir, and James Robert Columbe, " COVID-19: A Deep Economic Crisis in Indian Country ," May 13, 2020; and Casey Lozar, Donna Feir, and James Robert Columbe, " COVID-19 and Indian Country: Early Snapshot Reveals Disproportionate Economic Exposure and Uncertainty ," April 10, 2020. Return to text 8. Feir, "Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds." Return to text 9. Feir, "Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds." Return to text 10. Feir, "Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds." Return to text 11. The Minneapolis Federal Reserve's Center for Indian Country Development website has an interactive map of banks and credit unions owned by, and CDFIs primarily serving, American Indian, Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian individuals and communities at https://www.minneapolisfed.org/indiancountry/resources/mapping-native-banks . Return to text 12. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), " How America Banks: Household Use of Banking and Financial Services (PDF) ," 2019 FDIC Survey (Washington: FDIC, October 2020); and Feir, "Indian Country Small Businesses Face Strong Headwinds." Return to text 13. Information calculated using Summary of Deposits (SoD) 2020. Note that not all counties, especially some with high Native American populations, do not exist in the SoD dataset. Return to text 14. Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 2020 Broadband Deployment Report (PDF) (Washington: FCC, April 24, 2020). Return to text 15. Federal Reserve Board staff analyzed annually reported CRA Small Business and Small Farm loan data submitted by banks at the tract level and combined it with demographic data from the American Community Survey 2018 5-Year Survey. Return to text 16. Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Online Census Data System 2018 and U.S. Census Bureau American Community Survey 2014-2018. A tract is designated as distressed if it is a nonmetropolitan middle-income tract that meets one or more of the following triggers: (1) an unemployment rate of at least 1.5 times the national average; (2) a poverty rate of 20 percent or more; or (3) a population loss of 10 percent or more between the previous and most recent decennial census or a net migration loss of 5 percent or more over the five-year period preceding the most recent census. A tract is designated as underserved if it is a nonmetropolitan middle-income tract that meets criteria for population size, density, and dispersion that indicate the area's population is sufficiently small, thin, and distant from a population center that the tract is likely to have difficulty financing the fixed costs of meeting essential community needs. A nonmetropolitan middle-income tract is defined as a tract with median family income of more than 80 percent or less than or equal to 120 percent compared to a statewide nonmetropolitan area median family income. Return to text 17. Under the approach proposed in the ANPR, the qualitative aspects of a bank's performance would include a review of any retail activity conducted in Indian Country, even when outside of a bank's assessment area(s), as long as a bank also satisfies the needs of its own assessment area(s). Return to text 18. Joshua H. Gallin, Raven Molloy, Eric Nielsen, Paul Smith, and Kamila Sommer (2018). " Measuring Aggregate Housing Wealth: New Insights from Machine Learning (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-064 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July 26, 2019). Return to text 19. For more on the Section 184 Indian Home Loan Guarantee Program, see https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_indian_housing/ih/homeownership/184 . Return to text 20. See https://www.ccb.bank/indian-country/home-loans . Return to text 21. Lakota Funds data and conversations with Lakota Funds leadership. Return to text 22. Michou Kokodoko, " Findings from the 2017 Native CDFI Survey: Industry Opportunities and Limitations ," Center for Indian Country Development Working Paper 2017-04, November 28, 2017. Return to text Last Update: November 10, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At "Exploring Careers in Economics," Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. (via webcast) Share Watch Live It is a pleasure to be here today to talk about the future of economics with the next generation of economists who will shape it. I hope you will take away from what you hear today that a rigorous grounding in economic analysis can help you succeed in whatever field you choose. I will share a few thoughts on what economics can do for you and what you can do for the field of economics. 1 Let me start with what economics can do for you. Just as there are a variety of reasons that people decide to pursue economics, so too there are many career fields where a degree in economics can be a powerful enabler. I have to admit I had some reservations that led me not to major in economics as an undergraduate. That changed during my first job out of college, when I recognized that economics can provide powerful tools to analyze and design programs to improve opportunities and financial security for workers and their families. Economics can give you a powerful framework to explore the questions that matter most to you. Let me give a few examples of some important questions and the economic practitioners who made a big impact in addressing them. So here's one: How can we help protect working women and men and their families from the financial devastation of job loss due to forces beyond their control? Frances Perkins first began thinking about that question as a young White girl in the manufacturing hub of Worcester, Massachusetts in the 1880s. When Frances asked her father why nice people could fall into poverty, he replied that this was a question little girls should not concern themselves with. Fortunately, Frances did not listen to him. In college, Perkins took an economics class where she started exploring the impact of rapid industrialization on the lives of working people. Her professor encouraged students to visit local factories to see firsthand some of the brutal working conditions facing women and children. That early field research sparked Perkins' determination to bring about improved working conditions and established her careful attention to gathering data. 2 Perkins went on to become a key author of the New Deal, and served as Labor Secretary for a record 12 years, despite considerable opposition to the appointment of the first woman Cabinet secretary. She persuaded Roosevelt to put in place a system of unemployment insurance and built the Labor Department's capability to compile the necessary employment statistics. She worked hard to secure legislation codifying core labor rights, and she played a key role in designing and implementing Social Security. 3 As Perkins was advocating for policies to improve working conditions facing women and children, another young economist was gathering evidence on the lives of Black working people. In her doctoral dissertation, Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander examined the living standards of Black families who were migrating to Philadelphia to meet the demand for labor brought about by World War I. 4 Alexander would become the first Black American to earn a PhD in economics. She would subsequently become the first woman to receive a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania because of the barriers she encountered in the field of economics. Black workers were fleeing the South, Alexander explained in her dissertation, because of poor wages, segregation, lynching and disenfranchisement, seeking higher wages, better education, "the ballot," and "greater justice" in the North. And what did those Black workers migrating to Philadelphia find? Alexander's path-breaking research showed that one-third of Black families earned less than what she defined and calculated to be a fair standard of living. About one-quarter of the Black families she studied were underfed. Keep in mind Alexander wrote this in 1921, almost 50 years before the U.S. government adopted a formal definition of the poverty level. Alexander decried the systemic discrimination in housing, education, and so much more that held Black people back in Philadelphia. And yet, Alexander was optimistic that Black workers moving North for better paying jobs would eventually attain the education and standard of living of what she called the "Great American Middle Class." Since that time, a college degree has become more important for financial security. That raises the vitally important question of how to make college more affordable for low-income students. It turns out Lois Dickson Rice spent much of her career addressing that question. As the daughter of a janitor and a maid determined to send their five children to college, Rice was inspired by her parents' dedication to education. 5 Denied an alumni club state scholarship because she was Black, Lois, with the help of her high school teachers, secured a better scholarship directly from Radcliffe. 6 From there, she went on to a career at the College Board, becoming widely known as the "mother of the Pell grant." Originally called the Basic Educational Opportunity Grant, over almost half a century later, the program Rice designed and her tireless work to make college accessible to all, have helped around 200 million Americans afford a college education. 7 Economics can also provide powerful answers to questions such as, "What is the cost of discrimination?" This question was explored extensively by Andrew Brimmer, a child of sharecroppers who earned his PhD in economics at Harvard. Brimmer served with great distinction as the first Black governor of the Federal Reserve Board from 1966 to 1974, where he contributed to decision-making on monetary policy, and went on to publish research on systemic risk in capital markets and the Fed's lender of last resort function. 8 Brimmer estimated that discrimination cost the U.S. economy 3.8 percent of gross domestic product in 1993. 9 In case you are wondering about the cost in today's economy, Dana Peterson, who is the chief economist of the Conference Board and served as a research assistant at the Federal Reserve Board, estimated closing racial gaps could add roughly $5 trillion to the economy over the next five years. 10 I wanted to share these examples of pathbreaking economic scholar-practitioners who overcame daunting barriers to make important contributions on economic questions that touch the lives of working people all around our country. We created Exploring Careers in Economics to help you answer the question of whether economics is right for you. Today you will hear from my colleagues about why they chose economics, and you will learn about the many rewarding career opportunities available to you. Through our partnership with Howard University, you will see how students there are working with our economists to take a hands-on approach to research. 11 I want to thank our colleagues in Federal Reserve Education for cohosting and helping to make this event available to students, educators, and groups across the nation. 12 So that should give you a sense of what economics can do for you. What can you do for economics? You can bring your diverse backgrounds and life experiences and unique talents and interesting questions to strengthen the study and practice of economics. Economics is a powerful field that influences public policy and the economic opportunities facing all Americans. We should not be satisfied until the people in our field and those sitting around every economic decisionmaking table represent America in all its strength and diversity. A growing body of research and evidence makes clear that the quality of the economics profession and its contribution to society will be greater when it reflects a broader range of people and perspectives. Research shows that greater diversity results in better outcomes—it broadens the range of ideas and perspectives brought to bear on solving problems, and it brings important insights to the analysis of our economy. As Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Rouse have documented, microeconomic experiments and other research demonstrate the benefits of diversity for group deliberations and decisionmaking. For instance, one well-known experiment found that racially diverse groups of students outperformed other groups in solving problems, and another found similar benefits from gender diversity. 13 A review of 2.5 million research papers across the sciences found that those written by ethnically diverse research teams received more citations and had a greater impact than papers by authors with the same ethnicity. 14 It is notable that when Congress established the Federal Reserve System, it took great care to ensure that there would be a diversity of perspectives around the decisionmaking table with regard to regional representation. That is why we have 12 Reserve Bank Districts represented on the Federal Open Market Committee. But we have not yet lived up to that standard on racial and ethnic diversity. For instance, it was not until 2017, more than 100 years after the creation of the Federal Reserve, that the first African American, Raphael Bostic, was chosen to lead a Reserve Bank. We need to address the stubbornly persistent gap in the awarding of economics degrees. 15 Among U.S. citizens and permanent residents earning a doctorate in economics from U.S. universities, the representation of those identifying as Black, Hispanic, or Native American was 10 percent in 2018. The share of women overall obtaining a doctorate in economics was slightly above 30 percent in 2018, little changed from 1994. By contrast, Blacks and Hispanics make up 13 percent of medical students and women overall make up just over half of all medical students in the country. 16 Economics also lags behind law as well as science and engineering in the share of underrepresented minorities and women receiving advanced degrees. But the gap starts at the undergraduate level, as highlighted by Rhonda Sharpe. 17 From 2011 to 2015, Black women accounted for only 1.5 percent of undergraduate economics degrees, compared with their 6.2 percent share of all undergraduate degrees. 18 Diversity and inclusion need to be priorities for every economics department around the country—and for the think tanks, governments, businesses, and many other organizations that train and employ economists. Many of my colleagues in economics and education are working hard to make progress, including by developing programs to support and mentor diverse talent interested in this consequential discipline. We need to make it a national goal to catch up to medicine, science, engineering, and other fields in developing robust programs, conducting ongoing evaluation, and constantly adapting to improve the inclusivity of economics and our ability to recruit and retain diverse talent. We want to be known within the profession as a place where minorities and women are confident they have the opportunity to make an impact and feel they are respected and heard by leadership. We must continue to make progress towards a more just society, and I am hopeful that economists will contribute to that progress. Studying economics will provide you with a powerful, intellectual framework for asking and answering questions that matter to you. It will enable you to influence people's lives for the better. It will enable you to craft policy to change our world. It will enable you to teach and help shape the next generation. It will enable you to pursue a range of opportunities, not just in economics, but also in business, finance, policy, and nonprofits. I wish you good luck and success in your studies, and I trust that I will soon be reading about the questions—and answers—that matter most to you. 1. I want to thank Darren Gersh, Kurt Lewis, and Nancy Riley for their assistance in preparing this text. Return to text 2. George Martin, Madam Secretary: Frances Perkins (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1976). See also https://francesperkinscenter.org/life-new/ . Return to text 3. Martin, Madam Secretary: Frances Perkins . Return to text 4. Sadie Tanner Mossell, "The Standard of Living Among One Hundred Negro Migrant Families in Philadelphia," The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 98 (November 1921): 173-218. Return to text 5. Sam Roberts, "Lois Dickson Rice, Trailblazing Executive Behind Pell Grants, Dies at 83," The New York Times , January 18, 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/18/us/lois-dickson-rice-dead-pell-grants.html. Return to text 6. Susan Rice, Tough Love: My Story of the Things Worth Fighting For (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2019). Return to text 7. Lois Fitt Rice and David Mundel, " The Impact of Increases in Pell Grant Awards on College-going among Lower Income Youth ," (Washington: The Brookings Institution, November 2008). See also https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R45418.pdf and https://blog.ed.gov/2012/06/celebrating-success-40-years-of-pell-grants/ . Return to text 8. Andrew F. Brimmer (1984), "The Federal Reserve as Lender of Last Resort: The Containment of Systemic Risk," a paper presented before a joint session of the American Economic Association and the Eastern Economic Association, Dallas, Tex., December 19, pp. 35–40; and Andrew Brimmer (1989), "Distinguished Lecture on Economics in Government: Central Banking and Systemic Risks in Capital Markets." Journal of Economic Perspectives , vol. 3, number 2, pp 3-16. Return to text 9. Thomas D Boston, A Different Vision: African American Economic Thought, Volume 1 (Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 1997). Return to text 10. Dana M. Peterson and Catherine L. Mann, "Closing the Racial Inequality Gaps," Citi Global Perspectives & Solutions , September 2020, https://www.citivelocity.com/citigps/closing-the-racial-inequality-gaps/. Return to text 11. For more on the Board's partnership with Howard University Department of Economics see: https://newsroom.howard.edu/newsroom/article/13256/howard-university-host-five-year-program-increase-diversity-economist-pipeline Return to text 12. Federal Reserve Education (FRE) offers free classroom ready online resources for students from kindergarten to college. See https://www.federalreserveeducation.org/ . Return to text 13. Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse, " Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem ," Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (Fall 2016): 221-42. Return to text 14. Richard B. Freeman and Wei Huang, "Collaborating with People Like Me: Ethnic Coauthorship within the United States." Journal of Labor Economics , 33(S1), pp 289-318. Return to text 15. Lael Brainard, " Strengthening Diversity in Economics " (speech at the Conference for the 2017 Summer Training and Scholarship Program, East Lansing, MI, July 28, 2017). Return to text 16. See https://www.aamc.org/news-insights/press-releases/majority-us-medical-students-are-women-new-data-show . Return to text 17. Rhonda Vonshay Sharpe, " We've to Build the Pipeline. What's the Problem? What's Next? The Remix ," The Review of Black Political Economy , January 15, 2019. Return to text 18. Amanda Bayer and David Wilcox, " The Unequal Distribution of Economic Education: A Report on the Race, Ethnicity, and Gender of Economics Majors at U.S. Colleges and Universities (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-105 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October, 2017). Return to text Related Content Video of Governor Brainard's speech Exploring Careers in Economics - Fall 2020 Last Update: November 17, 2020 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At The Chicago Community Trust, Chicago, Illinois Share Good morning. I want to thank Dr. Helene Gayle for inviting me to join this conversation, along with the staff, grantees, and partners of the Chicago Community Trust and President Charlie Evans of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. I appreciate the opportunity to discuss economic inclusion and the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and learn more about the Trust's work with its partners in Chicago. 1 The effect of COVID-19 has underscored the importance and urgency of your work. This year the Chicago Community COVID-19 Response Fund has helped many of the nonprofits and communities hardest hit by the pandemic, and I know you have been thinking critically about doing this work in a way that supports an equitable recovery for Black and Latinx communities. 2 I commend the Trust for your leadership on these principles. The disproportionate effects of the pandemic on low-income and minority households and the importance of an equitable recovery are also a key focus of the Federal Reserve. While creating hardship for all, the pandemic has inflicted disproportionate economic pain on vulnerable businesses, sectors, and demographic groups, which risks entrenching a K-shaped recovery that is weaker overall. Small businesses in consumer-facing sectors, along with many low-income workers, women workers, and Black and Hispanic workers, are at a precarious stage of the pandemic. Even as we are buoyed by news that effective vaccines may be widely available by next summer, COVID case counts are resurgent, and many low- and moderate-income households are facing the exhaustion of unemployment benefits, the depletion of savings from CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) programs, and the fear that eviction moratoriums and forbearance for mortgages and student loans will soon end. While the Paycheck Protection Program provided some relief to many small businesses earlier in the year, that sector remains under pressure, and many small businesses in sectors hit hard by virus restrictions are facing dwindling cash buffers. In addition, states and localities are confronting difficult choices as they respond to increased needs in the face of reduced revenues. The combination of highly supportive fiscal policy and monetary policy was critical in driving the initial strong bounceback from the first wave of the pandemic. 3 Similarly today, it is vitally important to provide a lifeline to hard-hit households and businesses facing the harsh reality of a resurgent COVID second wave as a bridge to the time an effective vaccine will be widely available. The Federal Reserve is committed to providing sustained accommodation through its forward rate guidance and continued asset purchases to achieve our maximum employment and 2 percent average inflation goals. In parallel, additional fiscal support is essential to bridge past COVID's second wave in order to avoid labor market scarring, reductions in crucial state and local services, and bankruptcies. Such additional support is critical to turn this K-shaped recovery into a broad-based and inclusive recovery that is stronger overall. As we support a broad-based and inclusive recovery, the Board is focused on updating and strengthening CRA regulations to better meet their core purpose. You know the associated challenges well, given the Trust's mission to close the racial and ethnic wealth gap and the role you play in fostering opportunity and inclusion in communities across Chicago. The CRA was enacted in response to inequities in access to credit for communities that were redlined as a result of discriminatory government policies and market practices. Now, in light of the persistence of systemic credit disparities and in response to changes in the banking landscape, it is time to strengthen and modernize the CRA. In September, we proposed a framework for reforming the CRA that would advance the following principles. 4 First and foremost, the CRA should focus on addressing credit disparities and financial inclusion in low- and moderate-income and minority communities to fulfill its core purpose. One way our proposal addresses this first principle is by emphasizing minority depository institutions and community development finance institutions, and we are continuing to look for more ways to achieve this goal. Our proposal also makes a special effort to address the challenges of underserved rural communities. A related goal is to ensure that the CRA encourages banks to meet the broad spectrum of credit needs of communities. Our proposal considers how to evaluate banks across a number of areas, such as a bank's retail lending, which includes their home mortgages and small business loans. It also focuses on essential banking products and services like low-cost checking accounts. Community development activities are another point of emphasis, including financing for affordable housing and other needs, or volunteer activities, such as financial counseling, and providing clearer and stronger incentives to invest in the areas of need that lie outside of existing branch-based assessment areas. Another key objective is to provide greater certainty; tailor regulations based on local community needs, bank size, and business model; and minimize burden. Ultimately, we hope that our proposal provides a foundation for the three banking agencies to converge on a consistent approach that has broad support among stakeholders. The next step for us is to continue to gather feedback on our proposal from a wide range of stakeholders, including local communities. In addition to participating in conversations like this one today, we hope to receive as many comments as possible through our formal comment process, which has a deadline of February 16, 2021. We value this feedback tremendously, and our proposal includes specific questions where we are especially interested in input. Given the expertise and leadership of the Trust on racial equity, we will be particularly interested in your comments on the second question in our proposal: "In considering how the CRA's history and purpose relate to the nation's current challenges, how can we strengthen the CRA to address ongoing systemic inequity in credit access for minority individuals and communities?" I thank you for your valuable engagement in this process thus far and look forward to hearing your ideas today and in the months to come. With your continued engagement, I am confident we can come together on a stronger approach to the CRA that will benefit communities across the country. 1. I am grateful to Taz George of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. For more information, see the Chicago Community Trust's webpage " Chicago Community COVID-19 Response Fund ." Return to text 3. Recent research indicates that the government's response offset what could have been a surge in income poverty. Han, Meyer, and Sullivan (2020) found that income poverty declined about 1.5 percentage points, and that government programs, including the regular unemployment insurance program, the expanded unemployment insurance programs, and the Economic Impact Payments, account for more than the entire decline in poverty, which would have risen over 2.5 percentage points in the absence of these programs. See Jeehoon Han, Bruce D. Meyer, and James X. Sullivan (2020), " Income and Poverty in the COVID-19 Pandemic ," NBER Working Paper Series 27729 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August). Return to text 4. 85 FR 66410 (October 19, 2020), " Community Reinvestment Act: Advance notice of proposed rulemaking and request for comment (PDF) ." Return to text Last Update: December 02, 2020 Back to Top
