1 The Outlook for Inflation and Inflation Expectations Jeffrey M. Lacker President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Banque de France Paris, France March 21, 2016 Good morning. Thank you for the invitation to speak with you. I’d like to discuss the outlook for inflation in the U.S., and in particular how that outlook is informed by measures of inflation expectations. Before I say any more, I should note that the views I express are my own and not necessarily the views of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.1 In the United States, inflation has been running persistently below the 2 percent target established by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC). The price index for Personal Consumption Expenditures, the methodologically preferred measure, rose 1.3 percent over the 12 months ending in January, the highest year-over-year change in 15 months. The last time this measure of inflation was at or above 2 percent was in April 2012. As is always the case with a single month’s numbers, there were some special factors at play in January. Nevertheless, the January inflation numbers were firmer than expected and firmer than we have been accustomed to seeing in the last couple of years. Despite low recent inflation readings, FOMC participants generally expect that inflation will rise back toward 2 percent over the medium term, as was noted in the most recent Monetary Policy Report the Board of Governors prepared for Congress. 2 But it is not just the Committee’s expectations that matter. We must also pay attention to — and try to measure — what the public expects the path of inflation will be. The Importance of Expectations Why does it matter what the public thinks about expected inflation? Because expectations about future inflation affect current inflation. One way to understand this is to think about the value of money, that is, the amount of goods that can be bought with a given number of dollars. If people expect inflation to erode the future value of money, they will rationally place a lower value on money today. This principle applies equally well to the price-setting behavior of firms. If a firm expects the general level of prices to rise by 3 percent over the coming year, it will take into account the expected increase in the costs of inputs and the prices of substitutes when setting its own prices today. If you multiply that across all firms in an economy, expected inflation becomes actual inflation. In the short term, temporary shocks such as changes in energy prices or exchange rates can cause inflation to rise or fall for a time. But well-anchored expectations will tend to draw inflation back as those shocks dissipate. Keeping expectations anchored is one reason the FOMC clearly communicates its intentions via its “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy 2 Strategy,” which was first adopted in 2012 and amended at the beginning of this year, and via its statements after each meeting.3 Economists and policymakers have not always recognized the importance of expectations — this was a lesson learned at great cost during the 1960s and 1970s, a period known as the “Great Inflation.” Core PCE inflation increased from around 1.5 percent in the mid-1960s to more than 10 percent in the mid-1970s. It decreased slightly toward the end of that decade, but then rose again to nearly 10 percent in 1980.4 Today, the Great Inflation is largely understood to be the result of poor monetary policy. 5 And perhaps the greatest mistake on the part of policymakers was that they took inflation expectations as given. In the standard policy framework of the time, this suggested there was a simple trade- off between a lower unemployment rate and a higher inflation rate. But pioneering independent work by economists (and eventual Nobel laureates) Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps suggested that, in fact, this trade-off would only be true in the short term; over time, people would come to expect higher inflation, and unemployment would return to its “natural” rate, leaving behind a persistently higher actual inflation rate.6 The “stagflation” of the 1970s, when both inflation and unemployment rose, confirmed the predictions of Friedman and Phelps. Paul Volcker became chair of the FOMC in 1979, and the pivotal challenge the Committee faced in bringing down inflation was the Fed’s “imperfect credibility,” that is, the fact that the public expected high inflation to continue. 7 But the Volcker FOMC soon proved that the Fed was committed to bringing inflation under control, even in the face of public outrage about high interest rates and a severe recession. By the end of 1982, inflation was back under 5 percent. Since the Volcker era, monetary policymakers have worked hard to maintain the credibility the Fed established during that time. 8 In the spring of 1994, for example, despite the fact that economic conditions remained relatively weak following the recession of 1990-91, the FOMC under Chairman Greenspan surprised markets and began raising its target for the federal funds rate. While this generated some volatility in bond markets for a time, core inflation fell to about 2 percent and remained there until 2008. In fact, the stability of inflation around 2 percent led many people to believe that the Fed had an implicit inflation target. In 2012, the Committee formally announced a goal of 2 percent inflation, and it has reaffirmed that target every year since. After rising in early 2008, the inflation rate began to decline sharply in the second half of that year. Given the severity of the accompanying contraction in economic activity, many observers were concerned about the possibility of sustained deflation. Year-over-year core inflation did fall below 1 percent for two months in 2009, but the decline was much smaller and much less persistent than widely used macroeconomic models predicted based on the decline in real activity. One likely explanation for the relative stability of inflation during this time is the stability of the public’s expectations about future inflation — a stability that in part must have reflected the Fed’s credibility. 9 3 Measuring Expectations I just mentioned the stability of the public’s expectations about inflation. But how do we find out what people expect inflation to be? One way is to ask them. There are several respected surveys of expected inflation. Two surveys of economists, the Livingston Survey and the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), are conducted by the Philadelphia Fed. The Livingston Survey got its start in 1946 when the late Joseph Livingston, then a columnist for the Philadelphia Record, decided to ask economists about their forecasts of economic variables. The Philadelphia Fed took over the survey after Livingston’s death in 1989. The SPF was first conducted by the American Statistical Association and the National Bureau of Economic Research in 1968 and transferred to the Philadelphia Fed in 1990. There are also two widely cited surveys of consumers that ask about inflation expectations. One, conducted by the University of Michigan, started in 1946. In 2014, the New York Fed launched the Survey of Consumer Expectations, which was designed to address several methodological issues in the design of other surveys. These four surveys differ in the survey samples, the questions asked, and the time horizons specified, but currently they all seem to be telling the same basic story: Inflation expectations have been lower of late but are not inconsistent with the Fed’s goal of 2 percent over the longer term. For example, in the February Michigan survey, which asks consumers how much they expect prices to rise (rather than about a specific measure of inflation), the median respondent expected an increase of 2.5 percent over the next year, down from 2.8 percent in February of last year. The median expected inflation rate over the next five years was also 2.5 percent. In the most recent Survey of Professional Forecasters, respondents on average expected headline PCE inflation of 1.3 percent in 2016, down from 1.8 percent in the last survey, but expectations for 2017 were unchanged at 1.9 percent. Over the next 10 years, respondents on average expected inflation of 1.97 percent per year. Survey measures have both pros and cons. For example, a survey of professional forecasters can be thought of as aggregating across a wide range of modelling methodologies and judgmental approaches to forecasting. In that sense, such a survey can take advantage of a “wisdom of crowds" phenomenon, in which aggregated assessments outperform any one individual’s assessment. On the other hand, consumer survey participants might be overly influenced by the things they see every day, such as gas prices, and may be unfamiliar with the adjustments statisticians make for changes in the quality of goods and services purchased. This might explain why expected inflation in such surveys typically runs significantly higher than actual realized inflation. Still, some research suggests that surveys are the most accurate predictor of future inflation, at least in the short term. 10 One drawback of surveys is that they’re just words. Economists generally place more stock in what people do — particularly what they spend — than in what they say. That ’s the rationale behind Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), which the Treasury Department first auctioned in 1997. 11 4 TIPS, which are issued in terms of five, 10, and 30 years, are bonds whose payments to investors adjust to compensate for changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI), a measure of inflation calculated by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The principal value of TIPS is tied to the CPI: When the CPI rises, the principal value increases. When the CPI falls, so does the principal value. When TIPS reach maturity, investors receive either the inflation-adjusted principal or the original par value, whichever is greater. In this way, the principal value of the bond is protected from inflation, although it is not diminished by deflation.12 A conventional Treasury bond, whatever the maturity, pays investors a nominal yield that can be thought of as consisting of two components: the real rate of interest and an implicit compensation for inflation over the maturity of the bond. The TIPS yield presumably approximates the real interest rate component, so the difference between a TIPS yield and the yield on a traditional Treasury security of the same maturity is “inflation compensation” — in other words, the additional yield investors require to be willing to accept the exposure to inflation associated with Treasury securities. This is also referred to as the “breakeven” inflation rate, meaning the rate at which investors would be indifferent between TIPS and traditional Treasury securities. Inflation compensation is not the same as expected inflation, however. The differential between the yield on inflation-protected securities and traditional Treasury securities compensates both for expected inflation and for inflation risk, meaning the chance that inflation will differ significantly from what investors expect on average. In addition, the yield on TIPS includes a liquidity premium since the market isn’t as large as the market for traditional Treasury securities, and thus trading is not as liquid. These risk and liquidity premia can cause inflation compensation to either understate or overstate expected inflation. Economists have conducted extensive research to try to extract measures of inflation expectations from inflation compensation. The general approach is to estimate an asset pricing equation that identifies the risk premia and liquidity premia embedded in asset yields. With these estimates, one can then identify the portion of the spread between nominal and indexed bonds that represents expected inflation. 13 Of course, it’s important to remember that this is a relatively new literature, and the results are highly sensitive to the model’s auxiliary assumptions. With that caveat in mind, what do TIPS-based measures of inflation expectations currently tell us? Similar to survey measures, inflation compensation has been lower of late — the 10- year breakeven fell from about 1.9 percent in the middle of last year to about 1.2 percent in mid- February, though it has risen since then to nearly 1.6 percent. But research suggests that much of this decline was actually the result of changes in liquidity and risk premia rather than declines in expected inflation. For example, the Cleveland Fed has developed a model that accounts for these premia, and their most recent estimate of 10-year expected inflation is 1.65 percent. 14 This measure has been relatively unchanged for the past year. In addition, as is the case with survey measures, an estimate of expected inflation over a 10-year horizon puts greater weight on expected near-term inflation than on expectations for years further out. Nearly everyone expects inflation to run below the Fed’s 2 percent target in the near 5 term due to the effects of recent movements in oil prices and the value of the dollar. So an estimate slightly below 2 percent for a full 10 years is not inconsistent with the expectation that inflation will move back to the Fed’s target. Conclusion Inflation has been held down recently by two factors, the falling price of oil and the rising value of the dollar. But neither factor is likely to depress inflation indefinitely. After the price of oil bottoms out, I would expect to see headline inflation move significantly higher. And after the value of the dollar ultimately tops out, core inflation should move back toward 2 percent. Although recent declines in inflation compensation do give me some pause, I think the evidence indicates that inflation expectations (as opposed to inflation compensation) remain well- anchored. Therefore, I am reasonably confident that, barring subsequent shocks, inflation will move back to the FOMC’s 2 percent objective over the medium term. Of course, the FOMC will continue to closely monitor both inflation and inflation expectations, and if necessary, it will respond appropriately. 1 I am grateful to Jessie Romero and John Weinberg for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Monetary Policy Report,” February 10, 2016. 3 Federal Open Market Committee, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” January 26, 2016. 4 Headline PCE inflation increased about 1 percentage point more than core PCE inflation. 5 For more on the Great Inflation, visit www.federalreservehistory.gov. 6 See Milton Friedman, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review, March 1968, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 1–17; and Edmund S. Phelps, “Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Employment over Time,” Economica, New Series, August, 1967, vol. 34, no. 135, pp. 254–281. 7 Marvin Goodfriend and Robert G. King, “The Incredible Volcker Disinflation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, July 2005, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 981-1015. 8 For more on the evolution of monetary policy, see Marvin Goodfriend, “Monetary Policy Comes of Age,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, Winter 1997, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 1-22. 9 Ben S. Bernanke, “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” Speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 27, 2010. 10 Andrew Ang, Geert Bekaert, and Min Wei, “Do Macro Variables, Asset Markets, or Surveys Forecast Inflation Better?” Journal of Monetary Economics, May 2007, vol. 54, no. 4, pp.1163-1212. 11 Richmond Fed economist Robert Hetzel was an early advocate of inflation-indexed securities as an aid to monetary policy in the United States. (The United Kingdom began issuing inflation -indexed bonds in 1981.) For example, see Robert Hetzel, “Indexed Bonds as an Aid to Monetary Policy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, January/February 1992, pp. 13-23; and “A Better Way to Fight Inflation,” Wall Street Journal, April 25, 1991. 12 For a non-technical overview of TIPS, see Simon Kwan, “Inflation Expectations: How the Market Speaks,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic Letter, no. 2005-25, October 3, 2005. 13 For example, see Stefania D’Amico, Don Kim, and Min Wei, “Tips from TIPS: The Informational Content of Treasury Inflation Protected Securities,” Federal Reserve Board, Finance and Economics Discussion Series Working Paper no. 2014-24, January 31, 2014; and Michael Abrahams, Tobias Adrian, Richard K. Crump, and Emanuel Moench, “Decomposing Real and Nominal Yield Curves,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report no. 570, February 2015. 14 More information is available on the Cleveland Fed’s website.

1 Economic Leadership in an Uncertain World Jeffrey M. Lacker President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Chancellor’s Distinguished Lecture Series University of North Carolina, Wilmington April 12, 2016 Good afternoon. Thank you for inviting me to speak with you today. While I do have some consoling thoughts on your fellow North Carolinians’ unfortunate loss to Villanova, I know that what most people want to hear about from a participant on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is what’s going to happen with interest rates. Before I say anything about that, let me note that I am speaking for myself, and my remarks should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System.1 Last December, the FOMC decided to raise rates for the first time in seven years, increasing the target federal funds rate to ¼ to ½ percent. Now that the first interest rate increase is out of the way, the question on everyone’s mind is how rapidly interest rates will rise in the current year. Many observers have noted that central banks in some other major countries have actually moved toward easier monetary policy in recent months. In January, for example, the Bank of Japan announced that it would begin charging an interest rate of negative 0.1 percent on reserves held at the central bank. In March, the European Central Bank, which has charged negative interest rates on such reserves for nearly two years, announced further cuts to several key interest rates and expanded its asset purchase program. These policy decisions were a response to slowing inflation and economic growth in their respective regions. But the situation in the United States is different. As I will discuss in more detail, our labor markets are strong and growing stronger, and the household sector is healthy. This is fueling steady growth in household spending, which is a substantial portion of GDP. Certainly, many American households still face significant economic challenges. But overall, the prospects for continued growth in employment and consumer spending look good. As I will discuss later, U.S. economic leadership within the global economy makes divergence between the monetary policies of the United States and other major economies that much more likely. With that said, how quickly are rates likely to rise? As always, the future is uncertain, and neither I nor anyone else can give you a definitive answer. But the FOMC has provided some guidance based on our understanding of how economic conditions are likely to evolve and how we will want to respond. In a statement issued on March 16, the FOMC said, “The Committee expects that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate…” Essentially the same language has been used since the Committee raised rates in December. That statement raises the question of what “gradual” means. While the Committee has not formally adopted a definition of gradual, one can glean some information from the projections that meeting participants submit four times a year. (These are posted on the Federal Reserve Board’s website, under the heading “Summary of Economic Projections,” or SEP.) In December, 2 the median projection was for the federal funds rate target to rise 1 percentage point by the end of 2016 and nearly another 2 percentage points by the end of 2018. This projected path was notably slower than the “measured pace” of rate increases during the last tightening cycle, from June 2004 to June 2006, when the funds rate target rose at a pace of 2 percentage points per year — a quarter of a percentage point every m eeting. But it is important to remember that the FOMC’s rate projections are just that — projections, not promises. At lift off, when the Committee predicted gradual increases, it also stated that “the actual path of the federal funds rate will depend on the economic outlook as informed by incoming data.” Indeed, as the new year brought a new round of global economic and financial disturbances, many FOMC participants modified their views of the most likely appropriate path for policy. In the March SEP, the median projection for the federal funds rate target at the end of this year was ½ of 1 percentage point lower than it had been in December — that is, it indicated a half of a percentage point increase over the course of the entire year. This reflects the “data dependent” nature of participants’ judgments concerning appropriate policy. The contingent nature of policy is crucial. Since the future is uncertain, the appropriate path of policy has to depend on how economic conditions evolve. Consequently, one should expect the Fed’s interest rate target to rise at a pace that is gradual but dependent on the economic outlook. Moreover, one should expect that differing views regarding the economic outlook might give rise to differing views about the most likely pace at which the target should rise. My own view, as I will discuss today, is that the medium-term U.S. outlook has not changed materially since December. If anything, inflation seems to be returning to our 2 percent goal somewhat more rapidly than expected. As a result, my sense is that the less leisurely but still gradual pace of target rate increases that FOMC participants submitted at year-end is still more likely to be appropriate. In any case, this makes the discussion of the economic outlook especially relevant. The Outlook for GDP For perspective, recall that economic activity in the United States hit a low point when the Great Recession ended in June 2009. Since then, growth has been fairly steady. Real GDP, an estimate of total production of goods and services in the economy, has grown at an annual rate of 2.1 percent. Employment has risen by over 12 million jobs and the unemployment rate has fallen from a high of 10 percent to 5.0 percent currently. Growth in output and employment is likely to continue this year, I believe. The basis for that view is that the household sector is relatively healthy and is likely to remain so. Real consumer spending has risen by a solid 2.8 percent over the last 12 months due to strong fundamentals. Real disposable income increased by 2.7 percent over the last 12 months, and household net worth has risen by over $30 trillion in the last seven years. Moreover, a strong labor market continues to be a key factor supporting growth in consumer spending. Over the last 12 months we’ve added over 2.8 million new jobs, and the unemployment rate has fallen by 0.5 percent. Putting all this together, consumer spending growth is likely to be robust again this year. And since consumer spending by itself accounts for more than two-thirds of GDP, that’s critical for GDP growth as well. 3 The housing market also depends on the well-being of households and is also likely to contribute to real GDP growth this year. Over the last four years, real residential investment has grown over 8 percent at an annual rate. Granted, real residential investment fell sharply in the Great Recession and remains well below the peak values of the housing boom. So the housing market may seem sluggish to some. But new housing construction continues to expand; for the first two months this year, new housing starts rose 16 percent from the same period a year ago. And home prices have been rising steadily; over the last three years, the average rate of change for home prices has been 7 ½ percent. Taking into account the outlook for household incomes, employment and wealth, residential investment is likely to continue to add to growth this year. What about business spending? Fixed investment by the business sector has grown at a solid 5 ½ percent annual rate over the last six years, but that growth has not been steady. Early in the recovery it rebounded rapidly but it only grew 1.5 percent last year. Two categories of business investment look fairly solid. Investment in equipment seems to be on an upward trend after allowing for some quarterly volatility. And investment in intellectual property, which includes computer software, business research and original artistic creations, rose more than 3 ½ percent last year. Investment in nonresidential structures is the other main component of business fixed investment. Spending in this category, which includes new oil wells, grew rapidly from 2011 to 2014, but has contracted somewhat since then as oil producers have slashed capital spending in response to lower oil prices. Outside of drilling, investment in structures has been fairly robust. Looking ahead, prospects for nonresidential investment as a whole are reasonably positive. Businesses continue to identify profitable opportunities for new investment. Corporate cash flows are strong on balance, and financing is readily available to an array of firms. So I expect business investment to continue to expand this year despite the drag from energy sector spending. Rounding out the domestic picture, government spending subtracted from GDP growth for several years after stimulus-related spending peaked right after the recession. Last year, though, real government consumption and investment spending rose 1.1 percent, with positive growth at the national level and at the state and local levels. The budget deal last December will provide a boost to federal spending this year, and state and local spending in much of the country should continue to benefit from growing revenues. Net exports, on the other hand, are likely to subtract from growth this year. Many domestic producers now face stiffer competitive pressures from overseas because the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets has risen considerably over the last two years. But the dollar appears to have reversed course and declined in value since reaching a high point in early January, so the dampening effects on U.S. growth are plausibly behind us. Adding this all up, the evidence suggests that in the near term real GDP is likely to continue to grow at a pace very close to the 2.1 percent rate we’ve seen since the end of the recession. Growth at that rate would generate further employment gains and a lower unemployment rate. The unemployment rate is already fairly low, however, and arguably has reached a level 4 consistent with notions of longer-run maximum employment. As a result, we should expect growth in employment and GDP to start tapering off to a rate consistent with growth in the normal working age population of about ½ percent per year. If productivity advances at about 1 ¼ percent per year, which is slightly faster than its growth in this expansion, that implies convergence to real GDP growth of around 1 ¾ percent. The Outlook for Inflation The economic outlook is not complete until we discuss inflation. The FOMC’s 2 percent inflation target is based on a particular measure, the price index for personal consumption expenditure, which is produced as a part of the national income accounts that cover overall economic activity. This measure has been depressed by the dramatic fall in energy prices over the last two years. Energy prices appear to have bottomed out, however, and futures markets point to an upward near-term trend. Stripping the volatile energy and food components out of the overall price index yields the so- called core price index that often provides a better gauge of where inflation is likely to head. An important factor holding down core inflation has been the rise in the dollar on foreign exchange markets, which has reduced prices of imported consumer goods. Core inflation on a 12-month average basis was around 1.3 percent for most of last year, but it has firmed more recently. This measure rose to 1.7 percent in January, and was 1.7 percent again in February. As I noted a moment ago, the value of the dollar has actually declined since it peaked in January, so the restraining effect of import prices has been waning. In short, inflation has been held down temporarily by two factors, the falling price of oil and the rising value of the dollar. Since both seem to have stabilized of late, neither factor seems likely to depress inflation going forward. After the effects of temporary shocks that move inflation for a time wear off, inflation tends to gravitate back toward the level of inflation that the public generally expects to prevail, based on their understanding of the conduct of monetary policy. As I discussed at length in a speech last month, I believe the evidence shows that inflation expectations are well-anchored right now at a level consistent with the FOMC’s target of 2 percent over the near term. 2 As a result, I expect U.S. inflation to average fairly close to 2 percent this year, absent further disturbances. The Case for Raising Rates Now would be a good time to return to the question of how fast interest rates are likely to rise. As the FOMC has stated, the pace is going to depend critically on the evolution of the economic outlook as we see the incoming data. But even if there is uncertainty about the pace at which monetary policy rates will rise, the case for higher rates over time should be clear. For perspective, it’s useful to look at real interest rates — that is, interest rates adjusted for expected inflation. The federal funds rate has been near zero for over seven years. The difference between the federal funds rate and expected inflation is the real federal funds interest rate, and it has been negative for more than seven years. 5 Movements in real interest rates ultimately are due to changes in the supply of and demand for savings and investment. While cyclical fluctuations can simply reflect the ebbs and flows of overall economic activity, there are important longer-term movements attributable to changes in productivity growth, demographics and the efficiency of financial intermediation. This longer- term trend real interest rate is sometimes referred to as the “natural rate” — an unobserved variable that is distinct from the real interest rate that is actually observed at any point in time. Over the last several decades, actual real interest rates have tended to move down, suggesting that the natural real rate has fallen. Current estimates from a variety of models are that the natural rate is either near zero or is a small positive number. This observation has two implications for monetary policy. First, as this cyclical expansion continues, real interest rates may for some time remain below levels seen in previous expansions. This is consistent with the unusually low productivity growth we’ve seen in this expansion. Second, actual real rates, at about negative 1 ¼ percent, are now substantially below estimates of the natural rate, many of which are near zero. Thus current interest rates are extremely low, even after accounting for the downward longer-run trend in the natural rate. Given current economic conditions, there should be a strong presumption that the gap between the exceptionally low current level of real interest rates and the natural real rate needs to close relatively soon. Employment has continued to grow robustly and the unemployment rate is very close to its full employment value. Core inflation is firming more rapidly than expected this year, from 1.3 percent half a year ago to 1.7 percent today, and inflation expectations remain well- anchored, which should bolster confidence that inflation will rise toward 2 percent in the near term. For me, these considerations make a persuasive case for increasing the target range for the federal funds rate and related policy rates. As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, one argument that is often heard for a slower pace of rate increases is that the Fed should avoid diverging too far from many of the world’s other major economies, where monetary policy is either on hold or in an easing cycle. In such a global policy environment, tightening by the Federal Reserve could contribute to volatile movements in financial asset prices. But the Fed’s monetary policy mandate is solely focused on domestic economic conditions, employment and inflation in particular. Certainly, our assessment of the outlook should factor in how policy divergence might affect the domestic outcomes for which we are accountable, for instance through its effect on exchange rates. But policy divergence, by itself, is not a separate, additional consideration — it matters for our policy choices to t he extent that it affects the outlook for inflation and real economic activity. My assessment of the policy outlook takes this into account. Two months ago, global economic and financial developments appeared to have heightened the downside risks to U.S. growth and inflation. Given the sharp swings in U.S. asset markets, it made sense to take those linkages seriously. Since then, however, the adverse financial market developments we saw in the first two months of the year have largely reversed: equity markets have retraced, volatility measures have receded and oil prices appear to have bottomed out. 6 Moreover, the intervening tumult left little trace on real economic data, nor on real economic projections, which now largely mirror the December outlook for solid economic growth and continuing movement of inflation back toward the 2-percent goal. If anything, the inflation outlook has firmed, suggesting the emergence of upside risks on that front. When the Fed has delayed needed policy adjustments in the past, it has often been in response to financial market developments that turned out, with hindsight, to be false signals. The record shows that if we delay too long or raise rates too slowly, we run the risk of needing to make larger, potentially more disruptive rate increases in the future. Given the extent to which global risks to the United States have subsided, prudence suggests staying the course with a gradual sequence of rate increases. Continuing Economic Leadership I’ll close today by returning to the theme I started with — the relative strength of the U.S. economy compared to some other developed countries. What’s behind that strength? In my view, the country’s economic performance reflects the fact that the United States remains an attractive place to generate and implement innovations. Labor markets are relatively flexible and regulatory burdens have historically been low by international standards. Our institutions of higher learning are worldwide leaders in research and education, and they continue to attract exceptional students from both home and abroad. That said, we do face some challenges that I believe our educational system is the key to addressing. The pattern of wage differentials between workers with different levels of education has been described as a “race between education and technology.” 3 In general, new technologies create demand for workers with the skills to operate those technologies, leading to an increase in their wages relative to workers with fewer skills. But over time, we expect those higher wages to spur more people to obtain the necessary education, increasing the relative supply of skilled workers and narrowing the wage gap. But that’s not what we are seeing today. Instead, the “college premium” — the extra amount college graduates earn relative to workers without a college degree — has been increasing since the 1980s and remains large. Combined with relatively low college enrollment rates and high college dropout rates, particularly for lower- income and minority students, the inescapable conclusion is that we are failing to keep up with our economy’s demand for skilled workers. What can we do to ensure our workforce has the skills necessary to perpetuate the United States’ economic leadership? A full discussion is beyond the scope of my talk today, but I will say that the Richmond Fed’s review of the available research suggests several key strategies. 4 First, we must do a better job of informing middle and high school students about what is required for success in college (as well as ensure that the K-12 education system is capable of providing them with those skills, although I know this is easier said than done). We can also do a better job of providing these students with information about multiple postsecondary educational options, so that students who are not prepared for or do not wish to attend college can take advantage of other opportunities to acquire valuable skills. At the same time, there is evidence that some students who are well-qualified for college overestimate the costs of attending; providing such students with targeted information could improve their decision-making. Finally, and perhaps 7 most crucially, investment in high-quality early childhood education would yield exceptional returns, and would help broaden opportunities for students of all backgrounds. I believe these strategies aimed at bolstering growth in human capital can not only augment our nation’s prosperity over time but also can equip a broader range of our citizens with the skills they need to share in that prosperity. 1 I am grateful to Jessie Romero, Roy Webb and John Weinberg for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “The Outlook for Inflation and Inflation Expectations,” Speech for the Global Interdependence Center’s Central Banking Series, Paris, France, March 21, 2016. 3 Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F. Katz, The Race Between Education and Technology, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2008. 4 For more, see Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Investing in People for Long-Term Prosperity,” Speech delivered in Charleston, S.C., April 15, 2015.
