The Economic Outlook, Monetary Policy, and Some Future Considerations for the Monetary Policy Agenda Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland The Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance Princeton University Princeton, NJ March 26, 2018 1 Introduction I thank the organizers at the Julis-Rabinowitz Center for inviting me to speak today. It’s nice to be back at Princeton. Walking up from the Dinky station, I was impressed by the changes on campus, including several new buildings since my days here as a graduate student. But one thing hasn’t changed, and that’s the sense of energy and inquisitiveness among the people on campus. Although it has been several years since I graduated, I use the knowledge I gained at Princeton every day in my role at the Federal Reserve. Today, I’ll discuss my views on the outlook for the economy and monetary policy and make a few remarks on two future issues for the monetary policy agenda. I believe it’s important for Fed policymakers to explain the rationale for their policy decisions to the public, so I am looking forward to taking your questions after my remarks. Before I continue, I should remind everyone that the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. The Economy At its meeting last week, the Federal Open Market Committee, the monetary policymaking body within the Fed, decided to raise the target range of the federal funds rate by 25 basis points, to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. This rate increase is consistent with the healthy outlook for the economy, and the achieved and expected progress on our monetary policy goals of maximum employment and price stability. This year is shaping up to be another good year for the economy, and the task before monetary policymakers is to calibrate policy to this healthy economy so that the expansion is sustained. Given the economy’s strength, we don’t want to get behind the curve, but we also don’t want to overreact to the positive outlook and potentially curtail the expansion. This takes some careful balancing, and in my view, last week’s decision on rates reflects this type of balanced approach to achieving and maintaining our policy goals. 2 Economic growth Last year, economic growth picked up to 2-1/2 percent, and I expect growth to be a bit above that pace this year and next. This is an improvement from the average 2 percent pace over prior years of the expansion. In addition, growth is now more balanced across sectors. Business investment accelerated last year. Nonresidential investment grew at a pace of about 6 percent last year, compared to an anemic pace of less than 1 percent in 2015 and 2016. You may recall that oil prices fell sharply from mid-2014 through early 2016, and this led to a sharp pullback in the drilling and mining sectors and their suppliers. The drop in oil prices was coupled with a greater than 20 percent appreciation in the value of the dollar, which hurt manufacturers and other firms dependent on exports. Those conditions are now reversing. Last year, oil prices rose and the dollar depreciated as the economies of our trading partners began to strengthen. Indeed, for the first time in many years, economic activity around the world is picking up and forecasts for global growth are being revised up. This should have a positive feedback effect on the U.S. economy via exports. However, the tariffs on steel and aluminum imports and the recent announcement of planned tariffs on certain goods imported from China, as well as the ongoing renegotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), add uncertainty to the trade picture. This uncertainty may not be resolved quickly. Assessing the impact on the U.S. macroeconomy will ultimately depend on how other countries react, including whether they impose their own tariffs or other trade barriers in response. I am monitoring trade developments, and while I see them as a risk to the forecast, at this point they have not led me to change my outlook for the overall economy. Business sentiment remains high and firms will gain from the tax changes passed in December. The recently passed federal budget and spending appropriation bills will add further fiscal stimulus in the form of increased federal spending. At this point, it is difficult to be precise about the magnitude and timing of 3 the effect of these fiscal policy changes on output growth. I’m estimating they will add an additional 1/2 percentage point of annual growth over the next couple of years, but there is some upside risk that the effect could be larger. I expect to have a better read on the timing of the federal spending and on how households and firms are actually responding to the tax changes over the next several months. Lower tax rates and full expensing for investment in equipment and intangibles should spur additional business spending to meet higher near-term demand. In a staff survey of firms in the Cleveland Fed District, over a third of the firms expecting tax savings this year said they planned to use some of the proceeds to increase investment. Smaller percentages of respondents said they planned to buy back shares of their stock, increase dividends, or pay down debt with their tax gains. About a third of the surveyed firms in the District said they planned to share some of their tax savings with employees in the form of increased wages, bonuses, or additions to employee pension plans. And some firms in the District and elsewhere in the nation have already done so. This adds a positive element to an already healthy outlook for consumer spending, which makes up over two-thirds of output. Personal incomes are growing because labor market conditions are strong. Lower personal tax rates and higher standard deductions should spur some additional household spending in the aggregate, although the impact of tax changes on individual households will depend on the level and sources of their income. Household balance sheets are in much better shape since the Great Recession, reflecting a combination of deleveraging and increased savings. While there has been a marked increase in market volatility since the start of the year, equity prices are higher than they were a year ago. A moderately paced recovery in the housing sector continues, despite the increase in mortgage rates. Housing equity held by households is now above its peak before the housing crash. Overall, I expect activity in the housing sector to continue to expand at a sustainable pace. 4 Labor markets The labor market is strong and I expect that strength to continue. Payroll jobs rose by more than 300,000 in February, following an increase of more than 200,000 in January. These job numbers are a pickup from last year’s already strong pace of 180,000 jobs per month. Most economists put trend job growth somewhere in the range of 75,000 to 120,000 jobs per month. The variation depends on what one assumes about labor force participation. Based on demographic factors, including the aging of the population, the longer-run trend in participation is downward sloping. But the labor force participation rate has been fairly stable over the past two years, and last month we saw a rise in the participation rate, including that of prime-age males. Indeed, the participation rate of men aged 45 to 54 has shown a notable increase of nearly 1.5 percentage points over the past year. Increased participation helps ease some of the tightness we are seeing in the labor supply. As both national and regional labor markets have tightened, our contacts have been reporting for some time that they are having trouble finding qualified workers. These reports are now coming from a wide range of firms across different sectors and cover both higher-skill and lower-skill occupations. The unemployment rate, at 4.1 percent, is low by historical standards. It’s below its lowest point during the last expansion and below the range most economists associate with full employment. Of course, it’s difficult to say with any precision how tight labor markets are. Usually we associate tight labor markets with rising wages. The official statistics indicate that compensation growth has moved up, from under 2 percent earlier in the expansion to over 2-1/2 percent more recently. And increasingly, firms are telling us that they are responding to labor shortages by offering higher wages and benefits to attract and retain workers. But so far wage growth hasn’t been as strong as one might normally expect from tight labor markets. One partial explanation for this is the low level of productivity growth. Over the longer run, wages, adjusted for inflation, tend to reflect the marginal product of workers. During this 5 expansion, labor productivity growth has been on the order of only 1 percent.1 This is less than half the pace over the prior two expansions. Last year we saw somewhat stronger growth in productivity than we saw earlier in the expansion. It is too soon to tell whether this rise will be sustained; however, the welcome pickup we are seeing in investment should help to promote productivity growth as the expansion continues, and this should help buoy wage growth. The movements in labor force participation, combined with the fact that wage and price inflation have remained moderate even as labor markets continue to strengthen, suggest that labor market conditions may not be as tight as I had been assuming. So I recently moved my own estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate down by 1/4 percentage point, to 4-1/2 percent. I expect the unemployment rate to move below 4 percent this year and to remain below 4 percent next year. Overall, my assessment remains that from the standpoint of the cyclical conditions monetary policy can address, we are slightly beyond the maximum employment part of the Fed’s monetary policy mandate. Inflation The other part of the Fed’s mandate is price stability. The FOMC has set a symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. “Symmetric” means that the 2 percent inflation goal isn’t a ceiling; the FOMC would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or persistently below this goal and such persistent deviations warrant a policy response.2 But inflation measures can vary from month to month because of idiosyncratic factors and in response to temporary economic and financial disturbances. Sometimes inflation will be above and sometimes it will be below 2 percent. While monetary policy’s 1 Labor productivity as measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector has averaged 1 percent over this expansion. 2 See FOMC, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 30, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf) 6 control of inflation isn’t precise enough to keep inflation at 2 percent at each point in time, averaging through temporary fluctuations, we aim for inflation to be 2 percent because the FOMC believes that this rate is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve’s statutory mandate. Getting inflation back to this goal has been somewhat of a challenge. PCE inflation fell to very low levels in 2015, when inflation was held down by falling oil and import prices. Since then it has moved back up, even temporarily exceeding 2 percent early last year, until it moved back below 2 percent in the middle of last year partly due to special factors, like the drop in the prices of prescription drugs and cell phone service plans. Since then, inflation has picked up and several of our business contacts have reported that they now have more pricing power and have been able to pass along some of their cost increases to customers. PCE inflation has risen to about 1.7 percent, not quite at our goal. In the near term, we will likely see some higher inflation readings as the sharp price declines of last March drop out of the year-over-year measures. But just as we didn’t overreact to weaker inflation readings last summer or to stronger inflation readings at the beginning of last year, we shouldn’t overreact to these increases either. Mild temporary over- or under-runs of inflation should not be cause for concern. Instead, we need to remain focused on the medium-run outlook for inflation. My outlook is that inflation will gradually move up to 2 percent on a sustainable basis over the next one to two years. This forecast reflects my expectation that the economy will continue to grow above trend and the demand for labor will continue to strengthen. Stable inflation expectations are another important component of this forecast because inflation expectations help to anchor actual inflation rates. We already saw how valuable stable inflation expectations were during the Great Recession. At that time, the deep pullback in activity and collapse in demand could have led to deflation – not just low inflation rates but a declining overall price level. This would have made the economy even worse by making demand 7 even weaker than it was and raising debt burdens in real terms. But deflationary conditions did not develop because policy responses helped to maintain people’s expectations that prices would remain stable over the longer run and that inflation would eventually return to goal. One of the risks of having inflation under-run the 2 percent goal for so long is that inflation expectations could have become unanchored. That didn’t happen. Now, as inflation firms, it is equally important that monetary policymakers continue to convey through policy communications and decisions our commitment to achieving our dual mandate goals. Monetary Policy The recent policy action to increase the target range for the fed funds rate to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent is consistent with this commitment and continues the process to gradually increase interest rates as the economy has continued to make progress on our monetary policy goals. I supported the increase in the fed funds rate last week and, if the economy evolves as I anticipate, I believe further gradual increases in interest rates will be appropriate this year and next year. In my view a gradual upward path of interest rates will help sustain the expansion and balance the risks so that our longer-run goals of price stability and maximum employment are met and maintained. We want to give inflation time to move back to goal; this argues against a steep path. At the same time, the economy is slightly beyond maximum employment, and despite an increase in market volatility and longer-term interest rates since the start of the year, financial conditions are accommodative. It seems appropriate to remove some of the monetary policy accommodation to ensure we avoid a build-up in risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy were allowed to overheat. In addition, a gradual upward path of interest rates should help avoid financial imbalances and a potential build-up of financial stability risks that could arise from the extended period of very low interest rates. And it puts monetary policy in a better position to address whatever risks, whether to the upside or to the downside, are ultimately realized. 8 The gradual upward path of interest rates is consistent with the median path across the projections submitted by FOMC participants at last week’s meeting. The median path of appropriate policy in those projections has the fed funds rate gradually rising to between 2 and 2-1/4 percent by the end of this year, with further gradual increases over the next two years should the economy evolve as anticipated. Compared to the December projections, the FOMC’s median path over next year and the following year has steepened a bit, reflecting the policymakers’ views that the medium-run outlook has strengthened, with somewhat stronger output growth and a lower unemployment rate. The change in the median path is an excellent illustration of how our views of appropriate policy are related to the economic outlook. Policymakers don’t react to any small change in the data, but if incoming information suggests a change in our medium-run forecast, our projected appropriate policy path can change. The FOMC projections give a sense of the participants’ current views on appropriate policy given their current outlook. But the path policy actually takes will depend on how the economy actually evolves and the implications of incoming information for the medium-run outlook and risks around the outlook. If the upside risks to growth come to pass, we may need to steepen the path a bit; if inflation surprises on the downside, we may need to go a bit slower. I’ve been discussing the fed funds rate because changing its target range is the main way to adjust the stance of policy during normal times. But during extraordinary times, other tools are needed. To address the Great Recession, the FOMC brought the fed funds rate down to effectively zero, and then to put further downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, it undertook several programs to purchase longer-term assets, including longer-maturity Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS). As a result of the purchases, the Fed’s balance sheet grew, from nearly $900 billion in assets in 2007, or 6 percent of nominal GDP, to about $4.4 trillion today, or 23 percent of nominal GDP. The balance sheet’s composition changed from mainly short-term Treasuries to longer-maturity Treasuries and agency MBS. 9 Last October, the FOMC began implementing its plan to normalize the Fed’s balance sheet in terms of the size and composition of assets.3 Maturing Treasuries and principal payments of agency MBS and agency debt are allowed to gradually roll off the balance sheet up to a monthly cap, with the caps rising over time. The gradual, predictable decline in assets, which will take several years to complete, allows balance-sheet normalization to run in the background and monetary policy to focus on setting the appropriate level of the fed funds rate, our conventional monetary policy tool. Future Considerations for the Monetary Policy Agenda: Operating Framework and Monetary Policy Framework I’d like to end my talk by briefly touching on two future monetary policy considerations: the operating framework that the FOMC uses to ensure that its policy rate is being maintained at the appropriate level, and the monetary policy framework that the FOMC uses to determine what that appropriate level of the policy rate is to promote our longer-run monetary policy goals.4 You may have noticed that I didn’t tell you how large the Fed’s balance sheet will be once we complete normalization. We do know the balance sheet will be larger than it was prior to the financial crisis for the simple reason that the public’s demand for currency is rising over time. But the balance sheet will also likely be considerably smaller than it is today. Just how much smaller depends on how the FOMC 3 See FOMC, “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” June 13, 2017. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf) 4 For further discussion of monetary policy frameworks, see Mester, Loretta J., “Monetary Policy Frameworks,” National Association for Business Economics and American Economic Association Session at the Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, PA, January 5, 2018, (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20180105-monetary-policy-frameworks) and Mester, Loretta J., “Remarks on the FOMC’s Monetary Policy Framework,” panel remarks at the 2018 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, NY, February 23, 2018. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20180223-remarks-on-the-fomcs-monetary- policy-framework). 10 implements monetary policy in the future.5 Before the crisis, the FOMC kept the supply of bank reserves scarce. The FOMC could make small changes in that supply by buying or selling short-term Treasuries, and this allowed the FOMC to ensure that the market-clearing interest rate at which banks lend reserves to each other overnight, the fed funds rate, was maintained at the FOMC’s target. But now, as a result of the Fed’s large-scale asset purchases, reserves are very abundant: indeed, banks are holding around $2.2 trillion in reserves in accounts at the Fed, and about $2 trillion of this amount is in excess of what is required by regulation. At these levels, small changes in the supply of reserves have little effect on the fed funds rate. Instead, the Fed brings the fed funds rate into its target range by adjusting the rate it pays on excess reserves. Each of these operating frameworks has its strengths, and as balance-sheet normalization progresses, the FOMC will need to decide which operating framework it will use going forward. Another consideration for the FOMC is the framework it uses to determine appropriate monetary policy. Currently, we use a flexible inflation-targeting framework. This framework recognizes that, over the longer run, monetary policy can influence only inflation and not the underlying real structural aspects of the economy such as the natural rate of unemployment or maximum employment, but that monetary policy can be used to help offset shorter-run fluctuations in employment from maximum employment. I believe this framework has served the FOMC well and has been effective in promoting our policy goals. It has been the choice of many central banks around the globe. 5 For an accessible description of frameworks for implementing monetary policy, see Ihrig, Jane E., Meade, Ellen E., and Weinbach, Gretchen C., “Rewriting Monetary Policy 101: What’s the Fed’s Preferred Post-Crisis Approach to Raising Interest Rates?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 29 (Fall 2015), pp. 177-198 (http://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/jep.29.4.177). For projections of the Fed’s asset holdings in its System Open Market Account (SOMA), see Bonis, Brian, Ihrig, Jane, and Wei, Min, “Projected Evolution of the SOMA Portfolio and the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect,” FEDS Notes, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 22, 2017 (https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2081). 11 Nevertheless, it is legitimate to ask whether any changes in our monetary policy framework would be helpful in maintaining macroeconomic stability. First, as a matter of good governance, a central bank should periodically review its assumptions, methods, and models.6 Second, based on demographics, higher demand for safe assets, and other factors, many economists anticipate that the longer-term equilibrium real interest rate will remain lower than in past decades. If so, then compared to the past, there would be less room for monetary policymakers to cushion against a negative economic shock, the probability of the policy rate hitting the zero lower bound would be higher, and nontraditional monetary policy tools would need to be used more often. To the extent that these tools are less effective than the traditional interest rate tool or are constrained from being used, the potential would be for longer recessions and longer bouts of low inflation.7 To help mitigate this issue, researchers have suggested several alternative frameworks, such as targeting an inflation rate higher than 2 percent, or instead of targeting inflation, targeting a path for the price level or for nominal GDP. The positives and negatives of these and other frameworks would need to be thoroughly reviewed. Such reviews take considerable time and so it may be appropriate for the FOMC to commence a framework assessment later this year. I am open-minded on the outcome, but at the same time, I think the bar should be high for adopting a new framework. The current framework has been largely successful, there is little experience with alternative frameworks here or abroad, and since we are not starting from scratch, transition costs would need to be considered. Even if the FOMC concludes it is best not to adopt a new framework, the review will help 6 For example, the Bank of Canada renews its agreement with the government on its inflation target every five years. The next renewal is in 2021. 7 Although I don’t discuss them here, other government policies might also be brought to bear to increase the long- term growth rate and equilibrium interest rate, which would give monetary policy more room to act. Such policies would focus on increasing productivity growth and labor force participation. 12 determine if improvements to the current framework could make it even more effective at achieving our monetary policy goals, given the current and future economic environment. Now, paraphrasing French mathematician Blaise Pascal, if I had had more time, I would have written a shorter speech. Before we run out of time for questions, I’d like to end here and thank you for your attention.

Why I Want You to Study Economics: Increasing Diversity, Inclusion, and Opportunity in Economics Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Leaders, Executives, Entrepreneurs, and Directors (LEED) Program Central State University College of Business Wilberforce, OH April 4, 2018 1 Introduction I thank the organizers of this year’s LEED program and Professor Fidelis Ikem, the dean of the College of Business, for inviting me to speak today. I am proud of the relationship that the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland is building with Central State University. It’s great to be on campus today, where one feels a real sense of history. At the Federal Reserve, we are proud of the fact that while the first two attempts at central banks in the U.S. lasted only 20 years each, the Fed is in its 105th year. But Central State is even older. Founded in 1887, the university recently celebrated its 131st birthday. Central State’s designation as a historically black college and its focus on providing a high-quality academic experience to all students are things to be proud of. They make this university a very good place for me to speak about the benefits of an education in economics and the importance of diversity in the field of economics. Before I continue, I should remind everyone that the views I’ll present today are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Why Study Economics I didn’t start out to be an economist. I majored in mathematics at Barnard College but also pursued a second major in economics because it seemed interesting and didn’t require much additional course work. I applied to graduate school in math but ended up in the economics Ph.D. program at Princeton because two professors there wrote me letters explaining that Princeton’s economics program was very mathematical and encouraging me to come there and study economics. I’ve always thought that I lucked into economics. It has provided me with a fascinating career, and I hope that at least in a small way I’ve been able to provide some good in return through economic research and policymaking. Merriam-Webster defines economics as “a social science concerned chiefly with description and analysis of the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services.” Well, that’s fine as far as it goes, but it sounds kind of dry. Others think of economics as a path to running a business or working in finance. That’s also fine as far as it goes, but it is too limited a view. Instead, I like to think of economics as a social science that helps us think about how people use scarce resources, interact in markets or in 2 other economic settings, respond to incentives, and make trade-offs. The fact that economics is a social science, one that involves people and their choices, makes economics complicated but also very interesting. Because economics provides a rigorous way of thinking about trade-offs, incentives, and costs and benefits, it has many real-world applications. It can help a company be more profitable but it can also help policymakers formulate better public policies that affect people’s lives. It can help us analyze the distribution of income across individuals, regions, and countries, and the causes for those differences. It can help us understand how a small financial shock might be propagated economy-wide or even globally, and what can be done to prevent such contagion. It can help us understand the issues facing people in or entering the workforce and provide evidence on which programs are most effective at helping them finance their education, develop new skills, and manage the changing job landscape driven by technological innovation. Economics can help us understand how people make financial decisions and how simple changes can result in better outcomes. For example, a simple change from making employees have to opt out of a company’s savings plan, rather than opt in, can result in higher participation in the plan.1 One well-formulated study of a Fortune 500 company’s 401(k) savings plan found that switching to automatic enrollment increased employee participation from 49 percent to 86 percent. It also found that employees’ savings decisions tend to be inert, so the default contribution rate and fund allocation are important features to consider in designing such a plan. A default rule like this is an example of what behavioral economists call a nudge – something that isn’t mandated but points people in the right direction and can change behavior.2 Richard Thaler, an economics professor at the University of Chicago, won a Nobel Prize last year for his foundational work in behavioral economics, which combines aspects of psychology with economics. In his Nobel Prize 1 See Chetty, et al. (2017). 2 For accessible descriptions and examples of nudging, see Committee for the Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel (2017), Thaler (2017a), and Sunstein (2017). 3 lunch lecture, he mentioned that good work is being done around the world to, and I quote: “design and test scientifically informed policies that are working. People are being helped to save more for retirement, more poor kids – especially girls – are going to school, peasant farmers are retrieving more reliable harvests, and we are all being successfully nudged to use less energy.”3 That passage lists just a few of the areas in which economics is having a real-world impact and doing some good. In the policy realm, economics helps guide decisions about the country’s monetary and fiscal policies, but also policies on health care, education, and trade. It helps in the design and evaluation of programs at the local community level too, including workforce development and transportation policy. In a nutshell, I believe that economics helps society. I hope this piques your interest in studying economics. But if you need more convincing, you might want to know that economics offers a very good return on your education dollar. The ability to think critically, analyze a problem systematically, and deal with ambiguity are all skills developed through the study of economics and they are all skills highly valued in the job market. One recent study found that those with a bachelor’s degree in economics earn about 20 percent more than graduates with degrees in other fields.4 Some of the salary differences reflect the fact that economics majors have access to a wide variety of occupations, many of which are higher-paying. You’ll find people with economics degrees employed in many sectors, including education, accounting, law, business, finance, and government. The Federal Reserve System – the 12 Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors – employs about 700 Ph.D. economists and also many others with undergraduate and master’s degrees in economics, and I can tell you from experience that the Fed is a very productive and fascinating place to work. 3 Thaler (2017b). 4 Carroll, et al. (2014). 4 The State of Diversity in Economics The good news is that economics is a popular major in U.S. colleges and universities. In 2016, U.S. postsecondary schools awarded about 33,500 bachelor’s degrees in economics.5 While this represents less than 2 percent of all bachelor’s degrees awarded by these schools, at the top 100 universities and top 100 liberal arts colleges without an undergraduate business major, about 10 to 20 percent of male undergraduates major in economics.6 That’s a high number when you consider how many different majors there are. But despite its popularity, the field has had less success in attracting women or historically under-represented racial and ethnic minorities.7 While there has been some improvement compared to the 1970s, this under-representation has been going on for many years. Using U.S. Department of Education data on four-year, non-profit colleges and universities over 2011- 2015, Bayer and Wilcox found that while women earned more than half of all bachelor’s degrees awarded across all fields, they earned less than a third of the bachelor’s degrees in economics.8 And the numbers are lower for under-represented minorities, who earned slightly more than 20 percent of bachelor’s degrees and about 11 percent of economics degrees awarded. If you think about this in terms of the share of female graduates who choose to major in economics and the share of male graduates who choose to major in economics, according to Bayer and Wilcox’s numbers, there is one female economics major for every 100 female bachelor’s degrees compared to about three male economics majors for every 100 male bachelor’s degrees. That means women are choosing to major in economics at only a third of the rate of 5 The data on the number and proportion of bachelor’s degrees in economics in U.S. postgraduate institutions are derived from Tables 325.92 and 322.10 from U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) . 6 Goldin (2013, 2015). 7 The U.S. Department of Education’s Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) classifies as historically under-represented minorities members of the following groups: Hispanic or Latino (non- Hispanic), (non-Hispanic) Black or African American, and American Indian or Native Alaskan. The IPEDS data are used by the American Economic Association’s Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession (CSMGEP) to assess minority representation in the field. 8 Bayer and Wilcox (2017). 5 men.9 Similarly, minorities are choosing economics over other majors at only about half the rate of white students. While you don’t need to have majored in economics to enter a Ph.D. program in economics, it is a natural path. So given the under-representation of women and minorities at the undergraduate level, it is probably not surprising they are also under-represented at the Ph.D. level and in academia. The good news is that representation of women among the ranks of academia, from first-year graduate student through full professor, is higher now than in 1970.10 The bad news is that progress has slowed. In 2017, females made up 32 percent of first-year grad students in economics compared to 30 percent in 1997. Almost a third of the new doctorates in 2017 were awarded to women, but gender diversity falls as one moves up the academic ranks. Women make up less than 30 percent of assistant professors, about 23 percent of tenured associates, and about 14 percent of full professors in economics. Unless there is a pickup in entry into graduate school, it is hard to see how these numbers can increase. Analysis of minority representation in graduate economics is complicated a bit by the fact that almost 60 percent of doctorates awarded in economics are awarded to nonpermanent resident students. Some of these graduates return to their own countries, while others stay in the U.S. Restricting attention to U.S. citizens and permanent residents, of the 479 economics doctorates awarded in 2016, only 48, that is, 10 percent, were awarded to under-represented minorities: 15 were earned by African Americans and 33 by Hispanics or Latinos.11 In the academic professorial ranks, under-represented minorities make up less than 10 percent of assistant professors and less than 5 percent of full professors. 9 Among schools in the top 100 that offer both business and economics degrees, regardless of gender, students prefer the business degree over economics, but women do so to a greater extent. See Goldin (2013, 2015). 10 The statistics cited in this paragraph are the preliminary statistics for 2017 compiled by the American Economic Association’s Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession. See Lundberg (2017). 11 These statistics are from the U.S. Department of Education IPEDS data as reported in Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession (CSMGEP) (2017). 6 There has been some progress: the percentages of undergraduate and graduate degrees awarded to minorities have increased over the past two decades. But the rate of change has been slower than the growth of the minority population in the U.S. and slower than the growth of minority representation across all fields and in the STEM fields of science, technology, engineering, and math. Indeed, minorities earn a greater share of the degrees awarded in the STEM fields than they do in economics.12 Similarly, the representation of women in the STEM fields is also now higher than it is in economics.13 Why Isn’t Economics Diverse and Why Does It Matter? An interesting question is why women and minorities are under-represented in economics. One potential explanation is the lack of role models in the field. Seeing someone of the same race or gender being successful in a field can be validating, and having someone like you to run ideas by or get advice from can be very helpful. So, the relative lack of women and minorities in economics could be perpetuating under-representation. This is a plausible explanation but it may be only one piece of the puzzle, as the empirical evidence on role models is somewhat mixed.14 One study of a selective liberal arts college that essentially involved random assignment of students to instructors found that having an instructor of the same gender didn’t increase the probability of a student taking more classes or majoring in the field, regardless of the gender distribution in the department, but it was associated with the student earning a higher grade in fields dominated by the opposite gender.15 That is, female students received higher average grades from female instructors when taking courses in fields dominated by men (such as economics) – the difference was on the order of moving from a B-minus to a B. And there was a similar effect for males, who received higher average grades from male instructors when taking courses in female-dominated fields (such as education). A separate study in a different setting found evidence that 12 Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession (CSMGEP) (2017). 13 Goldin (2013, 2015). 14 Goldin (2013) and Griffith (2013). 15 Griffith (2014). 7 such grade differentials reflected achievement differentials and not just inflated grading.16 So the availability of role models appears to positively affect student achievement, but a lack of role models isn’t the whole story about why some students choose not to continue in economics. What about different preferences at the time students enroll? It is true that males are more likely than females to list economics as their planned major when accepted at college. But this gender difference for incoming students is not the full story because research that looks at the progression of students through the major has found that female students are relatively more likely to drop out of the major and switch to another field compared to male students. For example, one study found that women need to do well in their principles of economics course in order to continue in the major, and that’s less true of men.17 Other hypotheses have to do with the way economics is taught or with the content of the courses. Do large lecture classes, often found in introductory economics programs at large universities, turn off women and minorities more than men? Do the topics incorporated into the intro courses appeal to one group and not another? And, if so, how could the content be amended so that all students, regardless of race, ethnicity, or gender, feel included and take up the opportunity to be an economics major? Could it be that implicit biases come to play at each stage of the academic ladder, as has been shown in other types of settings? As a college math major, I am happy to say that the theory that women may be more turned off by the heavy mathematical content in economics does not pan out. In fact, women earn over 40 percent of bachelor’s degrees in math and statistics, a higher share than in economics;18 women do well in math at the high school level; women are selecting other fields that are very quantitative, like psychology; and 16 Carrell, et al. (2010). 17 Goldin (2013, 2015) and Avilova and Goldin (2018). 18 Table 325.65, U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistic s, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). 8 studies indicate that math aptitude doesn’t explain gender differences in participation in upper-level economics courses.19 So there are several different theories being explored, and I suspect that, at the end of the day, there are multiple drivers of the under-representation of women and minorities in the field of economics. But you might ask: why should we care? Shouldn’t students be able to choose their field of study and career path? The low level of diversity in economics may just reflect people’s preferences. That’s a possibility, but if that’s the case, then it is incumbent upon those of us in the field and upon educators to ensure that students can make informed choices and that they understand the value of an economics degree to the individual and to society. Moreover, because economics is a field that influences policy, and policy affects all kinds of people, it’s important to have diverse views inform that policy. As a public servant and Fed policymaker, I believe that policymakers need to consider the effects of our monetary, regulatory, and payments policies on all our constituents. In addition, I have seen firsthand how having a diversity of views expressed and discussed around the table can actually lead to better policy decisions, and there is actual research to back this up. Group dynamics are different when teams are diverse. Participants don’t necessarily find it as comfortable to serve on a diverse team, but the diversity helps to avoid group-think. Diverse teams tend to be more objective and focus on the facts when making decisions; they may process information more carefully because they are forced to confront a different way of thinking and convince those with alternative views; and firms with more diversity tend to be more innovative.20 Research also shows that firms with diverse management tend to have above-average earnings.21 Perhaps the better decision- making and innovation associated with diversity is showing up on the bottom line. 19 See Goldin (2013), and Bayer and Rouse (2016). 20 See Rock and Grant (2016). 21 Rock and Grant (2016) cite a Credit Suisse analysis of 2,400 companies worldwide that found that organizations with at least one female board member had higher return on equity and higher net income growth than firms with no female board members. In addition, Hunt, et al. (2015) report on a McKinsey & Company analysis of 366 9 Beyond current policy and business outcomes, another reason I’d like to see more diversity in the field of economics is so the field itself doesn’t get stymied by group-think. To expand our knowledge, economics needs to continually take on new research questions and develop innovative techniques and ways of analysis to arrive at answers to these questions. Broader representation in economics means a broader set of issues will be tackled and a broader set of research disseminated, resulting in better policy outcomes that will improve the economic well being of a greater share of the population. Some Things Are Being Done The American Economic Association, through its Committees on the Status of Women and the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession, is taking a close look at diversity in the economics profession and is offering programs and resources aimed at increasing diversity at all levels. The association provides information to students who want to pursue careers or a graduate degree in economics, and also provides lesson plans to teachers. It offers a summer training and scholarship program to help prepare students for graduate school and, with the National Science Foundation, offers a Summer Economics Fellows Program, which is designed to increase the participation and advancement of women and under-represented minorities in economics. I serve on the board of the Council for Economic Education. This nonprofit organization’s mission is to educate students in kindergarten through high school about economics and personal finance so they can make better decisions for themselves, their families, and their communities. The council provides many materials to teachers and also runs the National Economics Challenge, a quiz bowl competition, which reaches a wide population of students in terms of gender, race, and income. Last year, over 11,000 high school students participated in the challenge; of these, 42 percent were girls and 22 percent were under- companies that found that those in the top quartile in terms of management’s ethnic and racial diversity were 35 percent more likely to have financial returns above their industry mean, while those in the top quartile in terms of management’s gender diversity were 15 percent more likely to have financial returns above their industry mean. 10 represented minorities, and participation from these groups has been increasing over time. A recent survey found that participants’ performance on advanced placement exams exceeds the national average, with especially strong gains shown by female and minority students, and that participants are more likely than nonparticipants to choose to major in economics. At the Cleveland Fed, we strive for excellence in all that we do. And that means we are taking actions to foster a culture that champions diversity, inclusion, and opportunity throughout the organization. To increase our ability to recruit high-quality talent in a variety of positions, including banking, computer programming, data science, accounting, as well as economics, we are developing relationships with schools in our District, including Central State. Last June, we hosted a number of Central State students and several faculty members as part of your school’s eight-week summer Banking Institute program, and we will host another group of CSU students again next month. You may have attended one of the guest lectures that some of our economists have given in your economics and business classes, and representatives are here today to tell you about paid internships and other employment opportunities at the Cleveland Fed. As a contribution to strengthening the pipeline of future economists, the Cleveland Fed will be hosting a workshop this summer for the research assistants across the Federal Reserve System to help them prepare for graduate school. The Cleveland Fed has also been promoting pre- and post-college education. Our Learning Center distributes lesson plans on economics and financial literacy to teachers in kindergarten through high school, and our Money Museum, which is open to the public, offers interactive exhibits on the financial system and the economy. These may be small steps, but economics can help solve many real-world problems while providing individuals with a rewarding career, and we want to ensure that the widest group of people enter the field. Conclusion Fifty years ago today, this country lost a great leader, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. The tragedy of his death must not overshadow his many accomplishments and the lessons conveyed by his words and deeds. As I’ve discussed, there has been some progress over the past 50 years in increasing diversity, 11 inclusiveness, and opportunity within the economics profession, but that progress has been slow. It is easy to get discouraged and accept the status quo. But we all must remember a key lesson from Dr. King’s legacy: changing institutions is hard work and takes time. It must be met by perseverance and endurance. As a member of the economics profession, I will continue to seek ways to increase diversity, inclusion, and opportunity because I believe it will strengthen economic research and policymaking, and thereby help promote a healthier economy for a wider group of people. I encourage the students of Central State University to enter the field of economics and to join me in that mission. 12 References Avilova, Tatyana, and Claudia Goldin, “What Can UWE Do for Economics?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24189, January 2018. (http://www.nber.org/papers/w24189.pdf) Bayer, Amanda, and Cecilia Elena Rouse, “Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (Fall 2016), pp. 221-242. (https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.30.4.221) Bayer, Amanda, and David Wilcox, “The Unequal Distribution of Economic Education: A Report on the Race, Ethnicity, and Gender of Economics Majors at US Colleges and Universities,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-105, Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/files/2017105pap.pdf) Carrell, Scott E., Marianne E. Page, and James E. West, “Sex and Science: How Professor Gender Perpetuates the Gender Gap,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2010), pp. 1101-1144. (https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.2010.125.3.1101) Carroll, Thomas, Djeto Assane, and Jared Busker, “Why it Pays to Major in Economics,” Journal of Economics Education 45 (2014), pp. 251-261. (https://doi.org/10.1080/00220485.2014.917906) Chetty, Raj, John Friedman, Søren Leth-Petersen, Torben Nielsen, and Tore Olsen, “Active vs. Passive Decision and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (2017), pp 1141-1219. (https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qju013) Committee for the Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel, “Scientific Background on the Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economics in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2017, Richard H. Thaler: Integrating Economics with Psychology,” October 9, 2017. (https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2018/06/advanced-economicsciences2017-1.pdf) Committee on the Status of Minority Groups in the Economics Profession, Annual Report, American Economic Association, December 2017. (https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=6592) Goldin, Claudia, “Notes on Women and the Economics Undergraduate Major,” Newsletter of the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession (CSWEP) (Summer 2013), pp. 4-6, 15. (https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=570) Goldin, Claudia, “Gender and the Undergraduate Economics Major: Notes on the Undergraduate Economics Major at a Highly Selective Liberal Arts College,” manuscript, April 12, 2015 (update of Goldin, Summer 2013). Griffith, Amanda L., “The Importance of Role Models,” Newsletter of the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession (CSWEP) (Summer 2013), pp. 9-10, 16. (https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=570) Griffith, Amanda L., “Faculty Gender in the College Classroom: Does it Matter for Achievement and Major Choice?” Southern Economic Journal 81 (2014), pp. 211-231. (https://doi.org/10.4284/0038-4038-2012.100) 13 Hunt, Vivian, Dennis Layton, and Sara Prince, “Why Diversity Matters,” McKinsey & Company, January 2015. (https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/organization/our-insights/why-diversity-matters) Lundberg, Shelly, “The 2017 Report of the Committee on the Status of Women in the Economics Profession,” American Economic Association, December 6, 2017. (https://www.aeaweb.org/content/file?id=6388) Rock, David, and Heidi Grant, “Why Diverse Teams Are Smarter,” Harvard Business Review, November 4, 2016. (https://hbr.org/2016/11/why-diverse-teams-are-smarter) Sunstein, Cass R., “Nudging: A Very Short Guide,” manuscript, September 22, 2017. (http://www.tif.us.edu.pl/download/2015010893532Nudge_Sunstein.pdf). Thaler, Richard H., “From Cashews to Nudges: The Evolution of Behavioral Economics,” Nobel Prize Lecture slides, December 8, 2017a. (https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/2017/thaler-lecture-slides.pdf) Thaler, Richard H., “Speech at the Nobel Banquet,” December 10, 2017b. (https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/2017/thaler-speech.html) U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS), Digest of Education Statistics: 2016. (https://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d16/index.asp)

Perspectives on the Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland University of Pittsburgh Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business and Deloitte LLP Pittsburgh, PA April 19, 2018 1 Introduction Let me begin by thanking Dean Arjang Assad of the Katz Graduate School of Business and Dmitri Shiry of Deloitte for inviting me to speak with you this evening. Dmitri performs important public service as a member of the board of directors of the Cleveland Fed’s Pittsburgh Branch, and it just so happens that this building formerly housed our branch. In addition to including the western part of Pennsylvania, the Cleveland Fed’s District comprises the state of Ohio and parts of Kentucky and West Virginia. The regional nature of the Federal Reserve has served the country well for more than 100 years. It allows monetary policy decisions to take into account the diversity of the American economy and its people and helps ensure that those decisions incorporate information from all parts of the country, not just Washington, D.C. or Wall Street. This evening, I would like to give you my perspectives on the economy and monetary policy. My remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. Some Context: The Medium-Run Outlook and Monetary Policy Let me start with some context. Monetary policy affects the economy with a lag. Some sectors are more sensitive to interest rates than others, so it takes some time for changes in monetary policy to be transmitted through all parts of the economy. This means monetary policymakers have to formulate an outlook for the economy over the medium run and evaluate the risks around that outlook in order to set appropriate policy. Although we use state-of-the-art techniques and incorporate official data and anecdotal information from our contacts across the country, there is still a lot of uncertainty around any economic forecast. Indeed, in speaking about FOMC projections, former Fed Chair Ben Bernanke said, “The only economic forecast in 2 which I have complete confidence is that the economy will not evolve along the precise path implied by our projections.”1 But just because we cannot forecast the future with as much precision as we’d like does not mean that the exercise is without value. The discipline of forecasting and assessing risks over the medium run helps us avoid focusing too much on short-run changes in the economic data or volatility in financial markets. It helps us be systematic, yet responsive to changes in economic conditions to the extent that they change the outlook. And the more that people understand this process, the more they’ll be able to anticipate where policy is likely to go even if the economy develops in unexpected ways. With that as background, let me turn to the outlook. The Economy I expect 2018 to be another good year for the economy, with above-trend growth, continued labor market strength, and firming inflation. The economy will be supported by favorable fundamentals, including accommodative monetary and fiscal policy, healthy household balance sheets, rising personal income, and an improving global economy. Nonetheless, financial market volatility has risen from the very low levels of recent years, the trade picture has created uncertainty, and geopolitical concerns have risen. I view these as risks to the outlook, but at this point, these factors have not caused me to change my outlook for the overall economy. The task before monetary policymakers is to calibrate policy to this healthy economy to sustain the expansion. Monetary policy is still accommodative, and as the economy strengthens, we don’t want to get behind the curve and find ourselves in a position of having to raise rates 1 See Bernanke, Ben S., “Federal Reserve Communications,” Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, D.C., November 14, 2007. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20071114a.htm) 3 more aggressively than anticipated. But we also don’t want to overreact to the positive outlook by raising rates too aggressively and potentially curtail the expansion. This takes some careful balancing. Economic growth Last year, economic growth picked up to around 2-1/2 percent, and I expect growth this year to be a bit stronger. Admittedly, incoming data suggest a moderation in consumer and business spending in the first quarter. But this moderation was from high levels, and I expect the first-quarter softness in output growth to be temporary, just as it was in the past couple of years. Last year, growth became more balanced across sectors and less dependent on only the consumer. Nonresidential investment grew at a pace of about 6 percent in 2017, a significant pickup from the anemic pace of less than 1 percent in the prior two years. That earlier weakness reflected the steep decline in oil prices between mid-2014 and early 2016, which caused a sharp pullback in drilling, mining, and their suppliers. The oil price decline was accompanied by a sharp appreciation of the dollar, which hurt manufacturers and other firms dependent on exports. But last year, oil prices rose, the dollar depreciated, and the economies of our trading partners began to strengthen, all of which supported increased business spending. Indeed, for the first time in many years, economic activity around the world is picking up. This should be a positive for U.S. exports. However, the tariffs on steel and aluminum imports, rhetoric suggesting an escalation of reciprocal tariffs on certain goods traded between the U.S. and China, and the ongoing renegotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) have clouded the trade picture. This cloud may not pass over quickly. Assessing the impact on the U.S. macroeconomy will ultimately depend on the actions taken by the U.S. and its trading partners with respect to trade, and whether those actions or the continuing uncertainty causes businesses and investors to reevaluate their outlook for the U.S. economy. 4 We have already seen a marked increase in volatility in the equity markets this year. However, it is helpful to put this volatility into perspective. Last year, the S&P 500 index rose 19 percent, amid extremely low volatility. Equity prices are little changed, on net, this year. More notable is the rise in volatility. We are less than four months into the year, but as of yesterday’s close, there have already been 29 days on which the S&P 500 rose or fell by more than 1 percent. Through all of last year, there were only eight such days – a very low number compared to the average of about 60 days per year from 2010 through 2016. Whenever there are such big swings in the market, we need to assess their implications. The increased volatility this year has not been associated with signs of financial market stress, such as disorderly trading, a lack of liquidity, or contagion to other markets. And while a deeper and more persistent drop in equity markets could lead to a pullback in risk-taking and spending, the movements we have seen thus far are not close to this scenario. Contacts tell us higher volatility has not deterred planned spending. Equity prices remain considerably above their levels at the start of last year, and both business and consumer sentiment remain at high levels. The changes in tax policy are expected to buoy both business and household spending this year. Lower tax rates and full expensing for investment in equipment and intangibles should spur additional business spending to meet higher near-term demand, some of which will be driven by higher federal spending. In a recent Cleveland Fed staff survey of firms in the District, over a third of the firms expecting tax savings this year said they planned to use some of the proceeds to increase investment. The tax package adds a positive element to an already healthy outlook for consumer spending. Personal incomes are growing because labor market conditions are strong. Lower personal tax rates and higher standard deductions should spur some additional household spending in the aggregate, although the impact of tax changes on individual households will depend on the level and sources of their income. 5 Household balance sheets are in much better shape since the Great Recession, reflecting a combination of deleveraging and increased savings. The strength in the household sector is also supporting a moderately paced expansion of the housing sector, despite the increase in mortgage rates. In the aggregate, housing equity held by households is now above its peak before the housing crash. While the new tax law contains several provisions that affect the tax treatment of homeownership, I expect activity in the housing sector to continue to expand at a sustainable pace. Labor markets The economy’s strength is well illustrated by the very strong conditions in labor markets. I expect that strength to continue. The unemployment rate, at 4.1 percent, is below its lowest point during the last expansion. It is under the 4-1/2 percent rate I gauge to be consistent with full employment over the longer run. I expect the unemployment rate to move below 4 percent this year and to remain below 4 percent next year. Over the first three months of the year, payroll jobs have grown by an average of about 200,000 per month. This is a pickup from last year’s average monthly gain of about 180,000 jobs and is well above most economists’ estimates of trend monthly job growth, which lie in the range of 75,000 to 120,000. Based on demographic factors, including the aging of the population, the longer-run trend in labor force participation is downward sloping, but participation has been fairly stable over the past two years, another sign of a strong labor market. Regional contacts continue to report that finding workers, both for higher-skill and lower-skill occupations, is very difficult, and that they are responding to labor shortages by offering higher wages and benefits and more flexible work schedules. The official statistics indicate that compensation growth 6 has moved up, from under 2 percent earlier in the expansion to over 2-1/2 percent more recently. That’s less of a pickup than what is typically seen given the tightness in labor markets, but it is consistent with the low productivity growth we’ve seen over the expansion.2 As investment continues to pick up, which should help to promote productivity growth, and firms continue to move wages up to attract and retain workers, I expect to see some strengthening in wage growth. Combining all the indicators, my assessment is that from the standpoint of the cyclical conditions monetary policy can address, we are slightly beyond maximum employment, one part of the Fed’s monetary policy mandate. Inflation The other part of the Fed’s mandate is price stability. The FOMC has set a symmetric goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. The FOMC aims for inflation to be 2 percent because it believes that this rate is most consistent over the longer run with our statutory mandate. Inflation measures can vary from month to month due to idiosyncratic factors and in response to temporary economic and financial disturbances. So to assess where we are relative to goal, it’s always a good idea to look through transitory movements in the numbers, both those above and those below our goal, and focus on where inflation is going on a sustained basis. Getting inflation back to 2 percent has been somewhat of a challenge, but since 2015, inflation has been generally moving up. At 1.8 percent, PCE inflation is near, but still slightly under, our goal. In the near term, we will likely see some higher inflation readings as last March’s sharp decline in the prices of cell 2 Over the longer run, wages, adjusted for inflation, tend to reflect the marginal product of workers. During this expansion, growth in labor productivity, as measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector, has been on the order of only 1 percent, less than half the pace over the prior two expansions . 7 phone data plans drop out of the year-over-year measures, but we need to remain focused on the medium- run outlook for inflation. With growth above trend, strong labor demand, and inflation expectations relatively stable, my outlook is that inflation will gradually move up to 2 percent on a sustainable basis over the next one to two years. I don’t expect inflation to move up sharply. But as inflation firms, it is important that monetary policymakers continue to convey through policy decisions and communications that we are committed to achieving our dual mandate goals. Before I turn to monetary policy, let me discuss the Pittsburgh economy. The Pittsburgh economy The path of the expansion in the Pittsburgh region reflects its industrial mix and the nature of the shocks that have hit the broader U.S. economy. Pittsburgh saw relatively strong employment growth early in the expansion. But by mid-2012, payroll growth had begun to weaken. The pullback in mining, drilling, and manufacturing in 2015 and 2016 had a significant effect on the Pittsburgh region. The region lost jobs in 2015, barely saw any job growth in 2016, and the unemployment rate moved up. But last year saw a significant improvement in job growth, and the unemployment rate resumed its decline and now stands at 4.8 percent. Payroll job growth picked up to a pace of nearly 2 percent last year, stronger than job growth in the state of Pennsylvania and in the nation. Reflecting the turnaround in energy prices, gains were especially strong in mining and construction. The region’s growing reputation as an attractive tourist destination also led to a rise in tourism-related jobs. The rise seen in education and healthcare jobs reflects a longer- run trend of economic diversification in the Pittsburgh region, which was discussed in a recent Cleveland 8 Fed report in the Bank’s Industrial Heartland Series.3 Such diversification allows regions to better adapt to changing economic forces. But the region faces some challenges. Pittsburgh’s population has been declining over the past two decades, the population is aging, and despite the presence of some of the best colleges and universities in the country, many students leave the region after graduation. The Allegheny Conference on Community Development recently updated its report on regional labor supply and demand.4 The report projects that healthcare and information technology workers will remain in high demand, but there will also be a sizable demand for engineers and skilled technicians linked to emerging technologies, including autonomous vehicles, additive manufacturing, robotics, and ethane cracker and petrochemical development. The report documents a mismatch in the skill sets of residents in the region and the requirements for workers who will be in highest demand. Reading the report gives you a sense of the complexity of the issues at hand. But you also learn of the positive steps being taken by business, community, and civic leaders to address workforce development issues to ensure that Pittsburgh remains economically competitive in the future. Monetary Policy Let me now turn to monetary policy. For some time now, the FOMC has been engaged in a strategy of gradually removing the high level of accommodation that was needed to address the Great Recession. This strategy is a balanced approach, reflecting the improvement in the economy over time and the progress that has been made on our longer-run monetary policy goals of maximum employment and price 3 Venkatu, Guhan, “Rust and Renewal: A Pittsburgh Retrospective,” Industrial Heartland Series, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, February 2018. (https://clevelandfed.org/region/industrial-heartland/retrospectives.aspx#pittsburghreport) 4 The Allegheny Conference on Community Development, “Inflection Point 2017-18: Supply, Demand and the Future of Work in the Pittsburgh Region,” December 2017. (https://www.alleghenyconference.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/018_InflectionPoint.pdf) 9 stability. In March, the FOMC raised the target range for the fed funds rate to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. I supported this increase, and if the economy evolves as I anticipate, I believe further increases in interest rates will be appropriate this year and next year. In my view, a gradual upward path of interest rates will help sustain the expansion and balance the risks so that our monetary policy goals are met and maintained. We want to give inflation time to move back to goal, and I don’t expect inflation to pick up sharply; this argues against a steep path. At the same time, the economy is slightly beyond maximum employment, and despite an increase in market volatility and longer-term interest rates since the start of the year, financial conditions are accommodative. It is appropriate to continue to remove some of the monetary policy accommodation to ensure we avoid a build-up in risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy were allowed to overheat. Recent research from the Cleveland Fed suggests that a strategy to overheat the economy in an attempt to pull more people back into the workforce is unlikely to have any lasting effect on labor force participation.5 Yet, overheating would have costs – it would necessitate sharper rate increases that could in themselves be destabilizing. A gradual upward path of interest rates should also help to avoid financial imbalances and a potential build-up of financial stability risks that could arise from the extended period of very low interest rates. Currently, in my assessment, financial stability vulnerabilities are at a moderate level. Leverage levels in the household, nonfinancial, and financial sectors are low to moderate, and vulnerabilities arising from the financial system’s role in transforming the maturity of assets or funding long-term assets with short- term liabilities are moderate. But corporate bond yields relative to Treasury yields are quite low, and prices in the commercial real estate market continue to rise while capitalization rates, which measure 5 Fallick, Bruce, and Pawel Krolikowski, “Hysteresis in Employment among Disadvantaged Workers,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 18-01, February 2018. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/publications/working-papers/2018-working-papers/wp- 1801-hysteresis-in-employment-among-disadvantaged-workers.aspx) 10 operating income relative to the sale price of commercial properties, are at or near historical lows. These developments are worth watching. Continued gradual reduction in monetary policy accommodation, given the economic outlook, will put monetary policy in a better position to address whatever risks, whether to the upside or to the downside, are ultimately realized. The path policy actually takes will depend on how the economy actually evolves. If the upside risks to growth come to pass, we may need to steepen the path a bit; if inflation surprises on the downside, we may need to go a bit slower. Since last October, the FOMC has also been implementing its plan to normalize the Fed’s balance sheet in terms of the size and composition of assets.6 To address the Great Recession, after the FOMC brought the fed funds rate down to effectively zero, it undertook several programs to purchase longer-term assets, including longer-maturity Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities. These purchases were undertaken to put further downward pressure on longer-term interest rates. We are now allowing maturing longer-term assets to roll off the balance sheet in a gradual and predictable way; this will take several years to complete. Longer-Run Issues I have been discussing the medium-run economic outlook and associated risks, but to conclude my talk, I’d like to address two interconnected longer-run issues facing the U.S. economy. 6 See FOMC, “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” June 13, 2017. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf) 11 A country’s standard of living over the longer run depends on its longer-run growth rate, which, in turn, depends on the growth of the labor force and the growth of productivity, which measures how effectively the economy combines labor and capital to create output. Based on demographics, labor force growth is projected to be considerably slower than it has been in recent decades. In the 1970s, the labor force grew about 2-1/2 percent per year, on average, as baby boomers and women entered the workforce. But since then, labor force growth has slowed, rising at slightly more than 1/2 percent per year over 2010-2016, and it is expected to remain near that level over the next decade.7 Labor productivity growth has also been slow during this expansion. Some of this is cyclical, but more persistent structural factors may also be at play.8 For example, the American spirit of innovation, entrepreneurship, ease of business entry and exit, and labor market flexibility have contributed to economic growth and well-being in the U.S. These factors of dynamism allow resources to be reallocated from less-productive to more-productive businesses and allow workers to move up the career ladder. But the level of dynamism has been declining for some time. The combination of slow labor force growth and slow productivity growth suggests that the potential growth rate of the economy will be lower than it was in the past. My own estimate of output growth over 7 For further discussion of demographics and economic growth, see Mester, Loretta J., “Demographics and Their Implications for the Economy and Policy,” Cato Institute’s 35th Annual Monetary Conference: The Future of Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C., November 16, 2017, and forthcoming in the Cato Journal. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20171116-demographics-and-their-implications- for-the-economy-and-policy.aspx) 8 For example, on average, over the 1990s and until the Great Recession, business start -ups accounted for about 3 percent of total employment per year. Since then, this share has fallen to around 2 percent. For further discussion of dynamism, see Mester, Loretta J., “The National and Regional Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” The African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania Annual Business Luncheon, Pittsburgh, PA, November 30, 2016. (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20161130-the-national-and-regional-economic- outlook-and-monetary-policy) 12 the longer run is 2 percent, which is a lot slower than the 3 to 3-1/2 percent rate seen over the 1980s and 1990s. Of course, this is not a fait accompli. Investment in human capital, in the form of education and training, and investment in physical capital and infrastructure can improve outcomes. The recently adopted changes to the tax code may encourage such investment. Well-designed government policies can also help spur basic science, R&D, and innovation; make it easier for people to start up companies; and help to ease the transition for households, industries, and communities being negatively affected by globalization and technological change. A well-thought-out immigration policy that attracts labor to the U.S. is also a necessary ingredient to support longer-run growth. But such policies need to be implemented as the country puts its longer-run fiscal situation on a sustainable path. Recently released projections by the Congressional Budget Office indicate that under current policy, the federal deficit as a share of GDP will be quite a bit higher 10 years from now, with the recent fiscal policy changes estimated to add $1.6 trillion to the cumulative deficit over the next 10 years.9 Because of the accumulating deficits, the ratio of federal debt held by the public to GDP is projected to rise from 78 percent at the end of this year to nearly 100 percent in 2028, the highest it has been since 1946. Note that the CBO estimates would be higher if the major provisions of the new tax and spending policies are extended instead of expiring as they do under current law. Ever-rising government debt levels would mean a higher share of government spending going to interest payments. This would tend to crowd out productive investments by the private sector and the 9 The deficit as a percentage of GDP (adjusted to exclude the effects of shifting payments from one fiscal year into another so that those payments are not made on a weekend) was 3.5 percent in 2017. Under the CBO’s baseline assumptions, the CBO projects this ratio to rise to 4.2 percent this year and to be 4.8 percent in 2028. See Summary Table 2 from CBO, “The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2018 to 2028,” Congress of the United States, April 2018. (https://www.cbo.gov/publication/53651) 13 government, thereby lowering productivity and longer-run growth. Investors would demand a higher risk premium in order to hold U.S. government debt. With over 40 percent of publicly held U.S. Treasury debt held by foreigners, these interest payments need not be reinvested in the U.S. In addition, the sovereign debt crisis in Europe over 2009-2012 shows that high debt levels can pose severe problems if investors lose faith in the ability of governments to service their debts, generating spikes in what had previously been viewed as risk-free rates. Longer-run fiscal sustainability in the U.S. will depend on what combination of tax increases and spending controls are put in place to ensure that debt-to-GDP is on a downward path. And this brings me back to monetary policy. Unless the U.S. can get its longer-run fiscal situation in order, high debt levels will constrain using fiscal policy as a tool to buoy the economy in recessions. This will put more of the burden on monetary policy to stimulate the economy during downturns. But in a world with lower potential growth and lower equilibrium interest rates, monetary policy will also have less room to act. The zero lower bound on interest rates would be hit more often, and we would find ourselves having to rely more often on nonconventional policy tools like asset purchases. Today’s healthy outlook for the U.S. economy over the medium run gives policymakers the opportunity to consider these longer-run issues, which the country will need to deal with in order to ensure a healthy economy in the future. Before I overstay my welcome, let me end here and thank you for your attention. I look forward to your questions.

Issues for U.S. Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Global Interdependence Center Central Banking Series with Banque de France Paris, France May 14, 2018 1 Introduction Let me begin by thanking the Global Interdependence Center and the Banque de France for inviting me back to this important conference series. I always learn a lot from the GIC’s Central Banking Series conferences, and I am proud of the association I have had with the GIC for many years. Three years ago when I spoke here, I reviewed the tools that monetary policymakers had put in place to address the financial crisis and Great Recession. I discussed the Federal Reserve’s plans for normalizing policy and some of the challenges we would face as we transitioned from extraordinary economic and policy times back to ordinary times. Today, the environment has changed, but policymakers, as always, continue to face challenges in determining the most effective policies within the environment. So today, I’d like to carry on the theme and talk about current and future issues that Fed policymakers will face as we set appropriate monetary policy. My remarks will reflect my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee, the monetary policymaking body within the Fed. The U.S. Economy The U.S. economy is performing very well and I expect that to continue. Over this year and next, I expect above-trend output growth, continued strength in labor markets, and firming inflation. I believe the U.S. economy is slightly beyond maximum employment, from the standpoint of the cyclical conditions monetary policy can address, and that inflation will reach our symmetric 2 percent goal on a sustainable basis over the next one to two years. This outlook is based on favorable underlying fundamentals, including accommodative monetary and fiscal policies, healthy household balance sheets, rising personal income, a global economy that is improving overall, and stable inflation expectations. Of course, as with any forecast, there are risks around the outlook. Financial market volatility has risen from the very low levels of recent years. But, so far, investors seem to be taking it in stride and firms tell 2 us the volatility has not thwarted their spending plans. The rise in oil prices and increase in the value of the dollar are worth watching. Geopolitical risks have risen and there is uncertainty around trade, which may not be resolved soon. Assessing the impact of trade developments on the U.S. macroeconomy will ultimately depend on the actions actually taken by the U.S. and its trading partners. But in the meantime, continued uncertainty may also cause businesses and investors to reevaluate their outlook for the U.S. economy and alter their spending in the near term. We will need to continue to monitor the trade situation. On the upside, the tax package and increased federal spending in the U.S. are expected to add to an already healthy level of spending in the second half of this year and next year, but the magnitudes and exact timing are still somewhat uncertain. Despite the risks, this is one of the most favorable outlooks we have had in a long time, so one might ask: What are the challenges? The task before monetary policymakers is to calibrate policy to this healthy outlook to meet and maintain our dual mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability. At its meeting earlier this month, the FOMC decided to maintain the target range for the federal funds rate at 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. This was consistent with the strategy the FOMC has followed as progress has been made on our monetary policy goals, namely, to gradually remove the high level of accommodation that was needed to address the Great Recession. Also, at the May meeting, the FOMC continued to implement its plan, initiated last October, to normalize the Fed’s balance sheet in terms of the size and composition of assets.1 The balance sheet grew in size and lengthened in maturity during the Great Recession when the Fed undertook several programs to purchase longer-term assets in order to put further downward pressure on longer-term interest rates.2 We are now allowing maturing longer-term assets to 1 See FOMC, “Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans,” June 13, 2017 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf) . 2 As a result of the purchases, the Fed’s balance sheet grew, from nearly $900 billion in assets in 2007, or 6 percent of nominal GDP, to about $4.4 trillion today, or 22 percent of nominal GDP. The balance sheet’s composition changed from mainly short-term Treasuries to longer-maturity Treasuries and agency MBS. 3 roll off the balance sheet in a gradual and predictable way; this process will take several years to complete. The economy is dynamic, so calibrating monetary policy to the medium-run outlook involves several moving parts. Essentially, the challenge for policymakers is to assess current and future performance on our policy goals of maximum employment and price stability, and to assess the current and appropriate future stance of monetary policy. So let me discuss each of these. Maximum Employment The U.S. labor market is strong. The unemployment rate, at 3.9 percent, is below its lowest point during the last expansion and near its lowest point in the past 40 years. I expect the unemployment rate to fall further this year and to remain below 4 percent next year. This year, payroll job growth has strengthened to an average of 200,000 jobs per month. This is well above most economists’ estimates of trend job growth, which lie in the range of 75,000 to 120,000 jobs per month. The trend estimate depends on what one assumes about labor force participation, and this is a key factor in determining whether the economy is at or beyond the level of employment that is sustainable over the longer run. Based on demographic factors, including the aging of the U.S. population, the longer-run trend in participation is downward sloping. But the labor force participation rate has been fairly stable over the past two years, a sign of strength in the labor market. We are increasingly hearing from a wide variety of businesses and job placement firms that it is hard to find workers, for both higher-skill and lower-skill occupations, and firms are responding to labor shortages by raising wages. The acceleration in the employment cost index over the past two years suggests that the anecdotal reports of firms raising wages to attract and retain workers are now filtering through to the official statistics. 4 An issue for policymakers is that it is difficult to know with precision how tight labor markets are. The acceleration in compensation growth, from under 2 percent earlier in the expansion to about 2-3/4 percent more recently, is not as strong as one might normally expect from tight labor markets. In my view, part of the reason for this is the low level of productivity growth over the expansion. Over the longer run, wages, adjusted for inflation, tend to reflect the marginal product of workers. During this expansion, labor productivity growth has been on the order of only 1 percent.3 This is less than half the pace over the prior two expansions. Research from the Cleveland Fed staff suggests that nominal wage growth over the expansion is not a puzzle if you account for productivity growth, labor market conditions, and inflation.4 Nonetheless, economists and policymakers have to take on board all the data when assessing where the economy is relative to goal. The movements in labor force participation, combined with the fact that wage and price inflation have remained moderate even as labor markets have strengthened, suggest that labor market conditions may not be as tight as we originally assumed. As the expansion has played out, FOMC policymakers have lowered their estimates of the longer-run level of unemployment; these estimates come with a considerable amount of uncertainty. Five years ago, in the March 2013 Summary of Economic Projections, the central tendency of projections of the longer-run unemployment rate ranged from 5.2 to 6.0 percent.5 In projections this March, the central tendency was 4.3 to 4.7 percent, down a 3 Labor productivity as measured by output per hour worked in the nonfarm business sector has averaged 1 percent over this expansion. 4 See Pinheiro, Roberto and Meifeng Yang, “Wage Growth after the Great Recession,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, March 21, 2017 (https://clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/economic-commentary/2017-economic- commentaries/ec-201704-wage-growth-after-great-recession.aspx). 5 See the Summary of Economic Projections section of FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” March 19-20, 2013 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20130320.pdf ). 5 percentage point or more, with a median projection of 4.5 percent.6 I have also moved down my own estimate of the longer-run unemployment rate over time, to 4.5 percent. Despite lower estimates of the longer-run unemployment rate, in my view, if one combines all the indicators, labor markets do appear to be slightly beyond maximum employment, and the outlook suggests that labor markets will continue to be tight over the next couple of years. In the past, when labor markets have moved too far beyond maximum employment, with the unemployment rate moving substantially below estimates of its longer-run level for some time, the economy overheated, inflation rose, and the economy ended up in a recession. Achieving a soft landing is difficult and recent research by Cleveland Fed staff suggests that a strategy to overheat the economy in an attempt to pull more people back into the workforce is unlikely to have a lasting effect on labor force participation.7 An interesting paper by economists at Stanford University and the University of Chicago suggests that overly tight labor markets can result in firms having to meet rising demand by hiring workers into jobs that are not the best match to their skill sets.8 The longer this need to hire lower-productivity workers continues, the larger the decline in employment when the inevitable bad shock and downturn comes. All this suggests that policymakers have to continue to assess labor market conditions, and to balance progress on this goal with progress on our other objective, price stability. 6 See the Summary of Economic Projections section of FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” March 20-21, 2018 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20180321.pdf). 7 Fallick, Bruce, and Pawel Krolikowski, “Hysteresis in Employment among Disadvantaged Workers,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 18-01, February 2018 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/newsroom-and-events/publications/working-papers/2018-working-papers/wp- 1801-hysteresis-in-employment-among-disadvantaged-workers.aspx). 8 Jackson, Matthew O., and Pietro Tebaldi, “A Forest Fire Theory of the Duration of a Boom and the Size of a Subsequent Bust,” Working Paper, Stanford University and University of Chicago, June 2017 (https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2263501). 6 Price Stability The FOMC has set a symmetric longer-run goal of 2 percent inflation, as measured by the year-over-year change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, that is, PCE inflation. The FOMC aims for inflation to be 2 percent because it believes that this rate is most consistent over the longer run with our statutory mandate. The goal is symmetric, meaning that the FOMC would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or persistently below this goal and such persistent deviations would warrant a policy response.9 Inflation measures can vary from month to month due to idiosyncratic factors and in response to temporary economic and financial disturbances. So when we assess where inflation is relative to our goal, it is important to look through transitory movements and focus on where inflation is going on a sustained basis. Our goal is expressed in terms of total PCE inflation, but policymakers also look at a variety of other measures of inflation to get a sense of the underlying inflation trend. These include CPI measures; core measures of PCE and CPI, which exclude food and energy prices because they tend to be volatile; and the trimmed-mean and median measures, which drop those components with the largest and smallest changes. We also use various models to forecast inflation. The models include components to account for current and past inflation, utilization rates of labor and capital, and inflation expectations. As good as our various models are, it’s important to remember that a significant portion of the variation in inflation rates comes from idiosyncratic factors that can’t be forecasted.10 So forecasts of inflation, like those of longer-run unemployment, have wide error bands. For example, based on historical forecast 9 See FOMC, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 30, 2018 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf). 10 See Yellen, Janet, “Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy,” remarks delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24, 2015 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/yellen20150924a.pdf). 7 errors over the past 20 years, the 70 percent confidence range for forecasts of PCE inflation one to two years ahead is around 1.0 percentage point.11 Inflation has been running under the 2 percent goal for much of the expansion, but it has been firming and is now near our goal. Measured year-over-year, in March, total PCE inflation rose to 2.0 percent and core PCE inflation rose to 1.9 percent. These are welcome developments, but it is too soon to say that we have met our inflation goal on a sustained basis. Near-term monthly readings of inflation have risen, but some of the pickup reflects higher commodity prices and some of the strength is likely to be temporary, as low readings from last March drop out of the calculations. I expect to see month-to-month variation in the numbers around an underlying upward trend in inflation, as inflation moves to our goal on a sustainable basis over the next year or so. One of the challenges for monetary policymakers will be to keep the public and market participants focused on the medium-run outlook for inflation, even as higher monthly readings in the near term are followed by some softer readings. We don’t want inflation expectations to react to these temporary movements, and policymakers can best avoid that by continuing to convey through policy decisions and communications that we are committed to achieving our dual mandate goals. Consistent with the FOMC’s longer-run monetary policy strategy, I am comfortable looking through transitory movements in inflation – those to the low side and those to the high side – as we aim for inflation over the longer run to be at our symmetric 2 percent objective, allowing for the normal variation in measured inflation. 11 See Table 2: “Average Historical Projection Error Ranges,” in the Summary of Economic Projections portion of the “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” March 20-21, 2018 (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20180321.pdf). 8 The Stance of Monetary Policy As the FOMC said in its May statement, the stance of monetary policy remains accommodative. Currently, one indicator that policy is accommodative is that the fed funds rate, adjusted for inflation, is negative even though the economic outlook is strong. Another indicator is that many monetary policy rules are pointing to higher interest rates given the outlook. For example, the simple monetary policy rules across several forecasts that are available on the Cleveland Fed’s external website indicate that policy rates should be rising given the forecasts, with the median path somewhat steeper in the near term than the median funds rate path in the March Summary of Economic Projections.12 In its May statement, the FOMC also said it expects economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant further gradual increases in the fed funds rate. In my view, the medium-run outlook supports the continued gradual removal of policy accommodation; it seems the best strategy for balancing the risks to both of our policy goals and avoiding a build-up of financial stability risks. We want to give inflation time to move back to goal, and I don’t expect inflation to pick up sharply; this argues against a steep path. At the same time, the economy is slightly beyond maximum employment, and financial conditions are accommodative. In my view, it is appropriate to continue to remove some of the monetary policy accommodation to ensure that we avoid a build-up in risks to macroeconomic stability that could arise if the economy were allowed to overheat or a build-up of financial imbalances or risks to financial stability that could arise from the extended period of very low interest rates. Of course, the path policy actually takes will depend on how the economy actually evolves. If the upside risks to growth come to pass, we may need to steepen the path a bit; if inflation surprises on the downside, we may need to go a bit slower, but the gradual upward path is consistent with the modal economic outlook at this time. 12 See Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, “Simple Monetary Policy Rules” (https://www.clevelandfed.org/en/our-research/indicators-and-data/simple-monetary-policy-rules.aspx). 9 As we continue to move rates up, we will have to continue to assess whether monetary policy is accommodative, neutral, or restrictive. Essentially, it requires assessing where the policy rate is relative to the level of the short-term interest rate that represents neutral monetary policy, that is, the equilibrium interest rate. This equilibrium interest rate will vary with economic conditions that affect the demand for investment and the supply of savings; there are wide error bands around estimates of this rate; and the rate over a short-run horizon can differ from that over a longer horizon. For example, as the economy deteriorated during the financial crisis and Great Recession, the short-run equilibrium interest rate fell to a level below what would be expected to prevail over the longer run. Now, with fiscal policy turning from restrictive to stimulative, the economy growing above trend, and investment rising, the short-term equilibrium interest rate is rising, too. As the expansion continues, it could be that in order to maintain our policy goals, we may need to move the fed funds rate, for a time, a bit above the level of the funds rate that is expected to prevail over the longer run. Indeed, the March Summary of Economic Projections indicates that the median appropriate policy path has the fed funds rate in 2020 moving a bit above the estimate of its longer-run level, which is about 3 percent. Of course, 2020 is a long time away and the policy path actually followed will be responsive to changes in the outlook. In terms of that estimate of the longer-run fed funds rate, one needs to consider what policy rate is consistent with maximum employment and stable inflation over the longer run. There is reason to believe that this equilibrium rate is lower now than it used to be. In fact, FOMC participants have been lowering their estimates of the longer-run fed funds rate over time. For example, in March 2014, the median estimate was 4 percent. Now it is about 3 percent. The equilibrium rate is related to the longer-run potential growth rate of the economy, which itself depends on the growth of the labor force and the growth of productivity, a measure of how effectively the economy combines labor and capital to create output. 10 Based on demographics, U.S. labor force growth is projected to be considerably slower than it has been in recent decades.13 While some of the slow growth in labor productivity during this expansion has been cyclical, more persistent structural factors may also be at play.14 The combination of slow labor force growth and slow productivity growth suggests that the potential growth rate of the economy will be lower than it was in the past. My own estimate of output growth over the longer run is 2 percent, which is a lot slower than the 3 to 3-1/2 percent rate seen over the 1980s and 1990s, and my own estimate of the longer- run nominal fed funds rate is 3 percent, or 1 percent in real terms. Of course, policy changes outside the realm of monetary policy could foster higher productivity growth and labor force growth and ultimately support higher potential output growth and equilibrium interest rates. But such policies need to be implemented as the country puts its longer-run fiscal situation on a sustainable path. Recently released projections by the Congressional Budget Office indicate that under current policy, the U.S. federal deficit as a share of GDP will be considerably higher 10 years from now, with rising government debt levels implying that a higher share of government spending will go to 13 In the 1970s, the labor force grew about 2-1/2 percent per year, on average, as baby boomers and women entered the workforce. But since then, labor force growth has slowed, rising at slightly more than 1/2 percent per year over 2010-2016, and it is expected to remain near that level over the next decade. For further discussion of demographics and economic growth, see Mester, Loretta J., “Demographics and Their Implications for the Economy and Policy,” Cato Institute’s 35th Annual Monetary Conference: The Future of Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C., November 16, 2017, and forthcoming in the Cato Journal (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20171116-demographics-and-their-implications- for-the-economy-and-policy.aspx). 14 For example, on average, over the 1990s and until the Great Recession, business start -ups accounted for about 3 percent of total employment per year. Since then, this share has fallen to around 2 percent. For further discussion of dynamism, see Mester, Loretta J., “The National and Regional Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy,” The African American Chamber of Commerce of Western Pennsylvania Annual Business Lunche on, Pittsburgh, PA, November 30, 2016 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20161130-the-national-and-regional-economic- outlook-and-monetary-policy). 11 interest payments.15 This would tend to crowd out productive investments by the private sector and the government, thereby lowering productivity and longer-run growth. Monetary Policy Frameworks: Operations and Strategy Let me conclude by touching on two future monetary policy considerations: the operating framework that the FOMC uses to ensure that its policy rate is being maintained at the appropriate level, and the monetary policy framework that the FOMC uses to determine what that appropriate level of the policy rate is.16 Before the financial crisis, the FOMC kept the supply of bank reserves scarce. The FOMC could make small changes in that supply by buying or selling short-term Treasuries, and this allowed the FOMC to ensure that the fed funds rate was maintained at the FOMC’s target. But now, as a result of the Fed’s large-scale asset purchases, reserves are very abundant: indeed, banks are holding a bit more than $2 trillion in reserves in accounts at the Fed, and almost all of this is in excess of what is required by regulation. At these levels, small changes in the supply of reserves have little effect on the fed funds rate. Instead, the Fed brings the fed funds rate into its target range by adjusting the rate it pays on excess reserves, and by using overnight reverse repurchase agreements, which help put a floor on the fed funds 15 The deficit as a percentage of GDP (adjusted to exclude the effects of shifting payments from one fiscal year into another so that those payments are not made on a weekend) was 3.5 percent in 2017. Under the CBO’s baseline assumptions, the CBO projects that this ratio will rise to 4.2 percent this year and be 4.8 percent in 2028. See Summary Table 2 from CBO, “The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2018 to 2028,” Congress of the United States, April 2018 (https://www.cbo.gov/publication/53651). 16 For further discussion of monetary policy frameworks, see Mester, Loretta J., “Monetary Policy Frameworks,” National Association for Business Economics and American Economic Association Session at the Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, Philadelphia, PA, January 5, 2018 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20180105-monetary-policy-frameworks), and Mester, Loretta J., “Remarks on the FOMC’s Monetary Policy Framework,” panel remarks at the 2018 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, NY, February 23, 2018 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/speeches/sp-20180223-remarks-on-the-fomcs-monetary- policy-framework). 12 rate. As normalization of the balance sheet progresses, the FOMC will need to decide which operating framework it will use going forward. The fed funds market has changed considerably since the financial crisis, and part of the consideration will be whether the fed funds rate will remain the best indicator of the general level of short-run interest rates.17 Another issue for the FOMC is the strategic framework it uses to determine appropriate monetary policy. Currently, we use a flexible inflation-targeting framework, which has served the FOMC well in effectively promoting our policy goals. But as the economy moves back to normal, it seems an opportune time for the FOMC to undertake a study of its framework. As a matter of good governance, a central bank should periodically review its assumptions, methods, and models. Moreover, if the longer-term equilibrium real interest rate does remain lower than in past decades, there will be less room for monetary policy to cushion against a negative economic shock, policy would likely hit the zero lower bound more often, and nontraditional monetary policy tools would have to be used more often. To the extent that these tools are less effective or are constrained from being used, the potential is for longer recessions and longer bouts of low inflation. Given this potential scenario, now is the time to assess whether changes to our current framework could make monetary policy more effective in achieving our goals. Researchers have suggested several alternative frameworks, such as targeting an inflation rate higher than 2 percent, moving to an inflation- targeting range instead of a point goal, or targeting a path for the price level or for nominal GDP rather than for inflation. None of these alternative frameworks are without challenges, but the positives and 17 For a review of changes in the fed funds market since the financial crisis, see Craig, Ben R. and Sara Millington, “The Federal Funds Market since the Financial Crisis,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Commentary, April 5, 2017 (https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/economic-commentary/2017-economic- commentaries/ec-201707-the-federal-funds-market-since-the-financial-crisis.aspx). 13 negatives should be thoroughly reviewed to evaluate whether the net benefits of any of the alternatives would outweigh those of the flexible inflation-targeting framework currently in use. Conclusion Three years ago at this conference, I discussed the challenges U.S. monetary policymakers faced in preparing for the start of monetary policy normalization. Today, the medium-run outlook for the U.S. economy is very favorable and policy normalization is well underway. While the economic environment has changed, monetary policy challenges remain. I appreciate the opportunity this conference has given me to explain how I’m approaching some of the policy issues the FOMC faces. I look forward to your questions.

A Practical Viewpoint on Financial System Resiliency and Monetary Policy Loretta J. Mester President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Third Annual ECB Macroprudential Policy and Research Conference European Central Bank Frankfurt, Germany May 18, 2018 1 Introduction I thank the European Central Bank for inviting me to participate in this conference on macroprudential policy and research. The work being undertaken at the ECB, other central banks, and universities has increased our knowledge and understanding about the interlinkages between the macroeconomy and financial systems. It has been nine years since the financial crisis, and the global economy has improved substantially over that time. In the U.S., the economy is near both of our monetary policy goals of maximum employment and price stability, and the outlook is one of the most favorable we have seen in a long time. As we move further from the crisis, one lesson can never be lost: the importance of maintaining a resilient financial system for a healthy economy. Today, I’ll spend my time discussing monetary policy and macroprudential policy from the practical perspective of a U.S. monetary policymaker. Research informs our policy decisions, but at the end of the day, decisions have to be made in a world that doesn’t match our models and without full information. Research can be elegant, practice rarely is, but when we are setting policy, effectiveness is what we strive for. Before I continue, I should note that the views I’ll present are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve System or my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee. U.S. Financial System Regulation and Macroprudential Tools It is an understatement to say that the U.S. financial system’s regulatory structure is complex. A wide variety of institutions offer financial services in the U.S. Banks, a category that includes commercial banks, savings and loans, and credit unions, provide only about a third of the credit in the nation. Other providers include insurance companies; mutual funds; pension funds; government-sponsored enterprises, including Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which issue mortgage-backed securities; and other nonbanks, including broker-dealers, finance companies, and mortgage real estate investment trusts.1 1 See Fischer (2014). 2 At the federal level, there are multiple financial regulators, including the Federal Reserve, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the National Credit Union Association, the U.S. Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, and the Federal Housing Finance Agency. There are financial system regulators at the state level as well. In many cases, the regulatory authority of these agencies is defined by type of institution rather than by financial instrument. The 2008 financial crisis exposed gaps in the regulatory and supervisory architecture in the U.S., which contributed to a build-up in financial imbalances and systemic risk. The Dodd-Frank Act, signed into law in 2010, established provisions aimed at reducing the probability of another financial crisis and reducing the costs on the rest of the economy when a shock hits the financial system. It directed the regulatory agencies to augment their traditional microprudential approach, which focused on the safety and soundness of individual institutions, with a macroprudential approach, which encouraged assessing the risk across institutions. Dodd-Frank also created a new body, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), to promote coordination and information sharing across the financial system regulators. An important power of the FSOC is its ability to designate nonbanks as systemically important, bringing them under more banking-type supervision and regulation. The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System has the responsibility for supervising systemically important financial institutions, including these FSOC-designated nonbank financial companies, large bank holding companies, and the U.S. operations of certain foreign banking organizations. This complex system of institutions and regulators complicates risk monitoring and the ability to tailor regulations and supervisory oversight to potential risks to the financial system. But there are ongoing efforts in the U.S. to do so, and the Federal Reserve has developed a framework for systematically tracking financial stability risks. Before I describe the framework, let me spend a few minutes on why the 3 FOMC regularly reviews financial stability, even though financial stability is not an explicit part of the FOMC’s monetary policy mandate. Financial Stability and Monetary Policy Financial stability matters to the FOMC for several reasons. First, monetary policy affects the real economy by affecting financial conditions. When financial markets are disrupted, as they were during the financial crisis, the transmission of monetary policy to the economy can also be disrupted. Second, the goals of monetary policy and financial stability are interconnected. Indeed, the FOMC’s statement on its monetary policy strategy says that the FOMC’s monetary policy decisions “reflect its longer-run goals, its medium-term outlook, and its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals.”2 Financial stability is a necessary but not sufficient condition for macroeconomic stability. On the other side of the coin, macroeconomic stability is an important contributor to financial stability, and well-formulated and well-communicated monetary policy supports financial stability. A third reason monetary policymakers need to consider financial stability is that the financial crisis changed how monetary policy is implemented. From a practical standpoint, monetary policymakers have to be more attuned to developments in financial markets and institutions than they once were. The actions taken to address the financial crisis and Great Recession increased the size and changed the composition of the Fed’s balance sheet. The Fed is now transacting with a broader set of financial institutions, so policymakers have to have a more complete understanding of the plumbing in financial markets. 2 See FOMC (2018). 4 The Fed’s Framework for Monitoring Financial Stability The basic framework used by Federal Reserve staff to monitor financial stability risks recognizes the complex nature of the financial system in the U.S., with its mix of bank-based and market-based finance and its multiplicity of regulatory and supervisory bodies.3 The framework tracks a standard set of financial system vulnerabilities that could amplify and propagate shocks. It monitors these vulnerabilities using a set of indicators on various financial activities in four categories: asset valuation pressures (reflecting the price of risk and risk appetites among investors), leverage, maturity and liquidity transformation, and interconnectedness and complexity.4 Some of these vulnerabilities, like leverage, vary over the business and financial cycles; others, like complexity, are more structural in nature, reflecting the design of markets and intermediaries. The vulnerabilities are assessed across four sectors of the economy: the banking sector; the nonbank financial sector, including capital markets, nonbanks, and shadow banks; the nonfinancial business sector; and the household sector. Tools like heat maps and data- visualization techniques aid in tracking changes in vulnerabilities over time.5 Assessments of individual vulnerabilities are then combined to get an assessment of the overall vulnerability of the U.S. financial system. Recognizing the global interconnectedness of financial systems, the Fed staff has also developed tools to assess foreign financial stability.6 Four times a year, the staff uses this framework to brief the FOMC, and an evaluation of developments related to financial stability is now a regular section in the Board of Governors’ monetary policy report to Congress.7 3 See Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2013, 2015). 4 Important research on the propagation and amplification of shocks throughout the financial system includes Kiyotaki and Moore (1997), Brunnermeier and Sannikov (2014), and Gorton and Ordoñez (2014). 5 See Aikman, et al. (2015a, 2015b). 6 For example, see FOMC (2017), page 5. 7 See Board of Governors (2018a). 5 Macroprudential Policy and Monetary Policy Although the FOMC regularly discusses financial system stability, the financial system regulators, including the Federal Reserve Board of Governors (a group that is distinct from the FOMC), have responsibility for maintaining and enhancing the structural resilience of the financial system. In the U.S., structural resilience is promoted by requiring higher levels and quality of capital (including a minimum non-risk-based leverage ratio, as well as risk-based capital standards); conducting stress tests; imposing liquidity standards; developing effective resolution methods for systemically important banks and nonbank financial institutions; requiring large banks to submit living will resolution plans; and implementing reforms to improve the stability of certain nonbank markets.8 Financial regulators are also focused on working with the industry to enhance strategies to improve the cyber resiliency of the financial sector, as cybersecurity risk is a continuing threat to financial stability. In contrast to the structural tools, compared to other countries, the U.S. has fewer countercyclical tools that can be varied with the perceived level of vulnerabilities in the financial system. However, the stress tests can be used as a countercyclical tool to the extent that the vulnerabilities of concern can be built into the stress scenarios. For example, this year’s adverse stress scenario includes deep declines in corporate bond and real estate prices.9 Another cyclical tool available in the U.S. is the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB), which can be imposed on internationally active banks. The Federal Reserve Board has indicated that it will use this tool only when systemic vulnerabilities are “meaningfully above normal” and that, when using the tool, it intends to increase the buffer gradually.10 The Board anticipates giving 8 The Securities and Exchange Commission implemented revisions to the regulations governing money marke t mutual funds in 2014 and 2016 to reduce the chance of investor runs on these funds. In 2009, the G20 countries agreed that standardized over-the-counter derivatives contracts should be cleared by central counterparties. There are limits to interday credit exposures in the tri-party repo market. 9 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018b). 10 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016). Other countries have used limits on loan -to-value ratios and debt-to-income ratios that vary over the cycle and are targeted to particular sectors like housing or household credit to control leverage. See Liang (2013) and Fischer (2014). 6 banking organizations 12 months before an increase would become effective.11 The U.S. has not had much experience with this tool. It has yet to set a positive countercyclical capital buffer, even though countercyclical policy calls for building up buffers during good times so that they are available during bad times. And the lead times needed to use this tool likely make it less effective at addressing vulnerabilities that may rapidly develop or may be detected only after they have had time to develop. So focusing on increasing the resiliency of the financial system’s structure across the business and financial cycles seems well-founded. And from a practical viewpoint, even if, in theory, using countercyclical tools might be preferred, their limits suggest we need to at least contemplate using monetary policy to address financial stability in some cases. Indeed, the limits to the macroprudential tools were illuminated in a tabletop exercise in which I participated with some other Federal Reserve Bank presidents.12 The exercise involved a hypothetical scenario in which commercial real estate prices were rising sharply but the economy was at full employment and inflation was somewhat below goal. The objective of the exercise was for policymakers to use available macroprudential tools and possibly monetary policy to reduce the risk posed to financial stability by the commercial real estate boom while fostering the Fed’s monetary policy goals. Implementation challenges included having to coordinate across multiple regulators or, in some cases, to follow legally required administrative procedures like public comment periods, which delay application of the tools. Such delays could make the tools ineffective or even cause them to exacerbate the situation rather than shore up the financial system. Another limitation was that some tools applied only to regulated banking firms, which could result in risks shifting to other parts of the financial system. I came away from the exercise more convinced of the need to focus on the structural resilience of the financial system across the business and financial cycles. 11 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017). 12 See Adrian, et al. (2015). 7 Whether monetary policy should be used to address financial stability risks, such as sharply rising credit growth, is still an open question.13 The benefits depend on the extent to which monetary policy would be effective at stemming financial imbalances, thereby lowering the probability of a financial crisis or limiting the effects of the crisis, and whether or not there are macroprudential tools that could be used instead. Any benefits of attempting to use monetary policy to stem financial imbalances would need to be weighed against the cost of slowing the economy and increasing the volatility of output and of inflation.14 Let me now turn to the practical question of how the decisions about financial stability policy and monetary policy might effectively be organized, and then end with some conclusions. The Governance of Financial Stability Policy I argued earlier that the goals of monetary policy and financial stability policy are complementary over the longer run. But the policies do interact, and at times, there can be short-run trade-offs between monetary policy actions taken to support macroeconomic stability and financial stability. For example, an extended period of very low interest rates aimed at returning the macroeconomy to health might also generate financial imbalances and pose potential risks to financial stability by spurring investors to search for yield. Or a tightening of macroprudential policy to address financial stability risks could result in tighter financial conditions more generally, thereby increasing the likelihood that a monetary policy response would be needed to promote macroeconomic stability. 13 Borio, et al. (2018) argue that monetary policy should be more attentive to the financial cycle. Svensson (2017) argues against “leaning against the wind.” International Monetary Fund (2015) and Smets (2014) review the literature on the use of monetary policy for financial stability. 14 An interesting paper by Gourio, Kashyap, and Sim (2017) shows that the cost-benefit analysis depends on the nature of the shocks hitting the economy and the severity of the financial crisis. In the case of only demand and productivity shocks, having monetary policy focus only on macroeconomic stability also limits the probab ility of a financial crisis. But when there are financial shocks and when a financial crisis would have a large negative impact on the economy, using monetary policy to limit credit growth would increase welfare, even though it would mean higher volatility of output and inflation. 8 In many countries, responsibility for monetary policy and responsibility for financial stability policy are handled by two different committees, which, in some cases, have some members in common.15 Canada’s financial sector regulator is not part of the central bank, but the Bank of Canada assesses financial system vulnerabilities and risks and publishes this assessment twice a year.16 In Sweden, the financial stability authority is not part of the central bank, but the central bank publishes a financial stability report and its governor sits on the financial stability council, an advisory board. The ECB is somewhat different, with responsibility for both monetary policy and macroprudential policy ultimately resting with the ECB Governing Council. The U.K. has a two-committee structure housed within the Bank of England. The monetary policy and financial policy committees are independent, but they also share members, which allows for good communication and information sharing between the two committees. One example of coordination came in August 2013 when the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee initiated forward guidance that it would hold interest rates low and consider additional asset purchases at least until the unemployment rate had fallen to 7 percent.17 But it also said that a condition that would vacate this guidance would be if the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee found that the stance of monetary policy was threatening financial stability in a way that couldn’t be contained by the available macroprudential tools. In the U.S., financial system complexity means that we don’t have a single authority that oversees financial stability. While the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) has the ability to designate firms as systemically important financial institutions and, therefore, subject to enhanced regulation by the 15 Kohn (2015) discusses the benefits of what he calls this two-committee approach. 16 See Bank of Canada (2017). 17 Kohn (2014) discusses this example, and see Bank of England (2013). 9 Fed, the FSOC does not have the authority to take actions to mitigate emerging risks. Instead, it can make recommendations to the regulatory agencies and to Congress, which can then decide to act or not.18 But all is not lost. With its oversight of systemically important financial institutions, the Board of Governors plays an important role in setting macroprudential policy in the U.S. The Board also constitutes part of the FOMC, so that there is a potential for some coordination between macroprudential policy and monetary policy or, at the very least, good communication and information sharing. In some sense, the U.S. has a two-committee set-up and one could imagine a relationship between the FOMC and the Board of Governors similar to that between the two policy committees in the U.K. In the U.S., housing both committees within the central bank has an important governance benefit. By design, the FOMC’s monetary policy decisions are independent from short-run political considerations, with appropriate accountability to elected officials and the public. Similarly, it is also important that policymakers have some independence in setting macroprudential policy.19 There will be times when tools have to be used well before there are clear signs of instability. This might be difficult to explain, and there may be various interests that would prefer the tools not be invoked in seemingly good times. This means that macroprudential policymakers should be communicating with the public to improve the public’s understanding of how financial stability risks are being monitored, what tools are available to promote financial resilience, and the rationale for macroprudential policy decisions. Systematic and transparent application of financial stability policy would seem to be as important as it is in the conduct of monetary policy. Still, we are a distance away from being able to articulate a clear strategy and a set of principles to guide decisions about the circumstances under which monetary policy should be used as a tool for financial stability and when we should rely upon macroprudential tools. 18 Kohn (2014) compares and contrasts the financial stability structure in the U.S. with that in the U.K. 19 Kohn (2014) discusses the importance of the financial stability authority being able to pur sue its goals independent of short-run political considerations even when the actions taken aren’t popular. 10 Conclusions Let me conclude with three points I take away from this practical viewpoint on financial resilience and monetary policy in the U.S. First, given some of the limitations on macroprudential tools and the complexity of financial system regulation, ensuring the structural resilience of the financial system throughout the cycle is the first line of defense in promoting financial stability. Higher levels and quality of capital, liquidity standards, stress tests, living wills, and effective resolution methods for systemically important bank and nonbank financial institutions are all important tools for improving resilience. In my view, we should set standards for the structural resilience tools somewhat higher than they would be if we had more experience with and confidence in the countercyclical tools. I support efforts to better align regulation and supervisory oversight with where the potential system risks lie, including proposals to make regulation less burdensome on community banks in the U.S. However, I think it would be a mistake to unwind the steps taken since the financial crisis that have led to a more resilient financial system. I would like to see how the new settings perform throughout the cycle before making major changes. Second, monetary policymakers need to monitor the resiliency of the financial system and be cognizant of the interlinkages between monetary policy, financial imbalances, and financial stability risks. In a situation of rising financial stability risks, while using macroprudential tools might be preferred, we have had little experience with these tools. If they proved to be inadequate and financial stability risks continued to grow, monetary policy should be on the table as a possible defense. Note that, in this case, the blurring between financial stability goals and monetary policy goals would be high: if we assessed the risks to financial stability to be sufficiently great, achieving our dual mandate monetary policy goals would also be in jeopardy over the medium run. 11 Third, it will be important for the FOMC and Board of Governors to make progress toward a systematic strategy for handling the interactions between monetary policy and financial stability, including the appropriate use of monetary policy to counteract financial imbalances, and to communicate this strategy to the public. There are two concrete steps the Federal Reserve can take now. The Fed can continue to hold tabletop exercises designed to illuminate the interactions between macroprudential policy and monetary policy. These scenario exercises can help clarify policymakers’ views on the appropriate use of each type of policy and help the Federal Reserve develop a systematic strategy for dealing with the interactions between the policies. In addition, similar to other central banks, the Fed can develop and publish a financial stability report, which discusses the Fed’s assessment of financial system vulnerabilities. This report could also provide more context for the Board’s decisions about the countercyclical capital buffer and any regulatory guidance aimed at mitigating emerging risks. In summary, I believe the steps taken since the financial crisis have made the financial system more resilient. Today, systemically important financial institutions have higher capital and liquidity buffers and better risk-management systems. However, we cannot take greater resiliency for granted. If, as many economists predict, the new normal is a world with lower equilibrium interest rates, then the interactions between monetary policy and financial stability are likely to remain center stage. It’s important that we come to some clarity about how we will use all of our policy tools to promote a healthy macroeconomy and resilient financial system. 12 References Adrian, Tobias, Patrick de Fontnouvelle, Emily Yang, and Andrei Zlate, “Macroprudential Policy: Case Study from a Tabletop Exercise,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper RPA 15-1, September 30, 2015, revised December 2015. (https://www.bostonfed.org/publications/risk-and-policy-analysis/2015/macroprudential-policy-case- study-from-a-tabletop-exercise.aspx) Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang, “Financial Stability Monitoring,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series (FEDS) paper 2013-21, Divisions of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, March 2013. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2013/201321/201321pap.pdf) Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang, “Financial Stability Monitoring,” Annual Review of Financial Economics, 7, December 2015, pp. 357-395. (http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/10.1146/annurev-financial-111914-042008) Aikman, David, Michael T. Kiley, Seung Jung Lee, Michael G. Palumbo, and Missaka N. Warusawitharana, “Mapping Heat in the U.S. Financial System,” Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Divisions of Research and Statistics and Monetary Affairs Working Paper 2015-059, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, June 24, 2015a. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/feds/2015/files/2015059pap.pdf) Aikman, David, Michael Kiley, Seung Jung Lee, Michael Palumbo, and Missaka Warusawitharana, “Mapping Heat in the U.S. Financial System: A Summary,” FEDS Notes, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC, August 5, 2015b. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2015/mapping-heat-in-the-us-financial- system-a-summary-20150805.html) Bank of Canada, Financial System Review, November 2017. (https://www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/fsr-november2017.pdf) Bank of England, “Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee Meeting, 31 July and 1 August, 2013,” August 14, 2013. (https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/minutes/2013/minutes-august-2013.pdf) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Regulatory Capital Rules: The Federal Reserve Board’s Framework for Implementing the U.S. Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer,” Federal Register, Federal Reserve System 12 CFR Part 217, Appendix A, Docket No. R-1529; RIN 7100 AE-43, September 8, 2016. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20160908b1.pdf) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Federal Reserve Board Announces It Has Voted to Affirm Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) at Current Level of 0 Percent,” press release, December 1, 2017. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/bcreg20171201a.htm) Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Developments Related to Financial Stability” in the Monetary Policy Report, February 23, 2018a, pp. 24-26. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/20180223_mprfullreport.pdf) 13 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “2018 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule,” February 2018b. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/files/bcreg20180201a1.pdf) Borio, Claudio, Piti Disyatat, Mikael Juselius, and Phurichai Rungcharoenkitkul, “Monetary Policy in the Grip of a Pincer Movement,” Bank of International Settlements Working Paper No. 706, March 2018. (https://www.bis.org/publ/work706.pdf) Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Yuliy Sannikov, “A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector,” American Economic Review 104, February 2014, pp. 379-421. (https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.104.2.379) Fischer, Stanley, “Macroprudential Policy in Action: Israel,” in George A. Akerlof, Olivier Blanchard, David Romer, and Joseph E. Stiglitz, eds., What Have We Learned? Macroeconomic Policy after the Crisis (Cambridge, Mass: The MIT Press), 2014, pp. 87-98. (https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/what-have-we-learned) FOMC, “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, October 31-November 1, 2017,” November 2017. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20171101.pdf) FOMC, “Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,” adopted effective January 24, 2012; as amended effective January 30, 2018. (https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf) Gorton, Gary, and Guillermo Ordoñez, “Collateral Crises,” American Economic Review 104, February 2014, pp. 343-378. (https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.104.2.343) Gourio, François, Anil K. Kashyap, Jae Sim, “The Tradeoffs in Leaning Against the Wind,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 23658, August 2017. (http://www.nber.org/papers/w23658) International Monetary Fund, “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability,” Staff Report, IMF, August 28, 2015. (http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2015/082815a.pdf) Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy 105, April 1997, pp. 211-248. (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/262072) Kohn, Donald, “Institutions for Macroprudential Regulation: The UK and the U.S.,” On the Record, The Brookings Institution, April 17, 2014. (https://www.brookings.edu/on-the-record/institutions-for-macroprudential-regulation-the-uk-and-the-u- s/) Kohn, Donald, “Implementing Macroprudential and Monetary Policies: The Case for Two Committees,” Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 59th Economic Conference: Macroprudential Monetary Policy, October 2-3, 2015. (https://www.bostonfed.org/macroprudential2015/papers/kohn.pdf) 14 Liang, Nellie, “Systemic Risk Monitoring and Financial Stability,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Supplement to Vol. 45, No. s1, 2013, pp. 129-135. (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jmcb.12039/full) Smets, Frank, “Financial Stability and Monetary Policy: How Closely Interlinked?” International Journal of Central Banking 10, June 2014, pp. 263-300. (http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb14q2a11.pdf) Svensson, Lars E.O., “Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning Against the Wind,” Journal of Monetary Economics 90, October 2017, pp. 193-213. (https://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/cost-benefit-analysis-of-leaning-against-the-wind.pdf)
