Governor Lael Brainard At the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Share Watch Live The Role of the Federal Reserve in Ensuring Safe and Reliable Payments It is a pleasure to be here in Chicago today to talk about payments. The confidence that payments will be timely and dependable is a cornerstone of America's dynamic and resilient economy. 1 Today, Americans take the reliability and safety of their payments for granted. But that was not always the case. The nation's first 150 years were frequently disrupted by panics in the financial system that extended into the payment system, which was highly fragmented and inefficient. Before the Federal Reserve took on a role in the payment system, a check recipient could not count on receiving the full value written on the check and faced long and unpredictable delays in getting access to the funds. As a result of banks' efforts to avoid excessive clearance fees, it could take days, weeks, or more to clear checks. The Federal Reserve's second Chairman, William P.G. Harding, described the circuitous, opaque, and costly route one payment made: "…a bank in Rochester, N.Y., sent a check drawn on a Birmingham, Ala., account to a correspondent bank in New York, which sent it along to a bank in Jacksonville, Fla. From there, it traveled to Philadelphia, Baltimore and Cincinnati before it finally reached the originating bank in Birmingham." 2 The fragmentation of the payment system imposed costs on American merchants, households, community banks, and, ultimately, on the overall U.S. economy. Ensuring a reliable nationwide payment infrastructure was one of the motivations that led the Congress to create the Federal Reserve after the severe financial panic of 1907. Fostering a safe, efficient, and widely accessible payment infrastructure has been a crucial aspect of the Fed's mission from its founding in 1913. By creating a new core infrastructure for clearing and settling checks, the Fed was able to boost confidence in banks and America's payment system, ensure Americans received the full value of their checks, and speed up payments. That was the first, but not the last, time that the Fed played a central role in transforming America's retail payment system. By the 1970s, the payment system was staggering under the weight of paper checks. In 1973, Governor Jeffrey Bucher of the Federal Reserve Board described the exponential growth in check volume and the time-consuming and expensive process to clear paper checks as a "time bomb." 3 The Federal Reserve and payment system stakeholders faced a choice: continue making incremental changes to manage the growing avalanche of checks, or look to technology to facilitate transformational change. Working with the private sector, the Federal Reserve chose transformation, and the effect was dramatic. In partnership with the private sector, the Federal Reserve supported the implementation of the automated clearinghouse, or ACH system, to process payroll payments for individuals, bill payments for households, and vendor payments for businesses. Before the advent of the ACH, it would typically take a week for an employee to be able to access the funds from a paycheck. It would require first a trip to the bank during business hours to deposit the paycheck and then several business days for that bank to complete the time-consuming process of collecting the funds from the employer's bank. 4 With the advent of ACH, an employee could expect to access their pay from their bank on the same day it was deposited electronically by their employer. Today, the ACH operates with important roles for the private sector and the Fed, is available nationwide, and constitutes a vital piece of infrastructure supporting earlier access to funds and reliable settlement of payments. 5 Moving to 24/7 Real-Time Settlement Today, our payment system is again at a crossroads. There is a growing gap between the transaction capabilities we need and expect in the digital economy--fast, convenient, and accessible to all--and the underlying settlement capabilities. Consumers and businesses increasingly expect to complete transactions with a simple keystroke, swipe, or tap. If I want to split a restaurant tab with my friends, I can use an app on my smartphone. But my friends have to be signed up for the same app to receive the payment, and they may have to wait for confirmation that the funds have moved from the app into their bank accounts before they can use the funds outside the app. Similarly, if I want to make a purchase from a vendor online, all I have to do is upload my payment information and touch a screen to complete the purchase immediately. But that payment in turn may not be immediately available to the seller. While we are seeing a growing demand for payments to be as instantaneous as the apps on our smartphones, in reality, under the hood, these payments currently rely on a patchwork of systems that can result in inefficiencies and delays, as well as uneven access. To meet the expectations of our 24/7 app economy, there is a growing demand for broadly and nationally accessible faster payments that make funds available immediately. Faster payments would allow consumers and businesses to send and immediately receive payments at any time of the day, any day of the year, and provide recipients the ability to use their funds anywhere they choose. 6 Nascent faster payment services are emerging to address this demand from individuals and businesses for the capability to manage their finances more efficiently in real time. These faster payment innovations are striving to keep up with this demand, but gaps in the underlying infrastructure pose challenges associated with safety, efficiency, and accessibility. In many circumstances, the underlying infrastructure in place today cannot ensure that a fast payment is fully complete before the recipient seeks to use the funds. To complete a payment, the banks behind the transaction need to transfer funds between each other. Until this happens, the payment between them is like an "IOU." Today's systems that transfer funds between banks are not set up to work in a 24/7, real-time world. Instead, most faster payments settle funds between banks on a deferred basis. Deferred settlement entails a buildup of obligations--like IOUs between banks--that could present real risks to the financial system in times of stress. Although faster payment systems that rely on deferred settlements can incorporate certain measures to mitigate these risks, these measures may be appropriate for a nascent faster payment market only for a limited time. As we saw with the avalanche of paper checks prior to ACH, as the volume and value of faster payments grow over time, the potential risks of deferred settlement to the financial system are also likely to grow. To fully deliver on the promise of faster payments into the future, we need an infrastructure that can support continued growth and innovation, with a goal of settlement on a 24/7 basis in real time. To ensure the robustness of the payment system into the future, banks and other providers acting as their agents should have access to a settlement system that operates 24/7 and settles each payment as soon as an individual sends it. While everyone stands to benefit from faster payments, the benefits could be especially important for households and small business owners who face cash flow constraints. We know from the Fed's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking that four in 10 adults say they would need to cover an unexpected expense of $400 by borrowing or selling something, or simply be unable to pay. A forthcoming Fed research note estimates that a quarter of households have less than $400 combined in their bank accounts. 7 For these households, the difference between waiting for a payment to clear and receiving a payment in real time is not merely an inconvenience; it could tip the balance toward overdraft fees, bounced checks, or collections fees. To be clear, faster payments would not address the root causes of these households' financial fragility. Even so, faster payments could help reduce the strain on some. Similarly, many small businesses cite immediate access to working capital to finance inventories or pay employees as their number one constraint on growth. 8 Smaller businesses and merchants would benefit from faster payments because of their need to tightly manage how much of their capital is tied up in unused material or inventory. If a small business could count on its customers' payments being immediately accessible in its bank account, it could reduce its need for short-term financing to cover the costs of ordering materials and goods well in advance. The Role of the Federal Reserve in Faster Payments So what is our role at this moment of opportunity for the payment system? In keeping with the Fed's historical role in payments, five years ago we launched a collaborative effort with a broad array of stakeholders to catalyze a safe, efficient, and accessible faster payment system for the United States. As part of that effort, 300 organizations representing consumers, businesses, banks, card companies, and technology providers, including many represented here today, came together to define expectations for the future of the retail payment system and to make recommendations on how to implement those expectations. The members of the task force told us that the Federal Reserve needed to develop a 24/7 settlement system. 9 The U.S. Treasury echoed this theme in a recent report. 10 Over the past year, we have undertaken an assessment of what the Federal Reserve could do to modernize its infrastructure to support interbank settlement of faster payments. That assessment found that 24/7 payment-by-payment interbank settlement in real-time--what we refer to as real-time gross settlement (RTGS)--offers clear benefits in minimizing risk and maximizing efficiency. A 24/7 economy with 24/7 real-time payments needs 24/7 real-time settlement, and RTGS is the way to achieve this. That is where we believe that the Federal Reserve and the private sector together need to make investments for the future. In this regard, the U.S. retail payment system lags behind some other countries: the Reserve Bank of Australia and the European Central Bank have already implemented or are on the cusp of implementing RTGS systems to support private-sector faster payment services. The Federal Reserve and payment system stakeholders have an opportunity to upgrade America's payment system to meet the needs of households, businesses, and banks in the app economy. Today, we are publishing a Federal Register notice that seeks public comment on potential steps the Federal Reserve could take to support the vision of RTGS of faster payments. The Reserve Banks could develop a service for RTGS that is available on a 24/7 basis to provide payment-by-payment interbank settlement in real time and at any time, on any day, including weekends and holidays. The Reserve Banks currently provide payment services to more than 11,000 banks across the country. A 24/7 RTGS service provided by the Reserve Banks could significantly improve the prospect that banks of all sizes will have equitable access to a real-time interbank settlement infrastructure for faster payments in the long term. This common infrastructure would support connections across banks, and faster payment service providers acting as their agents, with the potential to weave together the current patchwork of systems. As a result, we would also expect the overall safety of faster payments to increase. The capability to finalize interbank settlement before funds are made available to the recipient would avoid an undesirable buildup of risk in the system. The more banks that have access to real-time as opposed to deferred settlement mechanisms, the lower the risk would be from deferring settlement to the payment system as a whole. Although RTGS may be operationally demanding, it offers clear benefits from a risk and efficiency perspective over the long term. The development of a nationwide real-time interbank settlement infrastructure could also support the development of private-sector faster payment services, thereby increasing innovation and choice in the market. Banks and technology providers of all sizes may be able to develop new services or enhance existing services by capitalizing on the underlying interbank settlement infrastructure. This could ultimately benefit all consumers by lowering costs, increasing choice, and improving quality. In that regard, we are also seeking comment on whether the Reserve Banks should consider developing a liquidity management tool that would operate 24/7 in support of services for real-time interbank settlement of faster payments. The tool could support settlement services provided by the private sector or the Reserve Banks. The Federal Reserve has a responsibility to promote a payment system that serves the evolving needs of the public. We hope to solicit as wide a range of views as possible as we consider these and possibly other options to support prompt, secure, and resilient settlement in a 24/7 world. To that end, the Federal Register notice poses a series of questions related to whether an RTGS is the appropriate strategic foundation for interbank settlement of faster payments. We also solicit views on the appropriate role for the Federal Reserve in such a system. We look forward to hearing from, and learning from, a broad array of stakeholders, including those who are actively involved in the provision of payment and banking services, as well as representatives of the consumers, households, and businesses who rely on the ability to make and receive payments every day. The future of payments will be determined by the actions we take today. We can wait and watch how these issues evolve on their own. But this will likely result in a fragmented patchwork of systems that entails inefficiencies and risks and could leave behind many households, small businesses, and smaller banks. Alternatively, we can work with other stakeholders to embrace innovation and design a faster payments infrastructure for the future to promote broad access and resilience. As technological change continues to drive payments innovation, we continue to focus on the same basic objective that motivated our initial engagement in the payment system a century ago: promoting a safe, efficient, and accessible payment system that serves the interests of all Americans. The Fed has the unique ability to provide the infrastructure to reliably settle obligations between banks using balances at the central bank. As such, we have a responsibility to serve the broad public interest by providing a flexible and robust payment infrastructure on which the private sector can innovate. We look forward to hearing from you on the important choices before us as we work to safeguard the integrity and efficiency of our payment system. 1. I am grateful to Susan Foley, John Maggs, Mark Manuszak , and Anjana Ravi of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Noted by Federal Reserve Chairman W.P.G. Harding in Robert Kramer and W. Putnam Livingston, "Cashing in on the Checkless Society," Harvard Business Review , September/October 1967, p. 143; Bill Medley , Highways of Commerce: Central Banking and the U.S. Payments System (PDF) (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2017), p. 23. Return to text 3. Jeffrey Bucher, " The Check ," (remarks at the Annual Meeting, Bank Stationers Association, Colorado Springs, CO, June 4, 1973). Return to text 4. Andre Pollack, "The New Look to Bankers' Hours," New York Times , April 8, 1989, www.nytimes.com/1989/04/08/business/the-new-look-to-bankers-hours.html. Return to text 5. According to the Federal Reserve Payments Study 2016 (PDF) , in 2015, the ACH system was used for 23.5 billion payments, totaling $145.3 trillion in value. Return to text 6. The Faster Payments Task Force viewed 24x7x365 service availability and final funds provided to the recipient within one minute as characteristics of a "very effective" faster payment service. Faster Payments Task Force, " Faster Payments Effectiveness Criteria (PDF) ," January 26, 2016. Return to text 7. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2017 (Washington: Board of Governors, May 2018); Neil Bhutta and Lisa Dettling, "Money in the Bank? Assessing Families' Liquid Savings Using the Survey of Consumer Finances," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, forthcoming). Return to text 8. For example, in 2015, 22 percent of small businesses reported cash flow (for example, meeting payroll or paying for inventory) as their top business challenge. See 2015 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms (PDF) , March 2016. Return to text 9. Faster Payments Task Force, Final Report Part Two: A Call to Action , July 2017. Return to text 10. U.S. Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF) (Washington: Department of the Treasury, July 2018). Return to text Last Update: October 03, 2018 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Denver Branch, Denver, Colorado Share Good afternoon. I am delighted to be here in Denver for a few days to visit with community leaders working to support affordable housing, workforce development, and small businesses across the Mile High City. So far, I have had a chance to hear firsthand about the housing affordability challenges facing many Denver families, which are requiring some families to make difficult choices between paying rent and paying for other necessities, and the associated challenges of homelessness. I have also had the opportunity to see the incredible work underway in Denver to ensure that individuals and families in need have access to safe, affordable shelter and the healthcare and case management services they need to get back on their feet. Not only is Denver's approach to service delivery a national model, but your use of Social Impact Bonds to fund those programs is also at the forefront of innovation in the community development sector. I can see there is a lot of pride in what you are accomplishing locally, and I look forward to seeing more groundbreaking work during the remainder of my time here. Every few months, I try to make a visit such as this one to better understand how different communities across the country are experiencing the economy. Promoting community development is one of the key purposes and functions of the Federal Reserve, and it requires that we have a strong understanding of the impacts of financial policies and practices in communities in all of our Districts. 1 I have heard about the important role the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) has played in strengthening community investment, so I am happy to have this opportunity to learn about your perspectives, as bankers here in Denver, on opportunities for further improvement. This roundtable is the first of several that the Federal Reserve System will host in the next several months to hear directly from bankers, community members, practitioners, researchers, and others about improving the CRA's effectiveness in making credit available to lower-income areas. We are inviting representatives of other banking regulatory agencies to join us so that we can all benefit from learning from different local experiences with the CRA. Our hosts at the Reserve Banks will be taking notes, and a summary of the findings from this outreach initiative will be made public. Before we get started, I want to say a few words about the interagency process for revising CRA regulations and the Federal Reserve's priorities. As you know, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency recently published an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) to solicit public comment on a variety of questions related to revising CRA regulations. Comments are due by November 19. Last week, the Board heard from members of the Fed's Community Advisory Council that there may be some confusion about commenting on the ANPR because it was not published on an interagency basis. Even though the Federal Reserve did not join in the publication of the ANPR, we will be reading the comment letters in anticipation of working with the Comptroller and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation on a joint proposal. We understand the importance of having the agencies work toward one set of CRA regulations that are clear and consistently applied and will do everything we can to make that possible. CRA regulations are complicated, and the regulators will benefit from perspectives from a variety of channels, so I encourage you all to submit comments. The CRA is too important to the financial well-being of communities across this country for banks and community members to disengage in any part of this process. The CRA has not only made more credit available in lower-income areas, but it has also helped to create a valuable community and economic development infrastructure. Revising the regulations will require careful consideration in order to strengthen that infrastructure. All of the agencies share the stated purpose of revising the regulations, which is to promote more, not less, CRA activity in underserved areas, as the Comptroller stated in recent testimony. 2 Properly balancing the goals of simplifying and clarifying the regulations, with the goal of promoting more CRA activity through stronger local community engagement, will require careful consideration. I want to emphasize the Board's commitment to regulatory revisions that strengthen the CRA's purpose, which is to encourage banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods. In that regard, there are a few principles that will guide our work. First, we should update the area in which the agencies assess a bank's CRA activities while retaining the core focus on place. I look forward to hearing your suggestions about how we can broaden our evaluation of banks' CRA performances to take into account the technological advances that have made it possible for banks to serve customers remotely, while retaining the focus on local credit needs that vary from place to place. The Federal Reserve's research, surveys, and outreach point to an economy that is very strong on an aggregate level but significantly more varied at the community level, with many neighborhoods still struggling. Second, the CRA regulations should be tailored to banks of different sizes and business models. Currently, the evaluation methods are tailored to banks of different sizes and business models. We should consider whether assessment areas also should be tailored to the business models employed by banks. Third, any redesign of CRA regulations should be done with the goal of encouraging banks to seek out opportunities in underserved areas. This is not simply a question of expanding a bank's assessment area, but of providing more incentives for banks to more effectively address the needs in neighborhoods that they may already be serving with branches. For example, there are concerns that distortions may lead some areas to become credit hot spots, while others become credit deserts. Investments, such as Low-Income Housing Tax Credits, are in such high demand in some areas that there is little return on investment, while it is difficult to find investors in other areas. We believe that it is important for revisions to CRA regulations to address this type of market distortion to promote more lending and investment in smaller markets within a bank's footprint. Fourth, the Federal Reserve is interested in promoting greater consistency and predictability in CRA evaluations and ratings. We see the value of clearer definitions and metrics that use publicly available information to identify local credit needs and opportunities. Finally, it is important to recognize that the CRA is one of several mutually reinforcing laws. The central thrust of the CRA is to encourage banks to ensure that all creditworthy borrowers have fair access to credit. For banks to be successful in meeting the credit needs of their entire community, it has long been recognized that they must guard against discriminatory or unfair and deceptive lending practices. With these principles in mind, I look forward to hearing your ideas on how we can make the CRA a more effective tool for bringing credit and capital to underserved communities. 1. See The Federal Reserve System Purposes & Functions at www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/pf.htm . Return to text 2. U.S. Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs. Return to text Last Update: October 15, 2018 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the FinTech, Financial Inclusion -- and the Potential to Transform Financial Services Hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and the Aspen Institute Financial Security Program, Boston, Massachusetts Share Thank you for inviting me to join today's discussion. Like many of you, I have long been interested in the potential for innovation to improve financial access for families and small businesses who are underserved. The combination of smartphone apps, big data, artificial intelligence, and cloud technology holds out intriguing possibilities in financial services. But no single app is likely to be a silver bullet for the complex challenges faced by underserved households and small businesses. Achieving inclusion will require a holistic understanding of the challenges faced by underserved groups in order to develop full stack solutions to address them. 1 Fortunately, an emerging generation of metrics may offer a more complete picture of consumers' financial needs. In addition, technological infrastructure is developing, such as faster payment systems, along with the potential for more transparent and simpler product offerings enabled by richer data and lower-cost processing. These new building blocks may make a difference on their own--and, more importantly, may be combined in powerful ways to bring end-to-end solutions to financial inclusion. I will briefly discuss each of these developments in turn. Lessons from the First Wave Let's start with the basic question of how to measure financial inclusion in order to evaluate the impact of financial innovations and inclusion policies. The World Bank's Global Findex Database starts with a seemingly reasonable proxy for financial inclusion: access to financial accounts. Having access to basic transaction and savings accounts has been shown to be an important step to financial inclusion, particularly in developing countries. For instance, a 2013 experiment provided savings accounts to a random sample of market vendors in Kenya, most of whom were women. The vendors with accounts saved at a higher rate and invested 60 percent more in their businesses relative to those who did not have accounts. 2 Similarly, women-headed households in Nepal ultimately spent more on nutritious foods and education when they received free savings accounts relative to those who did not. 3 Using account access as a proxy for financial inclusion suggests substantial progress has been made. According to the Findex Database, over two-thirds of adults around the globe now have some form of financial account, up from roughly half just seven years ago. 4 This represents an increase of 800 million people. Here in the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC's) most recent survey of unbanked and underbanked households found that 7 percent of U.S. households in 2015 were "unbanked." 5 The unbanked rate was nearly a percentage point lower than the prior survey in 2013 and is lower than in earlier years. Even with this modest improvement, however, lower-income and minority households have substantially higher rates of being unbanked. The widespread adoption of mobile phones and the data they generate are expected to extend these gains even further. The World Bank noted, for instance, that about 1.1 billion unbanked people, about two-thirds of the unbanked population, has a mobile phone. 6 Here in the United States, the Federal Reserve Board's 2015 Survey of Consumers' Use of Mobile Financial Services found that nearly 60 percent of the U.S. adult population had a smart (internet-enabled) phone. 7 It also found that the rates of mobile banking usage are higher among minorities. And even amongst the unbanked population, 40 percent of adults had access to a smartphone in their households; the same was true for 70 percent of underbanked adults. Another proxy used to gauge financial inclusion is access to credit. When I worked on microcredit 3 decades ago, it was very difficult to scale up the provision of loans to small businesses. 8 Reaching small enterprises and evaluating their creditworthiness was very expensive, especially in small cities and rural areas, and it was difficult to secure loans with collateral. The high transaction costs were reflected in interest rates many times greater than those available for established businesses in urban areas. Today, new technologies are lowering transaction costs by automating the customer interface and underwriting processes. A recent analysis by staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta notes that automated fintech platforms have lower operating costs relative to storefront payday lenders. 9 A recent study by staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York finds that fintech lenders process mortgages on average 20 percent faster than traditional lenders. Of course, these differences focus on costs and do not address loan pricing. 10 But alongside these promising developments, we have also learned some cautionary tales from the early wave of fintech. In particular, while access to accounts and to credit may be beneficial, they are by no means sufficient to ensure financial resilience on their own. Not surprisingly, access to an account is only a small part of achieving financial health. The Findex database itself notes that a quarter of all accounts worldwide are "inactive," meaning that there were no deposits or withdrawals made over the prior 12 months. In some cases, customers that are provided financial accounts quickly return to the cash economy. For example, in 2014, India launched an ambitious financial inclusion program with the goal of connecting every citizen to a basic bank account that facilitated the opening of 240 million accounts. Before too long, however, it became evident that over a quarter of the new accounts held balances of one rupee or less. 11 As for credit, fintech lending has moved beyond niche to the mainstream. In 2010, fintech lenders made only 1 percent of personal loan originations in the United States. By mid-2017, fintech lenders--often in conjunction with bank partners--were responsible for nearly a third of the personal loan market. 12 It is not clear how much of this fintech lending is making a significant dent in financial inclusion, as opposed to serving prime and near-prime consumers in the United States. 13 A 2017 study by TransUnion found that fintech lenders focused 59 percent of their originations in the near prime and prime risk tiers by the end of 2016--up marginally over the previous two years. 14 Researchers at the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Chicago found that at least some fintech lenders were able to slot "some borrowers who would be classified as subprime by traditional criteria" into better loan grades. 15 But the differences from existing channels may not be large: TransUnion found that around 10 percent of loans originated by fintech lenders were to subprime consumers, as compared to 14 percent for the overall market for personal loans. What We Are Learning About Financial Inclusion Account access and credit may be helpful and possibly even necessary components of a solution. But they are unlikely to provide a complete solution on their own. Continued progress on financial inclusion is likely to require solutions that are designed with an understanding of the issues that underserved communities face. In particular, it appears that many unbanked or underbanked people in the United States are intentionally choosing not to maintain a bank account, which may hold clues to what underserved families and small businesses actually need. The data show that nearly half of the unbanked households actually had bank accounts in the past, based on a 2015 FDIC survey. 16 A third of these previously banked households explained that they currently did not have bank accounts because of high or unpredictable fees, as did roughly a fifth of unbanked households that previously did not have accounts. The single most cited reason for not having accounts was not having "enough money." More than 10 percent of the unbanked explained that they simply "don't trust banks." Those findings were echoed at an international level by the Findex database, where roughly a fifth of adults without a financial account cited a lack of trust in the financial system. 17 To explore why consumers would choose to use alternative financial services over traditional bank accounts, Lisa Servon of the University of Pennsylvania worked for both a check-cashing firm and a payday lender. 18 Servon observed that check-cashing firms used simple fee structures that were transparent and prominently displayed, similar to an overhead priced menu at a fast-food restaurant. As a result, individuals could understand clearly what fees they will have to pay up front. In contrast, checking accounts can be more unpredictable. The funds from a deposited check may not be immediately available. By the same token, it may not be clear exactly when the funds associated with a payment by check are likely to be deducted from the account. That lack of predictability can be extremely important to a family that is living paycheck to paycheck. Bouncing a rent check, phone payment, or utility payment can have a destabilizing impact on day-to-day life with further knock-on effects and costs. When a check for a utility payment is rejected due to insufficient funds, for instance, the account holder may have to make time-consuming calls to get the lights turned back on, while also struggling to pay the associated overdraft fee. That may, in turn, lead to a vexing chain of additional late payments and fees. A 2013 study by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection found that more than a quarter of checking accounts in the study experienced at least one overdraft fee in 2011. 19 The average fee total for overdrawn accounts was $225, but varied as much as $200 between banks. Among bank customers who bounced checks, a relatively small minority bore the brunt of the fees: A quarter of accounts with overdrafts incurred in 2011 had more than 10 overdraft fees during that year. 20 It is increasingly clear that financial inclusion is less about account access and more about families' financial resilience in the face of volatile income and expenses. It is common to assess households' earnings and living expenses in terms of annual totals. But what keeps many people up at night is their ability to pay this week's bills, especially when their paycheck is not coming until next week. The U.S. Financial Diaries Project finds that the low- and moderate-income families studied experienced fluctuations in income either 25 percent above or below average for five months over the course of a year. Nearly a third of households whose annual incomes were twice the supplemental poverty measure dipped below the poverty line for at least one month during the year. 21 The Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) similarly finds that 10 percent of all adults self-reported that they struggled to pay their bills at least once in the past year due to volatile income. 22 Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider, the principal investigators of the Financial Diaries, argue that access to steady, predictable cash flows is an important source of financial inequality. 23 Expenses can be just as unpredictable as income, and financial fragility results from the mismatch between the two. The Pew Charitable Trusts showed that 60 percent of households self-reported that over the prior 12 months, they had experienced at least one financial shock, like a job change, divorce, major illness, or breakdown of a car or major household appliance. 24 The median household spent half-a-month's income on the most expensive shock (the median expense being $2,000). Further complicating things, expense shocks rarely occur on their own, but instead can cascade into additional expenses and stress for families on the margins. Pew showed that a third of households they studied self-reported two or more different financial shocks over the course of a year. 25 Morduch and Schneider found that 65 percent of spending spikes involved increases in two categories of expenses, such as transportation and health care. In more than half of the spending spikes they studied, spending was well above average in three categories. 26 Moreover, the spikes in expenses tended not to coincide with corresponding spikes in income. Financially vulnerable families typically do not have sufficient savings to smooth through the income and expense volatility mismatches they experience. Households in the Financial Diaries expected to spend more than 80 percent of their savings within the year. 27 Nearly half of households studied by the Pew Charitable Trust had not recovered from financial shocks at least six months afterward. 28 And the Federal Reserve SHED finds that 40 percent of adults report they would have difficulty covering an unexpected expense of $400. 29 This inability to plan for the future dramatically affects individuals' ability to engage in the investments, such as cutting back on work hours to pursue education and training, and the risk-taking that is necessary to improve their financial lives. 30 Access to credit can be an important part of weathering these shocks. The Federal Reserve SHED finds that families with less access to credit are more likely to self-report financial hardship due to income volatility. 31 But credit is only useful if consumers have the means to repay the debt in a timely manner and stabilize their financial lives. Research increasingly shows that borrowers often choose lenders based on their perceived chance of being approved for funding rather than on the cost or their ability to repay the debt. The Federal Reserve System's 2017 Small Business Credit Survey finds that this is one of the most appealing features of online lenders for small business borrowers. 32 With regard to consumers, a 2014 report by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection found that 80 percent of payday loans are rolled over or followed by another loan within 14 days. 33 The Bureau found that many loan sequences end quickly, but 15 percent of new loans are followed by others--and half of all loans were part of a sequence of at least 10 loans. Full Stack Financial Inclusion for Financial Health A sustainable solution is likely to require a comprehensive understanding of the needs of financially underserved families and small businesses. Accordingly, policymakers and financial services providers are beginning to assess financial inclusion in more nuanced ways. And, in parallel, new technological building blocks increasingly can be used to build more full-stack approaches to financial inclusion. When considering how to think about progress, we are seeing a move away from basic financial inclusion to a more holistic understanding of financial health. Financial health is more difficult to measure than bank accounts, and policymakers and researchers are learning how to better work with that complexity. For instance, when the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection released the findings of its research on financial well-being, it included a 10-item Financial Well-Being Scale Questionnaire, a self-evaluation tool designed to help an individual think comprehensively about his or her financial life. 34 The questionnaire asks consumers to rate statements such as "I can enjoy life because of the way I'm managing my money" and "I am securing my financial future." Similarly, this April, the Center for Financial Services Innovation announced the launch of a new data set that uses subjective consumer responses to survey questions and pairs that information with actual data on their financial transactions. 35 The regularly refreshed data is designed to give industry, researchers, and policymakers better insight into consumers' financial lives by providing more accurate metrics for assessing changes over time. The new initiative, which they call "Financial Health Pulse," aims to bring the siloes of a consumer's financial life into one comprehensive picture, encompassing "income, spending, savings, debt, retirement, and credit scores." Just as we are learning how to assess financial health more effectively, we are also seeing progress on tools that are specifically designed to address the challenges underlying financial inclusion. Moreover, these tools can be built upon a new generation of platforms and other basic building blocks, which can be used in combination to develop more effective full-stack solutions. Within the Federal Reserve System, we recognize that we have a role and, potentially, a responsibility to help create an infrastructure that facilitates safe, innovative, and ubiquitous faster payment services. Earlier this month, we announced that we are seeking public comment on whether the Reserve Banks should take a more active role in modernizing our infrastructure to support interbank settlement of faster payments in real time. 36 For households living paycheck to paycheck, the difference between waiting for a payment to clear and receiving a payment in real time is not merely an inconvenience; it could tip the balance toward overdraft fees, bounced checks, or collection fees. Of course, faster payments would not address the root causes of financial fragility, but they could help reduce the strain on some. 37 In addition, many small businesses cite immediate access to working capital to finance inventories or pay employees as their number one constraint on growth. If a small business could count on its customers' payments being immediately accessible in its bank account, it could reduce the need for short-term financing to cover the costs of ordering materials and goods well in advance. This could also make a difference for the many hourly wage employees that receive their pay in the form of paper checks. Electronic payments currently can take multiple days to process, so if an employer seeks to ensure that an employee receives their pay on the last day of a pay period, the employer usually has to release the funds a few days in advance. With hourly employees, it can be hard to know how much pay is owed until the hours are actually worked. So employers may wait until the last day of the pay period and then release a paper check at the end of the day, potentially leading to delays for the employee in receiving the funds or a fee to obtain immediate availability. 38 Faster payment systems can change that. Employers would be able to push funds to employees shortly after their shifts have ended. Indeed, some "gig economy" employers have begun to offer "instant pay" options that allow contractors to cash out their earnings as frequently as five times a day. 39 But when these options recently stopped working for about a week, news reports cited comments from drivers that were hindered in their ability to refuel, pay rent, or buy groceries because they were temporarily unable to access their pay as they earned it. 40 We are similarly seeing infrastructure-level innovations in the basic accounts offered to consumers. Many of the recent mobile apps provided by bank and fintech providers, separately or in partnership, enable consumers to check balances, pay bills, and deposit checks around the clock and every day of the week via their phones. Some banks have introduced innovative online-only accounts that are fee-free and require no minimum deposits, while offering phone-based deposits, account interfaces, and bill payment. 41 Some banks offer no-fee, phone-based accounts that incorporate savings and budgeting tools that look and feel like nonbank fintech apps. Consumers can set goals and ask that the account begin "automatically" saving toward those objectives. 42 For example, consumers might be able to swipe to see how much they can safely spend on a purchase without falling behind on their financial goals or missing scheduled payments. With other tools, using just their phone, a customer can set rules for their bank account, ranging from declining transactions that would overdraw the account, to automatically transferring funds from a related account, to opening an overdraft line of credit, or being charged a fixed-dollar overdraft fee, with a one-day grace period to avoid the fee. New platforms like faster payment systems have the potential to combine with other technological improvements, like cheap access to cloud computing and an open-source approach to artificial intelligence, to create more full-stack approaches to financial inclusion. A new generation of offerings experiments with using machine-learning tools and data aggregation to study consumers' expense and income flows in order to offer credit to consumers with little to no traditional credit histories. 43 As mentioned earlier, other apps are using faster payments and cheap accounts to offer consumers tools to smooth volatility in their incomes. 44 Still other products are using behavioral economics-based "nudges" to help consumers grow their savings. 45 It is still very early, and many of these products have difficult issues to work through with respect to consumer data security and privacy, which may have important implications for pricing of services. Again and again, we are reminded that when products are free, the consumers themselves may be the product. For instance, many financial apps that provide "free" services earn revenue by being paid for lead generation. Other apps may sell consumer data in ways that consumers may not be aware of. 46 For some workers, their employers may be able to be part of the solution, by subsidizing some or all of the costs of using these new tools. For example, some employers are partnering with fintechs to offer their employees better savings tools and the ability to draw emergency funds as an advance on their paycheck. While financial innovation may hold great promise, a lot of work is needed to ensure it will be able to reach communities that lack infrastructure for digital service delivery. In the colonias area on the Texas-Mexico border, I met with families that are unbanked, students that could not complete their homework, and businesses that could not serve customers outside their local area because they lacked the internet connectivity that many of us take for granted. 47 The Federal Reserve, and other federal banking agencies, view access to technology as increasingly essential to households and small businesses in underserved low- and moderate-income communities. That is why we have clarified that efforts to provide communications infrastructure, such as broadband internet service, may be viewed favorably under the Community Reinvestment Act or CRA. 48 Expanding access to financial services is most effective when consumers and small businesses are equipped with the ability and information to determine which financial products are suitable for their needs. Financial literacy and consumer protections are critically important regardless of whether financial services are delivered through traditional means or smartphone apps. Here too, digital delivery can expand the reach of traditional financial education systems by providing consumers with online and mobile education, just-in-time information, and interactive financial tools to evaluate their options. Financial services providers have an affirmative obligation to deliver clear and transparent products and services and to protect the personal information and financial assets of the customers they serve. Our challenge as regulators is to ensure trust in financial products and services by maintaining the focus on consumer protection, while supporting responsible innovation that provides social benefits. 49 It is too early to tell if many of these innovations will ultimately make good on their promise to help underserved consumers navigate their complex financial lives. And, of course, no app can solve a persistent gap between living expenses and real wages in some occupations, sectors, or counties. Still, I am cautiously optimistic. Together, we are developing a more holistic understanding of the financial needs of underserved households and small businesses. We are seeing the development of powerful new technologies. There is reason to hope these new technologies will be combined in ways that move the needle on financial inclusion. 1. I am grateful to Kelvin Chen of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Pascaline Dupas and Jonathan Robinson, " Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya (PDF) ," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics (2013): 163–192, cited in World Bank Group, The Global Findex Database 2017 (2017). Return to text 3. Silvia Prina, "Banking the poor via savings accounts: Evidence from a field experiment," Journal of Development Economics , vol. 115, (July 2015): 16–31, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304387815000061 Return to text 4. World Bank Group, The Global Findex Database 2017 , (2017): xi. The Findex Database is widely considered the authoritative database for measuring progress and need for financial inclusion from an international perspective. Return to text 5. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 2015 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households (PDF) (October 20, 2016). Return to text 6. The Global Findex Database 2017 , 11. Return to text 7. Federal Reserve Board, Consumers and Mobile Financial Services , 12, see table 4. Return to text 8. See, e.g., Brainard, "Senegal Community and Enterprise Development Project" in C. Mann, M. Grindle, and P. Shipton, eds., Seeking Solutions: Framework and Cases for Small Enterprise Development Programs, 1989. For a more recent perspective, see "Mobile financial services are cornering the market," The Economist , May 3, 2018, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2018/05/03/mobile-financial-services-are-cornering-the-market. Return to text 9. Larry D. Wall, " Fintech and Financial Inclusion ," Notes from the Vault (Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, August 2017) (quoting J. Michael Evans, President of Alibaba). The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta compared the high operating costs of storefront payday lenders with the automation of the Chinese fintech Alibaba's savings tools. Return to text 10. Andreas Fuster, Matthew Plosser, Philipp Schnabl, and James Vickery, " The Role of Technology in Mortgage Lending ," Working Paper 24500 (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April 2018). Return to text 11. See, e.g., "Financial inclusion is making great strides," The Economist , May 3, 2018, https://www.economist.com/special-report/2018/05/03/financial-inclusion-is-making-great-strides. Return to text 12. John Wirth, "Fact or Fiction: Are FinTechs Different than Other Lenders," TransUnion (blog), November 17, 2017, https://www.transunion.com/blog/fact-or-fiction-are-fintechs-different-than-other-lenders. Return to text 13. See, e.g., Press Release, TransUnion, FinTechs Taking Larger Share of Personal Loan Market While Increasing Portfolio Risk-Return Performance (Nov. 2, 2017), https://newsroom.transunion.com/fintechs-taking-larger-share-of-personal-loan-market-while-increasing-portfolio-risk-return-performance Return to text 14. Wirth, "Fact or Fiction," https://www.transunion.com/blog/fact-or-fiction-are-fintechs-different-than-other-lenders and TransUnion, "FinTechs Taking Larger Share of Personal Loan Market While Increasing Portfolio Risk-Return Performance," press release, November 2, 2017, https://newsroom.transunion.com/fintechs-taking-larger-share-of-personal-loan-market-while-increasing-portfolio-risk-return-performance/. Return to text 15. Julapa Jagtiani and Catharine Lemieux, " Do Fintech Lenders Penetrate Areas That Are Underserved by Traditional Banks? (PDF) " Working Paper 18-13, (Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, March 2018). Return to text 16. FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households (PDF) . Return to text 17. The Global Findex Database 2017 , 5. Return to text 18. See, e.g., "What Is Driving the 'Unbanking of America'?" National Public Radio, Fresh Air, January 10, 2017, https://www.npr.org/2017/01/10/509126878/what-is-driving-the-unbanking-of-america, cited in Wall, " Fintech and Financial Inclusion ." Return to text 19. Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, " CFPB Study of Overdraft Programs (PDF) ," white paper (June 2013). The findings here refer to banks in the study "that tracked all incidences for all accounts opened at any time during 2011." Return to text 20. The findings here refer to banks in the study "that tracked all incidences for all accounts opened at any time during 2011." Return to text 21. See Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider, The Financial Diaries: How American Families Cope in a World of Uncertainty (Princeton University Pres, 2017). See also Jeanne C. Marra, " The Financial Diaries Authors Discuss Income Volatility ," Bridges , (Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Fall 2017). Return to text 22. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2017 (PDF) (May 2018), 12. Return to text 23. Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider, "Mismatch: How Income and Expense Volatility Are Undermining Households," Stanford Social Innovation Review , January 12, 2016, https://ssir.org/articles/entry/mismatch_how_income_and_expense_volatility_are_undermining_households Return to text 24. The Pew Charitable Trusts, The Role of Emergency Savings in Family Financial Security: How Do Families Cope With Financial Shocks? (PDF) (October 2015). Return to text 25. The Pew Charitable Trusts, The Role of Emergency Savings (PDF) . Return to text 26. Morduch and Schneider, "Mismatch: How Income and Expense Volatility Are Undermining Households," https://ssir.org/articles/entry/mismatch_how_income_and_expense_volatility_are_undermining_households Return to text 27. Morduch and Schneider, "Mismatch: How Income and Expense Volatility Are Undermining Households," https://ssir.org/articles/entry/mismatch_how_income_and_expense_volatility_are_undermining_households Return to text 28. The Pew Charitable Trusts, The Role of Emergency Savings (PDF) . Return to text 29. Federal Reserve Board, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households (PDF) , 21, ("Over the past five years, as the economy has recovered, the fraction of families able to easily cover this emergency expense has increased by about 9 percentage points."). Return to text 30. See Marra, " The Financial Diaries Authors Discuss Income Volatility ." Return to text 31. Federal Reserve Board, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households (PDF) . For example, one-fourth of adults who are not confident in their ability to be approved for a credit card self-reported that they had experienced hardship from income volatility over the past year, as compared to only 6 percent of those who were confident in their credit availability. Return to text 32. Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, Kansas City, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, St. Louis, and San Francisco, 2017 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms (PDF) . Return to text 33. Kathleen Burke, Jonathan Lanning, Jesse Leary, and Jialan Wang, Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, CFPB Data Point: Payday Lending (PDF) , (March 2014). Return to text 34. " Measuring financial well-being: A guide to using the CFPB Financial Well-Being Scale ," Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection. Return to text 35. Center for Financial Services Innovation, "Center for Financial Services Innovation Launches 'U.S. Financial Health Pulse,'" press release, April 3, 2018, https://s3.amazonaws.com/cfsi-innovation-files-2018/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/27001554/U.S.-Financial-Health-Pulse-2018-Press-Release-FINAL-FOR-WEB.pdf. Return to text 36. Lael Brainard, " Supporting Fast Payments for All ," (speech at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, IL, October 3, 2018). Return to text 37. See, e.g., Aaron Klein, How the Fed can help families living paycheck to paycheck (PDF) , Brookings (November 22, 2017). Return to text 38. See, e.g., Faster Payments Task Force, The U.S. Path to Faster Payments (PDF) (January 2017); Center for Financial Services Innovation, Beyond Check-cashing: An examination of consumer demand and business innovation for immediate access to check funds (June 2014), http://cfsinnovation.s3.amazonaws.com/RESEARCH_FIS_CFSI_BeyondCheckCashing_6.3.2014_FINAL.pdf. Return to text 39. See, e.g., "Get Paid Quickly with Lyft and Express Pays," Lyft Blog , December 21, 2016, https://blog.lyft.com/posts/get-paid-quickly-express-pay; "Instant Pay: Your money, when you want it," Uber Newsroom , August 16, 2016, https://newsroom.uber.com/instant-pay/. Return to text 40. See, e.g., Levi Sumagysay, Uber says Instant Pay is fixed, but issue still affecting some drivers, The Mercury News (Sept. 17, 2018), https://www.mercurynews.com/2018/09/17/uber-says-instant-pay-is-fixed-but-issue-still-affecting-some-drivers/. https://www.usnews.com/news/business/articles/2018-09-15/uber-glitch-leaves-drivers-unpaid-and-frustrated Return to text 41. See, e.g., "What's a 360 Checking account?" Capital One, https://www.capitalone.com/bank/checking-accounts/online-checking-account/. Return to text 42. See, e.g., Simple, https://www.simple.com/; Frank Chaparro, "JPMorgan Chase launched an online bank for millennials called Finn, and I prefer it to the real thing," Business Insider , July 8, 2018, https://www.businessinsider.com/jpmorgan-chase-online-bank-finn-for-millennials-2018-7. Return to text 43. See, e.g., Petal, https://www.petalcard.com/; Lend Academy, Podcast Transcription Session No. 101 – Raul Vazquez, Oportun (May 2017), https://www.lendacademy.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Podcast-101-Raul-Vazquez.pdf. Return to text 44. Earnup, "Money. The Way It Should Be," http://www.earnup.com/. Return to text 45. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, " Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack? (PDF) " (speech at the "FinTech Risks and Opportunities" conference, Ann Arbor, MI, November 16, 2017). See Richard H. Thaler and Cass R. Sunstein, Nudge , (Penguin Random House, 2009). Return to text 46. See, e.g., Brainard, " Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack? (PDF) ". Return to text 47. See Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Closing the Digital Divide: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations , (revised December 2016). and "There is a major digital divide on the Texas-Mexico border, one of least connected parts of the country," National Public Radio, Marketplace, May 2018, https://www.marketplace.org/2018/05/03/tech/there-major-digital-divide-texas-mexico-border-one-least-connected-parts-country. Return to text 48. On July 15, 2016, the federal bank regulatory agencies issued new CRA guidance that includes references to broadband access, ( https://www.ffiec.gov/cra/pdf/2016_QA_Federal_Register_Notice.pdf ). Return to text 49. Lael Brainard, " The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech ," (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation, Washington, DC, December 2, 2016) Return to text Last Update: October 17, 2018 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At Fintech and the New Financial Landscape, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Share Although it is still early days, it is already evident that the application of artificial intelligence (AI) in financial services is potentially quite important and merits our attention. Through our Fintech working group, we are working across the Federal Reserve System to take a deliberate approach to understanding the potential implications of AI for financial services, particularly as they relate to our responsibilities. In light of the potential importance of AI, we are seeking to learn from industry, banks, consumer advocates, researchers, and others, including through today's conference. I am pleased to take part in this timely discussion of how technology is changing the financial landscape. 1 The Growing Use of Artificial Intelligence in Financial Services My focus today is the branch of artificial intelligence known as machine learning, which is the basis of many recent advances and commercial applications. 2 Modern machine learning applies and refines, or "trains," a series of algorithms on a large data set by optimizing iteratively as it learns in order to identify patterns and make predictions for new data. 3 Machine learning essentially imposes much less structure on how data is interpreted compared to conventional approaches in which programmers impose ex ante rule sets to make decisions. The three key components of AI--algorithms, processing power, and big data--are all increasingly accessible. Due to an early commitment to open-source principles, AI algorithms from some of the largest companies are available to even nascent startups. 4 As for processing power, continuing innovation by public cloud providers means that with only a laptop and a credit card, it is possible to tap into some of the world's most powerful computing systems by paying only for usage time, without having to build out substantial hardware infrastructure. Vendors have made it easy to use these tools for even small businesses and non-technology firms, including in the financial sector. Public cloud companies provide access to pre-trained AI models via developer-friendly application programming interfaces or even "drop and drag" tools for creating sophisticated AI models. 5 Most notably, the world is creating data to feed those models at an ever-increasing rate. Whereas in 2013 it was estimated that 90 percent of the world's data had been created in the prior two years, by 2016, IBM estimated that 90 percent of global data had been created in the prior year alone. 6 The pace and ubiquity of AI innovation have surprised even experts. The best AI result on a popular image recognition challenge improved from a 26 percent error rate to 3.5 percent in just four years. That is lower than the human error rate of 5 percent. 7 In one study, a combination AI-human approach brought the error rate down even further--to 0.5 percent. So it is no surprise that many financial services firms are devoting so much money, attention, and time to developing and using AI approaches. Broadly, there is particular interest in at least five capabilities. 8 First, firms view AI approaches as potentially having superior ability for pattern recognition, such as identifying relationships among variables that are not intuitive or not revealed by more traditional modeling. Second, firms see potential cost efficiencies where AI approaches may be able to arrive at outcomes more cheaply with no reduction in performance. Third, AI approaches might have greater accuracy in processing because of their greater automation compared to approaches that have more human input and higher "operator error." Fourth, firms may see better predictive power with AI compared to more traditional approaches--for instance, in improving investment performance or expanding credit access. Finally, AI approaches are better than conventional approaches at accommodating very large and less-structured data sets and processing those data more efficiently and effectively. Some machine learning approaches can be "let loose" on data sets to identify patterns or develop predictions without the need to specify a functional form ex ante. What do those capabilities mean in terms of how we bank? The Financial Stability Board highlighted four areas where AI could impact banking. 9 First, customer-facing uses could combine expanded consumer data sets with new algorithms to assess credit quality or price insurance policies. And chatbots could provide help and even financial advice to consumers, saving them the waiting time to speak with a live operator. Second, there is the potential for strengthening back-office operations, such as advanced models for capital optimization, model risk management, stress testing, and market impact analysis. Third, AI approaches could be applied to trading and investment strategies, from identifying new signals on price movements to using past trading behavior to anticipate a client's next order. Finally, there are likely to be AI advancements in compliance and risk mitigation by banks. AI solutions are already being used by some firms in areas like fraud detection, capital optimization, and portfolio management. Current Regulatory and Supervisory Approaches The potential breadth and power of these new AI applications inevitably raise questions about potential risks to bank safety and soundness, consumer protection, or the financial system. 10 The question, then, is how should we approach regulation and supervision? It is incumbent on regulators to review the potential consequences of AI, including the possible risks, and take a balanced view about its use by supervised firms. Regulation and supervision need to be thoughtfully designed so that they ensure risks are appropriately mitigated but do not stand in the way of responsible innovations that might expand access and convenience for consumers and small businesses or bring greater efficiency, risk detection, and accuracy. Likewise, it is important not to drive responsible innovation away from supervised institutions and toward less regulated and more opaque spaces in the financial system. 11 Our existing regulatory and supervisory guardrails are a good place to start as we assess the appropriate approach for AI processes. The National Science and Technology Council, in an extensive study addressing regulatory activity generally, concludes that if an AI-related risk "falls within the bounds of an existing regulatory regime, . . . the policy discussion should start by considering whether the existing regulations already adequately address the risk, or whether they need to be adapted to the addition of AI." 12 A recent report by the U.S. Department of the Treasury reaches a similar conclusion with regard to financial services. 13 With respect to banking services, a few generally applicable laws, regulations, guidance, and supervisory approaches appear particularly relevant to the use of AI tools. First, the Federal Reserve's "Guidance on Model Risk Management" (SR Letter 11-7) highlights the importance to safety and soundness of embedding critical analysis throughout the development, implementation, and use of models, which include complex algorithms like AI. 14 It also underscores "effective challenge" of models by a "second set of eyes"--unbiased, qualified individuals separated from the model's development, implementation, and use. It describes supervisory expectations for sound independent review of a firm's own models to confirm they are fit for purpose and functioning as intended. If the reviewers are unable to evaluate a model in full or if they identify issues, they might recommend the model be used with greater caution or with compensating controls. Similarly, when our own examiners evaluate model risk, they generally begin with an evaluation of the processes firms have for developing and reviewing models, as well as the response to any shortcomings in a model or the ability to review it. Importantly, the guidance recognizes that not all aspects of a model may be fully transparent, as with proprietary vendor models, for instance. Banks can use such models, but the guidance highlights the importance of using other tools to cabin or otherwise mitigate the risk of an unexplained or opaque model. Risks may be offset by mitigating external controls like "circuit-breakers" or other mechanisms. And importantly, models should always be interpreted in context. Second, our guidance on vendor risk management (SR 13-19/CA 13-21), along with the prudential regulators' guidance on technology service providers, highlights considerations firms should weigh when outsourcing business functions or activities--and could be expected to apply as well to AI-based tools or services that are externally sourced. 15 The vast majority of the banks that we supervise will have to rely on the expertise, data, and off-the-shelf AI tools of nonbank vendors to take advantage of AI-powered processes. Whether these tools are chatbots, anti-money-laundering/know your customer compliance products, or new credit evaluation tools, it seems likely that they would be classified as services to the bank. The vendor risk-management guidance discusses best practices for supervised firms regarding due diligence, selection, and contracting processes in selecting an outside vendor. It also describes ways that firms can provide oversight and monitoring throughout the relationship with the vendor, and considerations about business continuity and contingencies for a firm to consider before the termination of any such relationship. Third, it is important to emphasize that guidance has to be read in the context of the relative risk and importance of the specific use-case in question. We have long taken a risk-focused supervisory approach--the level of scrutiny should be commensurate with the potential risk posed by the approach, tool, model, or process used. 16 That principle also applies generally to the attention that supervised firms devote to the different approaches they use: firms should apply more care and caution to a tool they use for major decisions or that could have a material impact on consumers, compliance, or safety and soundness. For its part, AI is likely to present some challenges in the areas of opacity and explainability. Recognizing there are likely to be circumstances when using an AI tool is beneficial, even though it may be unexplainable or opaque, the AI tool should be subject to appropriate controls, as with any other tool or process, including how the AI tool is used in practice and not just how it is built. This is especially true for any new application that has not been fully tested in a variety of conditions. Given the large data sets involved with most AI approaches, it is vital to have controls around the various aspects of data--including data quality as well as data suitability. Just as with conventional models, problems with the input data can lead to cascading problems down the line. Accordingly, we would expect firms to apply robust analysis and prudent risk management and controls to AI tools, as they do in other areas, as well as to monitor potential changes and ongoing developments. For example, let's take the areas of fraud prevention and cybersecurity, where supervised institutions may need their own AI tools to identify and combat outside AI-powered threats. The wide availability of AI's building blocks means that phishers and fraudsters have access to best-in-class technologies to build AI tools that are powerful and adaptable. Supervised institutions will likely need tools that are just as powerful and adaptable as the threats that they are designed to face, which likely entails some degree of opacity. While so far, most phishing attacks against consumers have relied on standard-form emails, likely due to the high cost of personalization, in the future, AI tools could be used to make internet fraud and phishing highly personalized. 17 By accessing data sets with consumers' personally identifiable information and applying open-source AI tools, a phisher may be able to churn out highly targeted emails to millions of consumers at relatively low cost, containing personalized information such as their bank account number and logo, along with past transactions. 18 In cases such as this, where large data sets and AI tools may be used for malevolent purposes, it may be that AI is the best tool to fight AI. Let's turn to the related issue of the proverbial "black box"--the potential lack of explainability associated with some AI approaches. In the banking sector, it is not uncommon for there to be questions as to what level of understanding a bank should have of its vendors' models, due to the balancing of risk management, on the one hand, and protection of proprietary information, on the other. To some degree, the opacity of AI products can be seen as an extension of this balancing. But AI can introduce additional complexity because many AI tools and models develop analysis, arrive at conclusions, or recommend decisions that may be hard to explain. For instance, some AI approaches are able to identify patterns that were previously unidentified and are intuitively quite hard to grasp. Depending on what algorithms are used, it is possible that no one, including the algorithm's creators, can easily explain why the model generated the results that it did. The challenge of explainability can translate into a higher level of uncertainty about the suitability of an AI approach, all else equal. So how does, or even can, a firm assess the use of an approach it might not fully understand? To a large degree, this will depend on the capacity in which AI is used and the risks presented. One area where the risks may be particularly acute is the consumer space generally, and consumer lending in particular, where transparency is integral to avoiding discrimination and other unfair outcomes, as well as meeting disclosure obligations. 19 Let me turn briefly to this topic. The potential for the application of AI tools to result in new benefits to consumers is garnering a lot of attention. The opportunity to access services through innovative channels or processes can be a potent way to advance financial inclusion. 20 Consider, for instance, consumer credit scoring. There are longstanding and well-documented concerns that many consumers are burdened by material errors on their credit reports, lack sufficient credit reporting information necessary for a score, or have credit reports that are unscorable. 21 As noted earlier, banks and other financial service providers are using AI to develop credit-scoring models that take into account factors beyond the usual metrics. There is substantial interest in the potential for those new models to allow more consumers on the margins of the current credit system to improve their credit standing, at potentially lower cost. As noted earlier, AI also has the potential to allow creditors to more accurately model and price risk, and to bring greater speed to decisions. AI may offer new consumer benefits, but it is not immune from fair lending and other consumer protection risks, and compliance with fair lending and other consumer protection laws is important. 22 Of course, it should not be assumed that AI approaches are free of bias simply because they are automated and rely less on direct human intervention. Algorithms and models reflect the goals and perspectives of those who develop them as well as the data that trains them and, as a result, AI tools can reflect or "learn" the biases of the society in which they were created. A 2016 Treasury Department report noted that while "data-driven algorithms may expedite credit assessments and reduce costs, they also carry the risk of disparate impact in credit outcomes and the potential for fair lending violations." 23 A recent example illustrates the risk of unwittingly introducing bias into an AI model. It was recently reported that a large employer attempted to develop an AI hiring tool for software developers that was trained with a data set of the resumes of past successful hires, which it later abandoned. Because the pool of previously hired software developers in the training data set was overwhelmingly male, the AI developed a bias against female applicants, going so far as to exclude resumes of graduates from two women's colleges. 24 Importantly, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) include requirements for creditors to provide notice of the factors involved in taking actions that are adverse or unfavorable for the consumer. 25 These requirements help provide transparency in the underwriting process, promote fair lending by requiring creditors to explain why they reached their decisions, and provide consumers with actionable information to improve their credit standing. Compliance with these requirements implies finding a way to explain AI decisions. However, the opacity of some AI tools may make it challenging to explain credit decisions to consumers, which would make it harder for consumers to improve their credit score by changing their behavior. Fortunately, AI itself may play a role in the solution: The AI community is responding with important advances in developing "explainable" AI tools with a focus on expanding consumer access to credit. 26 I am pleased that this is one of the topics on your agenda today. Looking Ahead Perhaps one of the most important early lessons is that not all potential consequences are knowable now--firms should be continually vigilant for new issues in the rapidly evolving area of AI. Throughout the history of banking, new products and processes have been an area where problems can arise. Further, firms should not assume that AI approaches are less susceptible to problems because they are purported to be able to "learn" or less prone to human error. There are plenty of examples of AI approaches not functioning as expected--a reminder that things can go wrong. It is important for firms to recognize the possible pitfalls and employ sound controls now to prevent and mitigate possible future problems. For our part, we are still learning how AI tools can be used in the banking sector. We welcome discussion about what use cases banks and other financial services firms are exploring with AI approaches and other innovations, and how our existing laws, regulations, guidance, and policy interests may intersect with these new approaches. 27 When considering financial innovation of any type, our task is to facilitate an environment in which socially beneficial, responsible innovation can progress with appropriate mitigation of risk and consistent with applicable statutes and regulations. As with other technological advances, AI presents regulators with a responsibility to act with thoughtfulness and perspective in carrying out their mandates, learning from the experience in other areas. As we move ahead in exploring the policy and regulatory issues related to artificial intelligence, we look forward to collaborating with a broad array of stakeholders. 1. I am grateful to Kelvin Chen and Carol Evans for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. Executive Office of the President, National Science and Technology Council Committee on Technology, Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence (PDF) (Washington: Executive Office of the President, October 2016); and American Bankers Association, "Understanding Artificial Intelligence" (Washington: American Bankers Association, November 2018), https://www.aba.com/Tools/Function/Technology/Documents/understanding-artificial-intelligence.pdf. Return to text 3. Executive Office of the President, Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence ; and Financial Stability Board, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Financial Services (PDF) (Basel: Financial Stability Board, November 1, 2017). Return to text 4. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, " Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack? " (speech at the FinTech Risks and Opportunities Conference, Ann Arbor, MI, November 16, 2017). Return to text 5. See, e.g., Brandon Vigliarolo, "Amazon AI: The Smart Person's Guide," TechRepublic, August 21, 2017, https://www.techrepublic.com/article/amazon-ai-the-smart-persons-guide/; and Fei-Fei Li and Jia Li, "Cloud AutoML: Making AI Accessible to Every Business," The Keyword (Google blog), January 17, 2018, https://www.blog.google/topics/google-cloud/cloud-automl-making-ai-accessible-every-business/. Return to text 6. SINTEF, "Big Data, for Better or Worse: 90% of World's Data Generated over Last Two Years," ScienceDaily.com, May 22, 2013, https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2013/05/130522085217.htm ; and IBM, "10 Key Marketing Trends for 2017" (2017) (on file with author). Return to text 7. Executive Office of the President, Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence . Return to text 8. AI tools are also likely to be useful for central banks and regulators in their responsibilities for supervision, financial stability, and monetary policy, although this is not addressed here. The 2017 Financial Stability Board report highlighted the potential use of AI tools by central banks and prudential authorities for applications ranging from systemic risk identification to detecting fraud and money laundering (Financial Stability Board, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning ). Return to text 9. See Financial Stability Board, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning . See also, e.g., U.S. Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities (PDF) (Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, June 3, 2018); Brainard, "Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack?"; and American Bankers Association, "Understanding Artificial Intelligence." Return to text 10. See, e.g., Financial Stability Board, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning and National Consumers Law Center (on behalf of its low-income clients), California Reinvestment Coalition Consumer Action, Consumers Union, National Association of Consumer Advocates, U.S. PIRG, Woodstock Institute, World Privacy Forum, "Comments in Response to Request for Information Regarding Use of Alternative Data and Modeling Techniques in the Credit Process," Docket No. CFPB-2017-0005 (May 19, 2017); U.S. Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities ; and Carol A. Evans, "Keeping Fintech Fair: Thinking about Fair Lending and UDAP Risks," Consumer Compliance Outlook (Second Issue 2017), https://www.consumercomplianceoutlook.org/2017/second-issue/keeping-fintech-fair-thinking-about-fair-lending-and-udap-risks/. Return to text 11. Lael Brainard, " Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack? " (speech at the Northwestern Kellogg Public-Private Interface Conference, April 28, 2017). Return to text 12. Executive Office of the President, Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence . Return to text 13. U.S. Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities . Return to text 14. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, " Guidance on Model Risk Management ," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR Letter 11-7 (April 4, 2011). See also Andrew Burt, "Leave A.I. Alone," New York Times, January 4, 2018, https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/04/opinion/leave-artificial-intelligence.html. Return to text 15. See, e.g., FFIEC Outsourcing Technology Services Booklet (June 2004); and Board of Governors, " Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk ," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 13-19/Consumer Affairs Letter CA 13-21 (December 5, 2013). Return to text 16. Board of Governors, " Risk-Focused Safety and Soundness Examinations and Inspections ," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 96-14 (May 24, 1996). Return to text 17. See, e.g., Eric Lipton, David E. Sanger, and Scott Shane, "The Perfect Weapon: How Russian Cyberpower Invaded the U.S.," New York Times , December 13, 2016, https://mobile.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/us/politics/russia-hack-election-dnc.html; and Cormac Herley,"Why Do Nigerian Scammers Say They Are from Nigeria?" Microsoft Research, June 1, 2012, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/WhyFromNigeria.pdf, ("A less outlandish wording that did not mention Nigeria would almost certainly gather more total responses and more viable responses, but would yield lower overall profit. Recall, that viability requires that the scammer actually extract money from the victim: those who are fooled for a while, but then figure it out, or who balk at the last hurdle are precisely the expensive false positives that the scammer must deter.") Return to text 18. Brian Krebs, "The Year Targeted Phishing Went Mainstream," Krebs on Security, (August 18, 2018), https://krebsonsecurity.com/2018/08/the-year-targeted-phishing-went-mainstream/. Return to text 19. In a 2017 request for public comment, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection noted that alternative modeling techniques may offer consumer benefits, such as greater credit access, enhanced creditworthiness predictions, lower costs, and better service and convenience, but also highlighted consumer risks, such as privacy concerns, data quality issues, loss of the ability to correct errors, and discrimination. See Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, " Request for Information Regarding Use of Alternative Data and Modeling Techniques in the Credit Process (PDF), " (Washington: Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, February 14, 2017), Return to text 20. See, e.g., Lael Brainard, " FinTech and the Search for Full Stack Financial Inclusion ," (speech at the Conference on FinTech, Financial Inclusion, and the Potential to Transform Financial Services at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 17, 2018). Return to text 21. Federal Trade Commission, " In FTC Study, Five Percent of Consumers Had Errors on Their Credit Reports That Could Result in Less Favorable Terms for Loans ," news release, (February 11, 2013); Federal Trade Commission, " FTC Issues Follow-Up Study on Credit Report Accuracy ," news release, (January 21, 2015) ; and Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Data Point: Credit Invisibles (PDF) (Washington: Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, May 2015). Return to text 22. The primary federal statutes governing fair lending are the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Housing Act (FHA). See, also Lael Brainard, " Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack? " (speech at the FinTech Risks and Opportunities Conference, Ann Arbor, MI, November 16, 2017). Return to text 23. U.S. Department of the Treasury, " Opportunities and Challenges in Online Marketplace Lending (PDF) " (Washington: U.S. Department of the Treasury, May 2016). Return to text 24. Jeffrey Dastin, "Amazon Scraps Secret AI Recruiting Tool That Showed Bias against Women," Reuters, October 9, 2018, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-amazon-com-jobs-automation-insight/amazon-scraps-secret-ai-recruiting-tool-that-showed-bias-against-women-idUSKCN1MK08G. Return to text 25. See generally ECOA section 701, 15 USC 1691; 12 CFR § 1002.9; FCRA section 615, 15 USC 1681m; and 12 CFR §§ 1022.70-75. Return to text 26. See, e.g., Nanette Byrnes, "An AI-Fueled Credit Formula Might Help You Get a Loan," MIT Technology Review (February 14, 2017), https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603604/an-ai-fueled-credit-formula-might-help-you-get-a-loan/. Return to text 27. See, e.g., U.S. Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities ; Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack?"; and Lael Brainard, " The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech " (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation at the Board of Governors, Washington, December 2, 2016). Return to text Last Update: November 13, 2018 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Inaugural Janet L. Yellen Award for Excellence in Community Development, Washington, D.C. Share Thank you, Chairman Powell. It is my honor to introduce Chair Yellen. 1 When I first arrived at the Board, Chair Yellen offered me the opportunity to lead the Committee on Consumer and Community Affairs--even though I had little experience in this area. I greatly appreciate the opportunity she gave me. After visits to 16 communities across the country--both rural and urban--I can attest to the richness of our community development work. It helps us see the economy as it is experienced by Americans in their communities. It provides a valuable perspective on our monetary policy goals by putting names and faces on the aggregate unemployment statistics. It helps us spot problems in consumer credit in overstretched communities well before they show up in national statistics. And it is essential in helping our banks meet their affirmative obligations to the low- and moderate-income communities they serve and to understand what is likely to be most effective in lifting up the lives of people in challenged communities. Janet Yellen's experience as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco during some of the most challenging economic times for our country no doubt shaped her commitment to the Federal Reserve's community development work. 2 One associate from the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank recounts a meeting at the height of the crisis when staff suggested their exhausted boss should take a break from the round-the-clock emergency meetings. Then-President Yellen stated that she had an obligation to continue working until such time that families were no longer losing their homes, their livelihoods, and their pensions. That moment encapsulates Chair Yellen's consistent orientation to how our work touches the lives of American families. It is perhaps no accident that Chair Yellen delivered her first speech as Chair at a community reinvestment conference. 3 In navigating the Federal Open Market Committee's objectives of price stability and full employment, Chair Yellen was attentive to low- and moderate-income communities, recognizing that Americans on the most precarious rungs of the ladder often feel the impacts of a downturn soonest and the longest. 4 Chair Yellen brought the subject of economic disparities to the forefront of our conversations, consistently emphasizing the importance of an economy that works for everyone. 5 As Chair, Janet Yellen continued her practice of meeting with community members, where she had in-depth conversations about disparities in employment, labor force participation, income, and wealth, recognizing these direct interactions provide valuable insights no statistic or report can fully capture. For instance, she visited the Manufacturing Technology Center on Cuyahoga Community College's Metropolitan Campus where she participated in a roundtable discussion on the state of manufacturing workforce development in Northeast Ohio. 6 We are committed to continuing Chair Yellen's legacy. In our service to the American people, we recognize that our monetary policy, financial stability, and supervisory activities have an important influence on the financial health of Americans in communities across the country. Promoting community development is one of the key purposes and functions of the Federal Reserve, and we have a responsibility to ensure that consumer and community perspectives inform Federal Reserve policy, research, and actions, including vulnerable communities. 7 In his inaugural remarks as Chairman, Jay Powell underscored that it is our duty at the Federal Reserve to "approach every issue through a rigorous evaluation of the facts, theory, empirical analysis, and relevant research." 8 That lens informs our community development responsibilities: we seek to learn from the experience of manufacturing workers, homeowners, community bankers, nonprofit executives, community organizers, and small business owners to help inform our policymaking. 9 Under Chair Yellen's leadership, the Board of Governors established a Community Advisory Council (CAC) to help provide regular insights into the conditions facing low- and moderate-income communities. 10 Recently, CAC members provided informative public comments to the Board on the Community Reinvestment Act and current market conditions within low- and moderate-income communities. 11 Under Chair Powell’s leadership, Eric Belsky, Anna Boyd, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland President Loretta Mester--who chairs the Committee on Research, Public Information, and Community Affairs for Reserve Bank presidents--and community development staff across the System are continuing to advance this agenda. Over the past year, all 12 Reserve Banks have adopted a common community development strategic plan that seeks to advance the economic resilience and mobility of low- and moderate-income households and communities and to enhance public awareness of these issues. During Chair Yellen's 16 years as a public servant in the Federal Reserve, her words, actions, and research demonstrated a deep commitment to striving for an inclusive economy and recognizing the challenges faced by underserved communities. 12 From her speeches to her policy deliberations, Janet made clear that her duty was to serve Main Street and all Americans. The Award for Excellence in Community Development that we are establishing tonight memorializes Janet Yellen's commitment to the people and places that make up our vibrant economy, including those who face challenges. Going forward, we will look to celebrate staff within the System like Ariel Cisneros--the first to receive this award in Janet Yellen's name--thus honoring those who innovate, trailblaze, and embody the same deep-seated commitment to low- and moderate-income communities that Janet Yellen espouses. With that, it is my great pleasure to introduce Chair Janet Yellen. 1. I am grateful to Charlene van Dijk for her assistance in preparing these remarks. Return to text 2. See the Federal Reserve History website at www.federalreservehistory.org/people/janet_l_yellen . Return to text 3. Janet L. Yellen, "What the Federal Reserve Is Doing to Promote a Stronger Job Market" (speech at the 2014 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference, Chicago, Illinois, March 31, 2014). Return to text 4. "Differences in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups tend to widen sharply during recessions, as less advantaged groups shoulder an outsized share of total layoffs, and these differences shrink during recoveries. For example, in the second quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate for black adult men was a little more than 3 percentage points higher than for white adult men. This differential, while sizable, is nonetheless close to the smallest gap seen since comparable data became available in the mid-1970s." Lael Brainard, "Why Persistent Employment Disparities Matter for the Economy's Health " (speech at "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., September 26, 2017). Return to text 5. Janet L. Yellen, Opening Remarks (speech at the "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy," a community development research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., April 2, 2017) . Return to text 6. Janet L. Yellen, "Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy" (speech at the "Prospects for Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals" 59th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio, September 26, 2017). Return to text 7. See the 10th edition of the Federal Reserve System Purposes & Functions (PDF) . Return to text 8. See Jerome H. Powell, Remarks (speech at the Ceremonial Swearing-in at the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., February 13, 2018. Return to text 9. For examples of the Federal Reserve's analysis of community and household economic issues, see the Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking , Small Business Credit Survey , and Investing in America's Workforce . Return to text "10. "The Community Advisory Council (CAC) was formed by the Federal Reserve Board in 2015 to offer diverse perspectives on the economic circumstances and financial services needs of consumers and communities, with a particular focus on the concerns of low- and moderate-income populations." www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cac.htm . Return to text 11. Lael Brainard, "Community Investment in Denver" (speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Denver Branch, Denver, Colorado, October 15, 2018). Return to text 12. Janet L. Yellen served as a member of the Board of Governors from August 12, 1994, to February 17, 1997; President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco from 2004 to 2010; Vice Chair of the Board of Governors from October 4, 2010, to February 3, 2014; and Chair and Executive Officer of the Board of Governors from February 3, 2014, through February 3, 2018 ( www.federalreservehistory.org/people/janet_l_yellen ). Return to text Last Update: December 03, 2018 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At "The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market" Fourth Annual Conference Hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York Share I am pleased to join the fourth annual conference on the evolving structure of the U.S. Treasury market. Four years ago, the Treasury "flash rally" served as a wake-up call for regulators and market participants alike that the structure of the Treasury market had changed radically from the conventional view. Since the surprising sharp spike in Treasury prices on October 15, 2014, the public sector has devoted significant effort and resources to monitoring the ongoing changes in the Treasury market. The interagency working group's (IAWG) Joint Staff Report on the events of October 15, the Treasury Department's request for information on the report's recommendations, and the subsequent collection of transactions data by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) through its Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) system have offered us a much better understanding of this market. 1 But the market is not resting, and neither can we. Even in the past year, much has changed in the Treasury market, and technology is continuing to drive rapid transformation in the competitive landscape. I would like to talk about the changes we are seeing, what we are learning from the TRACE data, and emerging developments that are important to monitor. In particular, I want to highlight an initiative that the Federal Reserve is considering to expand the public sector's access to transactions data in order to help ensure the IAWG is able to keep up with the market. Still Changing At the first Treasury conference in 2015, market participants were still processing the results of the Joint Staff Report. 2 It came as a surprise to many that the high-frequency trading activity conducted by "proprietary trading firms," or PTFs, accounted for a majority of trading in the interdealer platforms that are so central to the Treasury market. Indeed, the names of the largest proprietary trading firms were new even to some seasoned professionals. At that time, the discussion often drew a very bright line between traditional dealers and proprietary trading firms and, in particular, the trading activities associated with each. The distinction between broker-dealers and proprietary trading firms remains important today with regard to why they are trading, but less and less with regard to how they are trading. Now, as then, broker-dealers intermediate financial transactions primarily to serve their clients' needs, and, for this reason, they are required to register with FINRA. Conversely, the hallmark of proprietary trading firm activity was and still is high-frequency proprietary trading. Proprietary trading firms trade for their own account rather than that of a client, which places them outside of FINRA's jurisdiction and many other forms of oversight. This distinction remains important today. But the distinction in how broker-dealers and proprietary trading firms trade was already starting to blur by the time of the first conference. For example, some of the larger dealers had already invested heavily in electronic trading systems by 2015. Since that time, the distinctions have blurred considerably further. Almost all midsize and large dealers now possess autoquoting capabilities and deploy them on Treasury trading platforms. Several primary dealers have even entered direct partnerships with proprietary trading firms, effectively outsourcing some parts of their market-making operations. The evolution of the dealer business model to incorporate advanced technology is not limited only to trading activity. A number of developers of emerging financial technologies, or fintech, have arisen in recent years to provide dealers and other market participants with back-office tools that reduce costs by automating routine processes, streamlining regulatory reporting, and more efficiently allocating capital, collateral, and margin among competing uses. On the front end, dealers are increasingly offering their customers web-based research and analytic tools, trading and execution engines, and even apps that allow clients access to internal software for pricing and structuring transactions. The landscape for proprietary trading firms has changed considerably in recent years, too. Since 2015, we have witnessed the first initial public offering by a proprietary trading firm, as well as a few high-profile mergers and acquisitions. 3 The industry is contending with declining revenue growth and diminished returns by expanding operations into new asset classes and geographies. Proprietary trading firms are also adapting in other ways. Some have begun to offer broker-dealer services themselves or appear to be contemplating such a business model change. Still others have entered joint ventures with one another to finance new investment in faster microwave communications and defray the high costs of that infrastructure. 4 Third-party providers are also offering high-speed links to firms that wish to engage in high-frequency trading without investing directly in microwave tower infrastructure. We have seen important recent changes among infrastructure providers as well. CME Group's acquisition of NEX and the BrokerTec platform has recently been finalized, with direct implications for the structure of the Treasury market. 5 We have also witnessed the conclusion of J.P. Morgan's exit from broker-dealer settlement services in the triparty Treasury repo market and the transition to BNY Mellon Government Securities Services Corp. as a subsidiary offering Treasury market settlement services. Beyond these changes, some new trading platforms are experimenting with the very structure of the market. 6 These platforms are promoting new trading models such as all-to-all trading, in which many buy-side and sell-side participants transact directly, and direct streaming, in which live continuous, executable prices are delivered electronically under bilaterally or multilaterally negotiated terms. These services can potentially bridge all of the venues of the Treasury market, connecting not just dealers and proprietary trading firms, but also those entities with buy-side clients. And, finally, the macroeconomic landscape has undergone some significant changes that have important implications for the Treasury market. At the time of the flash rally in October 2014, the Federal Reserve was still actively purchasing Treasury securities, and the federal funds rate was still at the effective lower bound. With the economy now at or beyond full employment and inflation around target, the Federal Open Market Committee has since gradually increased its target for the federal funds rate to between 2 and 2-1/4 percent, and normalization of the balance sheet is well under way. Since October 2017, the portfolio of the System Open Market Account has decreased in size from $4.2 trillion to about $3.9 trillion. What Have We Learned So Far? Against this changed backdrop and with more than a year's worth of information from the TRACE data available, it is a good time to ask what we have learned since the initial market event and what questions remain. First, the initiation of policy normalization and the ongoing reduction of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet do not appear to have sparked a deterioration in Treasury market liquidity. Standard metrics such as bid-ask spreads have not materially changed for benchmark securities since 2014. Market functioning has also been orderly during a number of recent events that were characterized by high trading volume and elevated price volatility, such as in early February of this year. Second, some segments of the market seem much more active than observers may have feared before the collection of TRACE data. In particular, according to the TRACE data as shown in figure 1 , off-the-run trading accounts for 27 percent of overall trading volume, while deep off-the-run notes and bonds--seasoned securities older than the first or second off-the-run--account for 14 percent of all coupon activity. 7 Likewise, the data show that Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) trade in significant volumes as well. Due to the TRACE data, we are now able to measure with reasonable precision the transaction volumes in these securities. Off-the-run and TIPS activity is largely concentrated in the dealer-to-client (DTC) and voice venues of the market, segments into which the public sector had only limited insight before the TRACE data. While substantial analysis with respect to pricing and liquidity remains to be done in these market segments, the early results allow us to conclude that these securities do trade in meaningful amounts. Third, although there was speculation that proprietary trading firms had already eclipsed bank dealers in benchmark Treasury trading or would come to threaten the dealer business model more broadly, neither has occurred. 8 Based on the TRACE data, as shown in figure 2 , we can now state with a reasonable amount of confidence that dealers generally--and primary dealers particularly--still intermediate the majority of activity in all Treasury securities. 9 In the market for Treasury bills in particular, primary dealers play an important role in allocating issuance to investors. This can be seen where most activity in bills occurs, as shown in figure 3 , which depicts the share of trading volume of bills in the DTC, interdealer broker (IDB), and interdealer segments of the market. Federal Reserve staff analysis of the TRACE data reveals that nearly three-fourths of total trading volume of bills is in the DTC market, where dealers are, of course, the main intermediary. From this and other analysis, there is substantial evidence that the dealer business model plays a central role in this market and will continue to do so into the future. 10 That said, proprietary trading firms do occupy an important space in the Treasury market alongside dealers, and it is clear that they, too, are here to stay. When it comes to areas where speed is paramount--for instance, in trading across and between asset classes and trading venues‑‑proprietary trading firms are deploying technology and infrastructure in ways that are having lasting effects. This is evident in the Treasury market in the intervals following economic data releases. Again turning to the TRACE data, we see in figure 4 a depiction of average trading volumes of all Treasury securities across five-minute intervals on days in which the Employment Situation report, gross domestic product data, or consumer price index data are announced. The TRACE volume data indicate that the immediate surge in trading activity following these announcements occurs mainly in the electronic IDB venue, where proprietary trading firms dominate. In short, the TRACE data are enabling us to put some old puzzles to rest. Our analysis makes clear that the Treasury market has adapted well to the post-crisis regulatory regime, the normalization of monetary policy, and technological changes in trading processes, and that both broker-dealers and proprietary trading firms play important, often complementary, roles in the market structure that has emerged. Looking Ahead Of course, the structure of the Treasury market will continue to evolve, along with changes in technology and the broader financial environment. Looking forward, we will need to ask more of the data as we seek to understand what is next for the structure of the Treasury market. As I mentioned earlier, experimentation with new protocols is occurring now. Although all-to-all trading in the Treasury market was contemplated at the first conference, direct streaming largely was not, which might prompt us to ask what else is on the horizon. In addition to direct streaming, another development that bears watching is the batch auction platforms that have arisen in the voice IDB market, something that has not received as much attention from market participants. Started after the financial crisis, batch auctions are now conducted by a number of IDB firms at regular intervals throughout the trading day. Like any closed auction, the IDB collects anonymous bids and offers for a specific security in specific amounts during a relatively short window of time, generally on the order of a few minutes. After the batch auction closes, the orders are matched, and participants are notified of their awards. 11 Figure 5 , based on TRACE data, depicts average trading volumes of TIPS securities in the IDB venue of the market across five-minute intervals. As you can see, the level of activity rises significantly at intervals, which correspond to the timing of the auctions. While it is not a large part of the overall market, this activity appears to be an important innovation for segments often deemed to be less liquid--in particular, for off-the-run and TIPS trading on voice IDBs. Before the collection of the TRACE data, there was limited insight into this area of the market, which made it difficult to assess the significance of such innovations. No doubt there are other innovations that have yet to be assessed. Recently, the debate over liquidity has turned toward the participation of proprietary trading firms in the off-the-run segment of the market, an area outside of their traditional domain. All-to-all and direct-streaming platforms are also attempting to establish a foothold in the off-the-run segment by offering new services. I look forward to further analysis as the structure of the market continues to evolve. Keeping Up As the Treasury market has evolved, the public sector has had to evolve as well in order to keep up. Many of the recommendations in the Joint Staff Report have now been implemented. Our colleagues at Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and FINRA deserve credit for the work to begin collecting Treasury transaction data on FINRA's TRACE system. My hope is that you will take away from my remarks, along with those of my colleagues from other agencies, a comprehensive picture of how all of the IAWG agencies are using the data to work through the many issues that intersect with our various policy missions and mandates. As the market continues to innovate and the broader financial environment continues to shift, we will maintain our focus on the resilience of the Treasury market specifically and the financial system more broadly. 12 In this regard, the staff at the Federal Reserve continues to work on important issues raised by the events of October 15, 2014. Markets have been able to weather several episodes of short-lived market turbulence well in the past few years. But the fact that sharp market movements--some on the order of seven or eight standard deviations outside the norm--can occur even in the absence of clear news drivers remains a concern and highlights the potential risks to financial stability posed by the high-speed transmission of price and liquidity shocks across multiple markets and trading venues. The TRACE data now allow us to monitor events when equity and bond markets move sharply. For instance, take the turbulence in equity and bond markets on February 5, 2018. While trading volumes in both the electronic IDB and DTC market segments were markedly higher than average, some metrics of liquidity, such as market depth near the top of the order book on major electronic IDB platforms, deteriorated and remained low through the week. The pattern of a spike in trading volumes followed by a persistent decline in market depth has been characteristic of three recent market turmoil episodes: (1) the Treasury flash rally on October 15, 2014; (2) the flash crash in the British pound on October 7, 2016; and (3) the spike in the VIX on February 5, 2018. 13 Figure 6 shows this pattern for February 5, 2018. These seemingly contradictory dynamics are easier to reconcile if the prevalent role played by high-speed electronic trading in the Treasury market is taken into account, particularly under stressed conditions. As previously noted in the Joint Staff Report, high-speed market makers are able to manage perceived risks from sudden adverse price moves by greatly reducing the sizes of orders placed on electronic execution venues while, at the same time, increasing order placement rates as much as needed to accommodate increased trading volumes without the need to widen bid-ask spreads. That said, the ability of high-speed market makers to nearly simultaneously adjust liquidity provision across multiple closely linked markets can create potential challenges for large institutional investors seeking to reliably aggregate posted liquidity among otherwise distinct trading venues. 14 The dynamic nature of liquidity provision by high-speed market makers makes static measures of liquidity, such as posted bid-ask spreads and market depth, less useful. For the purposes of improving our assessment of financial stability, it is therefore necessary to look for alternative ways of gauging liquidity and transaction costs in these markets. For example, measures such as implementation shortfall aim to account directly for the difference between the original decision price and the final execution price for a trade split into multiple smaller transactions. 15 As IAWG staff members continue to refine the TRACE data to assess market resilience more accurately in light of changes in structure and speed, it will be important to incorporate alternative measures of liquidity and transaction costs. Separately, the increased role of managed funds is also having an effect on the Treasury market. TRACE data can help us keep up with that development as well. As in other asset classes, 3 p.m. has become an important liquidity point during the trading day for Treasury securities. There is a regular spike in trading activity around 3 p.m., as can be seen in figure 7 , which depicts average trading volumes across five-minute intervals. Federal Reserve staff analysis reveals that the 3 p.m. spike in trading volumes tends to be fairly evenly divided between the DTC and IDB market segments, suggesting that both dealers and proprietary trading firms play an important role during this narrow window of activity. In the DTC market, the increase around 3 p.m. would be consistent with trading related to mutual fund daily and end-of-month portfolio rebalancing. In the electronic IDB market, the increase around 3 p.m. would be consistent with the increased role of proprietary trading firms in intraday intermediation and the possible closeout of positions toward the end of the main part of the trading day. From a market resilience perspective, it would be valuable to analyze these systematic intraday spikes in trading volumes, particularly as they may influence price formation and liquidity provision in the Treasury market. The large spike in flows toward the end of the trading day points to a financial stability consideration that is worth flagging. The Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG) has done valuable work in mapping out clearing and settlement patterns in the Treasury market. One issue that this analysis highlights is the currently limited potential for same day, or T+0, settlement on transactions conducted near the end of the day. The flash events we have seen in the Treasury market so far have occurred early enough in the day to allow time for prices to recover before market close, and they have not been accompanied by any participant's failure to perform, let alone a major participant, platform, or exchange. As the TMPG's work shows, most transactions in the Treasury market settle the next day, or T+1. As can be seen in figure 8 , Federal Reserve staff analysis based on the transactions recorded in TRACE shows that same-day settlement volumes, on average, represent only about 4 percent of total daily volume, with the rest concentrated primarily on one-day settlement. Same-day settlement volumes since the inception of TRACE have never exceeded roughly 10 percent of the daily total. Fortunately, we have not recently observed a large liquidation of Treasury holdings for cash at the end of the same day. But we cannot rule out that this will always be the case. It is not clear from the TRACE data whether the market could accommodate a large sale of Treasury securities later in the day, perhaps associated with a need to raise cash quickly to settle outstanding positions, without causing a substantial move in prices. It will be important to follow closely how the market evolves in light of the potential risks and resilience issues identified in the recent TMPG white paper on clearing and settlement in the secondary market for U.S. Treasury securities. 16 Before I conclude, let me discuss one other step the Board is planning to take to help us keep up with the changing nature of markets. The TRACE data are indispensable in the IAWG's ability to track and understand this market. However, FINRA's collections are limited only to its members. The Federal Reserve is close to finalizing an agreement with FINRA to act as our agent in expanding the collection of Treasury transactions to key banks that are also active in this market. In addition, in light of recent changes in the market, the Board has decided to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking to seek public comment on collecting agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and debt transactions as well. This collection will help round out the IAWG's view of these markets and ensure continuous coverage in circumstances where trading moves between the bank and the broker-dealer within a firm. It is important that reporting thresholds be appropriately tailored to avoid imposing undue burden on smaller firms, and we will be particularly attentive to public comments on this matter. I see important potential benefits of transparency under appropriate circumstances. The Treasury Department is currently considering these issues, and we would seek to harmonize our approach with any future decisions by the Treasury Department and the IAWG in making Treasury transactions data available to the public. Our expectation is also that Federal Reserve policy would be harmonized with FINRA's practices in making anonymized agency MBS and debt transactions publicly available, taking into account what we learn from the comment process. Conclusion In sum, we recognize it is vitally important for the Federal Reserve and other agencies to keep up with the rapid changes we are seeing in the Treasury market. The Treasury market is a cornerstone of the global financial system: Treasury securities are used to finance the federal government, represent a store of value for investors and households alike, and serve as the primary reserve asset for the global financial system. The Treasury market is also vital to the Federal Reserve: It is central to the transmission of our monetary policy, provides key signals on market expectations for inflation and future interest rates, and is a key source of high-quality liquid assets for the banking system. Given the centrality of the Treasury market, it is all the more notable that access to data on Treasury market transactions on par with those available for futures, equity, and corporate bond markets is a very recent development. The recent collection of these data has provided crucial insights into the resilience and structure of the Treasury market. Recognizing that the market will continue to evolve, we are committed to doing our part to make sure the scope of our data and their availability evolve commensurately. 1. I am grateful to David Bowman, Dobrislav Dobrev, Peter Johansson, and Michael Puglia for assistance in preparing these remarks. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See U.S. Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015), Joint Staff Report: The U.S. Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 (PDF) (Washington: Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July). Return to text 3. These developments include the mergers and acquisitions between Virtu and KCG and between Teza and Quantlab. See CNBC (2017), "Trading Firm Virtu Financial to Buy KCG for about $1.4 Billion," CNBC, April 20, https://www.cnbc.com/2017/04/20/two-high-speed-trading-firms-merge-in-1-4-billion-deal.html; and Gregory Meyer (2017), "Teza Sells High-Speed Trading as Lucrative Business Sours," Financial Times, March 21. Return to text 4. One example is the Go West Consortium. See Gregory Meyer, Nicole Bullock, and Joe Rennison (2018), "How High-Frequency Trading Hit a Speed Bump," Financial Times, January 1. Return to text 5. See CMG Group (2018), " CME Group Completes Acquisition of NEX, Creating a Leading Global Markets Company across Futures, Cash and OTC ," press release, November 2. Return to text 6. LiquidityEdge and OpenDoor, LLC, are two examples of trading platforms offering new models. Return to text 7. See Doug Brain, Michiel De Pooter, Dobrislav Dobrev, Michael Fleming, Peter Johansson, Frank Keane, Michael Puglia, Tony Rodrigues, and Or Shachar (2018). " Breaking Down TRACE Volumes Further ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 29, 2018, https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2299. Return to text 8. See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2015), " Conference Summary: The Evolving Structure of the U.S. Treasury Market (October 20-21, 2015) (PDF) ." Return to text 9. TRACE data do not currently identify PTF firms. We estimate the activity by assuming PTFs account for 92 percent of nondealer trading volume on the electronic and automated interdealer brokers, which is the share of nondealer activity accounted for by PTFs on electronic IDBs reported in the Joint Staff Report from 2014. The Securities and Exchange Commission recently approved a rule change proposed by FINRA to require some reporters in TRACE to identify non-FINRA member activity. Once in effect, this change will enhance regulators' ability to identify trades with PTFs on IDBs and to more accurately identify the share of overall trading activity attributable to PTFs. Return to text 10. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Supervision and Regulation Report (Washington: Board of Governors, November). Return to text 11. Note that these auctions differ from proposed high-frequency batch auctions in that they are held at much less frequent intervals, typically separated by hours and, in some cases, occurring only once a day or a week. Return to text 12. Flash events that have occurred in recent years include, but are not limited to, the first "flash crash" in U.S. equity markets on May 6, 2010; the Treasury flash rally of October 15, 2014, the flash event in U.S. equity markets on August 24, 2015; the pound flash crash on October 7, 2016; and the turbulence in U.S. equity and VIX markets on February 5, 2018. Return to text 13. See also Ernst Schaumburg and Ron Yang (2015), " Liquidity during Flash Events ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 18. Return to text 14. See Dobrislav Dobrev and Ernst Schaumburg (2015), " The Liquidity Mirage ," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 9. Return to text 15. See Bank for International Settlements, Markets Committee (2018), Monitoring of Fast-Paced Electronic Markets (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: BIS, September). Return to text 16. See Treasury Market Practices Group (2018), " White Paper on Clearing and Settlement in the Secondary Market for U.S. Treasury Securities (PDF) ," consultative white paper (New York: TMPG, July); and Treasury Market Practices Group (2018), Clearing and Settlement in the Secondary Market for U.S. Treasury Securities: Trade Flow Mapping (PDF) , consultative report (New York: TMPG, July). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: December 03, 2018 Back to Top

Governor Lael Brainard At the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C. Share Watch Live Financial stability is integral to achieving the Federal Reserve's objectives of full employment and price stability. We need only look back a decade to see the dramatic damage from financial vulnerabilities that increase unchecked: Millions of Americans lost their livelihoods and their homes, business losses and failures rose, and the government had to provide extraordinary support to the system. Since then, financial sector resilience has strengthened, and household balance sheets have been repaired over the course of a lengthy recovery. Today employment is strong, inflation is around target, and incomes are growing. 1 If we learned anything from this experience, it is that we must be especially vigilant to safeguard the resilience of our financial system in good times when vulnerabilities may be building. That is why the Federal Reserve actively monitors the potential vulnerabilities to the financial system. Last week, for the first time, we released our assessment in the Financial Stability Report. 2 Today I will offer a brief summary of the outlook, highlight areas where I see financial imbalances building, and touch on the implications for policy. Sustaining the Expansion Domestic economic momentum has been strong, as evidenced by the labor market. With the November data, monthly payroll gains have averaged 170,000 over the past 3 months, well above the pace necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force. The share of the prime-age population (people ages 25 to 54) that is working is closing in on its pre-crisis level. By most measures, wages have accelerated over the past year and are now growing around 3 percent, the highest level since the crisis. These are welcome developments. While the most recent reading on core personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, inflation ticked down, indicators of underlying trend inflation remain encouraging overall, providing little signal of an outbreak of inflation to the upside, on the one hand, and reassurance that underlying trend inflation may be close to our target of 2 percent, on the other ( figure 1 ). The economy has grown 3 percent over the past year, and there are good reasons to expect growth to remain solid next year, supported by the strong underlying momentum in domestic demand. Consumer spending looks to be robust going into the fourth quarter, and ongoing gains in income and employment provide positive fundamentals. In addition, business investment should be solid, even with recent declines in oil prices. Sizable fiscal stimulus has provided an important boost to demand this year and will likely contribute somewhat further next year, given the usual lags in outlays and in the effects of tax cuts on business and household spending. The most likely path for the economy is positive, although some tailwinds that have provided a boost are fading, and we may face some crosscurrents. The global growth that provided a strong tailwind going into this year has moderated. The earlier strong growth in Europe and Japan appears to be softening toward trend. China is shifting to an accommodative policy stance to contend with a challenging trade environment and lagged effects from its earlier tightening. Here at home, the impetus to growth from fiscal policy is likely to fade going into 2020. And after being exceptionally accommodative, financial conditions have tightened in recent months. Financial conditions are still supportive of growth by many measures ( figure 2 ), but less so than last year. There are risks on both sides of the economy's likely path. In Europe, there are risks associated with deliberations over Italy's fiscal and debt trajectory and the United Kingdom's deliberations on the Brexit deal. Here at home, we hear from businesses that the uncertainty associated with trade policy and the implications for supply chains may weigh on business capital spending. Although it is reasonable to expect fiscal spending to be extended around current levels in real terms after the Bipartisan Budget Act expires, we cannot rule out that fiscal policy could become a headwind in 2020. The risks are two-sided. Business contacts report difficulties finding qualified workers and increased costs associated with inputs, tariffs, and transportation, along with somewhat greater ability to pass through those increases to consumer prices. Despite this, however, inflation remains muted overall. At 3.7 percent, the unemployment rate is at its lowest level in 49 years, and payrolls have been growing well above the pace that is consistent with labor market stabilization. Historically, the few periods when resource utilization has been similarly tight have seen elevated risks of either accelerating inflation or financial imbalances. Our goal now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation around target. The gradual path of increases in the federal funds rate has served us well by giving us time to assess the effects of policy as we have proceeded. That approach remains appropriate in the near term, although the policy path increasingly will depend on how the outlook evolves. Assessing Vulnerabilities over the Cycle The last several times resource utilization approached levels similar to today, signs of overheating showed up in financial-sector imbalances rather than in accelerating inflation. In contrast to the past, the Federal Reserve now has a systematic forward-looking approach to identifying increases in financial vulnerabilities. This monitoring is the focus of regular Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee discussions. Last week, the Board released its first Financial Stability Report to help inform the public and promote transparency and accountability as we carry out our financial stability responsibilities. While there has been substantial progress on reducing household debt burdens and increasing the resilience of the banking system, the Federal Reserve's assessment suggests that financial vulnerabilities associated with corporate debt are building against a backdrop of elevated risk appetite. Let me briefly review these developments in turn. In contrast to the years preceding the crisis, when household borrowing was growing at a pace far above that of gross domestic product (GDP), it has since come down and is now growing more slowly than the economy overall ( figure 3 ). Moreover, while much of the increase before the crisis reflected borrowing that proved unsustainable, more recent borrowing has been concentrated among households with strong credit profiles. The regulated financial sector is also more resilient, owing to far-reaching reforms as well as favorable conditions. Large banks have increased both the size and quality of their capital buffers: The ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets at large banks has increased by half relative to the pre-crisis average. It is now close to levels seen at smaller banks, although the risk-weighted capital ratio at large banks has moved down somewhat over the past year ( figure 4 ). In addition, insurers appear generally well capitalized; broker-dealers, including those not affiliated with large bank holding companies, have reduced their leverage; and the outstanding values of funding vehicles that embed significant leverage, such as certain securitized products, are much lower. In contrast, there has been some evidence of rising use of leverage by hedge funds over the past year and a half. Financial reform has reduced funding risks associated with banks and money market funds. Large banks subject to liquidity regulation rely less on unstable short-term wholesale funding and have thicker liquidity buffers. As a result of money market reforms, investors have migrated toward government-only funds, which pose low run risk, and away from prime institutional funds, which proved highly susceptible to runs during the crisis and required extraordinary government support ( figure 5 ). In contrast, we are seeing elevated vulnerabilities in the nonfinancial business sector. 3 Business borrowing has risen more rapidly than GDP for much of the current expansion and now sits near its historical peak ( figure 6 ). The run-up in corporate debt has brought the ratio of debt to assets close to its highest level in two decades on an overall basis, and this is also true for speculative-grade and unrated firms ( figure 7 ). And whereas previously, mostly high-earning firms with relatively low leverage were taking on additional debt, analysis of detailed balance sheet information indicates that, over the past year, firms with high leverage, high interest expense ratios, and low earnings and cash holdings have been increasing their debt loads the most. Historically, high leverage has been linked to elevated financial distress and retrenchment by businesses in economic downturns. Regarding corporate bonds outstanding, recent years have witnessed little change in the relative shares of investment-grade bonds and high-yield bonds. Credit quality has deteriorated within the investment-grade segment, where the share of bonds rated at the lowest investment-grade level has reached near-record levels. As of mid-2018, around 35 percent of corporate bonds outstanding were at the lowest end of the investment-grade segment, which amounts to about $2-1/4 trillion. In comparison, the share of high-yield bonds outstanding that are rated "deep junk" has stayed flat at about one-third from 2015 to 2018, well below the financial crisis peak of 45 percent. In an economic downturn, widespread downgrades of these low-rated investment-grade bonds to speculative-grade ratings could induce some investors to sell them rapidly--for instance, because lower-rated bonds have higher regulatory capital requirements or because bond funds have limits on the share of non-investment-grade bonds they hold. This concern may be higher now than in the past, since total assets under management in bond mutual funds have more than doubled in the past decade to about $2.3 trillion this year. These funds now hold about one-tenth of the corporate bond market, and the redemption behavior of investors in these funds during a market correction is unclear. Bond sales could lead to large changes in bond prices and overall financial conditions if technological, market, or regulatory factors contribute to strains on market liquidity--a possibility that has been relatively untested over the course of the expansion. Further down the credit quality ladder, there has been sizable growth in leveraged lending, accompanied by a notable deterioration in underwriting standards. Net issuance of debt to risky borrowers, which had stopped growing in late 2016, rebounded over the past year. Leveraged loans outstanding rose about 12 percent over the past 12 months and now stand around $1 trillion overall. 4 While leveraged loans have traditionally had important investor protections, loan covenants for new leveraged loans have weakened dramatically. Covenant-lite, or cov-lite, transactions now represent roughly 80 percent of the entire leveraged lending market--up from less than 30 percent a decade ago, when they were associated primarily with stronger borrowers. Deals increasingly involve features that increase opacity and risk, such as less subordinated debt; "EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) add backs," which could inflate the projected capacity of the borrowers to repay their loans; and "incremental facilities," which allow additional borrowing that is of equal seniority with the existing bank loan. 5 The share of newly issued large loans to corporations with high leverage (debt to EBITDA ratios above 6) now exceeds previous peak levels observed in 2007 and 2014 ( figure 8 ). Previously, much of this deterioration in underwriting appeared to be concentrated among nonbank lenders, but this year has witnessed a deterioration in underwriting at the largest banks. The widening adoption of practices that make risk harder to measure suggests a heightened focus on industry risk-management practices is warranted. 6 A substantial share of the leveraged loans are packaged in collateralized loan obligations (CLOs). Gross issuance of CLOs hit $71 billion in the first half of 2018. This pace represents an increase of about one-third compared with the same period in the previous year. 7 Many large banks are engaged in the origination of leveraged loans with an intent to distribute, often to CLOs. The originate-to-distribute model exposes banks to pipeline risk--the risk that some originated loans may be difficult to distribute if market conditions deteriorate. Although banks have improved pipeline management over the past decade, risk-management practices may have weakened somewhat recently in the face of strong investor demand. The direct exposures of the banking system, in the form of loan portfolios and warehousing exposures, can be tracked. But there are also indirect exposures, including through bank investments in CLOs on the order of $90 billion, that bear vigilance. More broadly, bank lines to the nonbank financial sector have increased notably ( figure 9 ). Loan funds have also become increasingly important in the leveraged loan market and are estimated to purchase about one-fifth of newly originated leveraged loans. If prices were to move sharply lower, a rush to redeem shares by open-ended mutual fund investors could lead to large sales of their relatively illiquid holdings, further exacerbating price declines and run incentives. To date, the default rate on leveraged loans has been at the low end of its historical range, and corporate credit conditions have been favorable, with low interest expenses and low expected default rates. However, if spreads rise sharply or economic conditions deteriorate significantly, we could see downgrades, refinancing challenges, rising delinquencies and defaults, and losses to investors. It is thus particularly notable that the run-up in business debt occurred against a backdrop of generally elevated valuations ( figure 10 ). Even with the recent volatility in equity markets and the recent widening of corporate bond spreads, a range of asset prices remain high relative to historical benchmarks. In particular, yields on high-yield corporate bonds relative to Treasury securities remain somewhat narrow on a historical basis despite recent increases. Similarly, although they have moved up in recent months, spreads on leveraged loans remain in the low end of their range since the financial crisis, which is notable given the evidence of weakening protections. Finally, capitalization rates on commercial real estate properties, which measure annual income relative to prices for recently transacted properties, have been low relative to Treasury yields. The generally high appetite for risk that we saw over the past two years makes the equity, corporate debt, and other asset markets more vulnerable to swings in market sentiment. In addition to generating losses for investors, declines in valuations could make it more challenging for firms to obtain or extend financing--especially among risky, indebted firms--which in turn could be amplified by the high levels of risky corporate debt. Calibrating Policy over the Cycle The assessment of financial vulnerabilities that I have outlined naturally raises the following question for policymakers: What is the appropriate risk tolerance? It goes without saying we must take all appropriate steps to prevent another Great Financial Crisis from causing the greatest contraction in global economic activity since the Great Depression. But it is also worth remembering that financial imbalances played a key role in each of the past three U.S. downturns--the risky investments and maturity mismatches associated with the savings and loan crisis and junk bond collapse; the tech boom and bust; and, most dramatically, the subprime crisis. This suggests policy might seek to moderate financial vulnerabilities when they are likely to materially exacerbate an economic downturn, leading to deeper declines in output and higher levels of unemployment. Each of the past three U.S. recessions featured important financial imbalances, although they differed in important ways. Both economic theory and econometric evidence point to the risk that excesses in corporate debt markets could similarly amplify adverse shocks and contribute to job losses. 8 The economics are straightforward. Over-indebted businesses may face payment strains when earnings fall unexpectedly, and they may respond by pulling back on employment and investment. The slowdown in activity lowers investor demand for risky assets, thereby raising spreads and depressing valuations. In turn, business losses accumulate, and delinquencies and defaults rise, reducing the willingness or the ability of banks to lend. This dynamic feeds on itself, potentially amplifying moderate adverse shocks into more serious financial strains or a recession. 9 Given the risks to the financial system and economy from this potential adverse feedback loop, a strong case can be made that the financial system's buffers should be fortified when the economy is strong. Reinforcing capital buffers during the strong part of the cycle means that banks will have a cushion to absorb losses and remain sound during a subsequent downturn. Thicker capital buffers help bolster the confidence of market participants when conditions deteriorate, helping prevent the downward spiral from a loss of confidence. And during the downturn, that extra buffer can be released to enable banks to continue lending and help mitigate its severity. History suggests that we should not expect the market to provide incentives for banks to build the necessary buffers when times are good; the essence of the cycle is that market sentiment become overconfident precisely when risk is actually highest. One of the roles for independent regulatory bodies such as the Federal Reserve is to serve as a counterweight. Moreover, as we saw in the last crisis, it is much costlier to rebuild capital in a downturn when earnings and risk appetite are low than to build buffers in an expansion when earnings are strong. At the Federal Reserve, the two important tools that can respond somewhat to rising vulnerabilities are the design of stress-test scenarios and the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB). The annual supervisory stress test examines the resilience of large bank holding companies to a severely adverse scenario, which includes salient risks that can be adjusted over time. In recent years, the scenarios have been designed to explore severe dislocations in corporate credit markets as a salient risk. Nonetheless, the stress tests have limitations as a countercyclical tool during buoyant periods. For instance, while the severity of the stresses can be varied from year to year to address emerging risks to some degree, it is difficult to introduce entirely new scenarios each year to target specific sectoral risks without introducing excessive complexity. 10 And while the stress tests and proposed stress capital buffer are designed to calibrate capital buffers for the riskiness of an institution's particular assets and exposures, the capital buffer does not vary systematically to counter the cyclicality that arises through elevated asset valuations and other channels. 11 The limited ability of the stress tests to increase loss-absorbing capacity during buoyant economic times is illustrated in the results from recent years, where scenarios have involved increasingly severe recessions and strains in corporate debt markets but generally lower declines in capital ratios. More broadly, capital ratios at the largest banks have been flat and, more recently, modestly lower. In contrast, the first goal of the CCyB is to directly build resilience at large bank holding companies when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses, which often follow periods of credit growth or rapid asset price appreciation. The second goal of the CCyB is to promote a more sustainable supply of credit over the economic cycle. The CCyB is expected to be reduced as credit growth slows in order to support credit supply at times when it might otherwise contract. As a rough rule of thumb, the criteria for implementing the CCyB described in the Board's framework of September 2016 are calibrated so that the CCyB will be above its minimum value of zero about one-third of the time--when financial vulnerabilities are assessed to be in the upper one-third of their historical distribution. 12 There are several potential advantages to building additional resilience through the CCyB. First, countercyclical capital requirements are intended to lean against rising risks at a time when the degree of monetary tightening needed to achieve the same goal could be inconsistent with sustaining the expansion. And countercyclical capital requirements build resilience, unlike monetary policy. Second, the banks that are subject to the CCyB could achieve a modest buffer simply by safeguarding the capital they have built up or by reducing payouts moderately. Third, the CCyB is a simple, predictable, and slow-moving tool that applies equally across all large banks. It does not single out shortfalls in particular banks or result in hard-to-predict volatility in individual banks' stressed capital requirements. Finally and critically, the additional capital implied by the CCyB across the system can be released when conditions deteriorate to ensure the ability of large banks to lend into a downturn. A number of countries have raised their CCyB setting above zero, and we can learn from their experiences, which have generally been positive. 13 Conclusion Our job now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation near target. Recent history suggests that the business cycle and the financial cycle are increasingly intertwined. If history is any guide, as resource utilization continues to tighten, there is some risk that financial imbalances could grow. The U.S. financial system is much more resilient than before the crisis, owing importantly to strong financial reforms. Even so, the banking system's core capital and liquidity buffers have yet to be tested through a full cycle. At the same time, the appetite for risk among financial market participants rose notably over 2017 and much of 2018, and corporate borrowing has reached new heights amid rapid growth and deteriorating underwriting standards in riskier segments, such as leveraged lending. The mutual funds that have built up exposure to some of this risky debt have liquidity mismatches that could contribute to market dislocations in stressed conditions. This constellation of vulnerabilities could amplify adverse shocks that might materialize. At a time when cyclical pressures have been building and bank profitability has been strong, it might be prudent to ask large banking organizations to fortify their capital buffers, which could subsequently be released if conditions warrant. References Bank of England (2018). Financial Stability Report (PDF) . London: BOE, November. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2018). " Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) ," webpage. Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler (1989). "Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations," American Economic Review, vol. 79 (March), pp. 14-31. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013). " Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Policy Statement for Developing Scenarios for Future Capital Planning and Stress Testing Exercises ," press release, November 7. -------- (2016). " Regulatory Capital Rules: The Federal Reserve Board's Framework for Implementing the U.S. Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer (PDF) ," final policy statement, September 8. -------- (2018). Financial Stability Report (PDF) . Washington: Board of Governors, November. Brainard, Lael (2014). " The Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda ," speech delivered at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, Washington, December 3 . -------- (2018a). " An Update on the Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda ," speech delivered at the Center for Global Economy and Business, Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, April 3. -------- (2018b). " Safeguarding Financial Resilience through the Cycle ," speech delivered at the Global Finance Forum, Washington, April 19. López-Salido, David, Jeremy C. Stein, and Egon Zakrajšek (2017). "Credit-Market Sentiment and the Business Cycle," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 132 (August), pp. 1373‑1426. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, National Risk Committee (2018). Semiannual Risk Perspective (PDF) . Washington: OCC, Fall. Vermilyea, Todd (2018). "Perspectives on Leveraged Lending," speech delivered at the Loan Syndications and Trading Association 23rd Annual Conference, New York, October 24, https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.iib.org/resource/resmgr/weekly_bulletin/10-24fedspeech_leveraged_len.pdf . 1. I am grateful to Michael Kiley and Namirembe Mukasa for their assistance in preparing this text. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Board of Governors (2018). Return to text 3. In addition to the discussion of vulnerabilities presented in the Board's Financial Stability Report, the increase in risks associated with nonfinancial corporate borrowing is highlighted in the fall 2018 report Semiannual Risk Perspective , produced by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency. See Office of the Comptroller (2018). Return to text 4. Estimates vary. The estimate of about $1 trillion in the Board's Financial Stability Report excludes lending to financial companies and generally excludes loan commitments by banks. The S&P Global Leveraged Loan Index is around $1.3 trillion. The estimate of $2.2 trillion in the Bank of England's Financial Stability Report is for the global market, including bank loans. Return to text 5. An "add back" is an unusual, discretionary, or nonrecurring expense that is added back to earnings with the intent of normalizing EBITDA. Examples include legal expenses, insurance costs, or owner-related expenses. Return to text 6. For a recent discussion of developments informed by the Federal Reserve's supervisory work, particularly through its review of the Shared National Credit program, see Vermilyea (2018). Return to text 7. For a recent comparison of the subprime mortgage market and the global market for leveraged loans, see Bank of England (2018). Return to text 8. For example, López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2017) present empirical evidence linking corporate debt excesses to contractions in U.S. economic activity and review related research. Return to text 9. The broad contours of this dynamic are laid out theoretically in the literature on the financial accelerator. The classic reference is Bernanke and Gertler (1989). Return to text 10. For a discussion of the Federal Reserve's framework for designing scenarios, see Board of Governors (2013). Return to text 11. See Brainard (2014). Return to text 12. See Board of Governors (2016) and Brainard (2018a and 2018b). Return to text 13. Basel Committee (2018) reports the setting of the CCyB across countries. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: December 07, 2018 Back to Top
