Presentation to the 2012 Santa Barbara County Economic Summit Santa Barbara, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on May 3, 2012 The Slow Recovery: Causes and Monetary Policy Implications Thank you. It’s a pleasure to participate in the 2012 Santa Barbara County Economic Summit. It’s especially nice for my Fed colleagues from other parts of the country to experience firsthand the beautiful scenery and wonderful weather that we Californians get to enjoy every day. In my presentation today, I’m going to sketch out the key factors shaping the economic recovery. I’ll then comment on the implications of these events for monetary policy. Before I get running, I should note that my remarks represent my own views and not those of others in the Federal Reserve System. Our economy is still feeling the aftereffects of the worst financial crisis and economic downturn since the Great Depression. Economists have pointed out that recoveries from financial crises are typically very slow and drawn out.1 This one has been no exception. We are now nearly three years into the recovery phase, as measured by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The economy is steadily improving and the outlook is for continued moderate growth. Nonetheless, we have nearly four-and-a-half million fewer jobs today than five years ago and the unemployment rate remains very high at 8.2 percent. A number of forces are holding back the economy. The foremost is the massive fallout from the housing crash.2 The scale of the housing meltdown is breathtaking. From their peak in 1 1 Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor (2011). See Williams (2012a,b) for fuller discussions of recent economic developments. 2 Feroli et al. (2012). 2006, house prices have fallen by about a third nationally. The destruction of net worth from housing equaled more than 40 percent of the value of annual U.S. production. About a quarter of borrowers found themselves under water, owing more than their homes were worth. Millions of families have lost their homes to foreclosure. And millions more are currently in foreclosure or are severely delinquent on their mortgages. When a debt-fueled bubble bursts, the economic effects are severe. During the boom, higher house prices helped fuel consumption as people tapped home equity to buy cars, boats, vacations, and the like. When house prices did a U-turn, households—deep in debt and feeling much poorer—hunkered down. They cut spending and salted away more savings to rebuild lost wealth. And that wasn’t the housing bust’s only depressing effect. By early 2009, home construction had plunged by over 75 percent from its 2006 high. It’s edged up somewhat since then, but remains at very depressed levels. That’s kept millions of carpenters, plumbers, and others in construction and real estate out of work. In addition to the collapse of housing, other powerful forces have kept us stuck in a slow growth pattern. I’ll highlight three: tight credit, government contraction, and uncertainty. Tight credit was clearly a by-product of the housing bust. But it took on a life of its own when the fallout from the mortgage meltdown nearly brought down the global financial system in 2008. The repercussions of those dramatic events remain with us today. Many banks are still feeling the effects of the huge housing-related losses they experienced. As a result, credit has been harder to come by for many. For example, to get a mortgage, a borrower must have a top- notch credit rating and the cash to make a substantial down payment. 2 Government cutbacks are a second obstacle to growth. Typically, state and local government spending increases during an economic recovery. This time around, the housing bust has cut into the revenue of state and local governments, forcing them to slash spending.3 I don’t see government spending turning around soon. Indeed, spending at the federal level is set to contract sharply at the end of this year as several temporary programs expire, and taxes are set to rise sharply. Some of those programs may be extended. But, overall, we can expect federal spending trends to weigh on near-term economic growth. Uncertainty is a third factor holding back the recovery. Businesses, investors, and households remain skittish, even in the face of better economic news. Many of my business contacts say they remain cautious about expanding because they’re unsure about future conditions. Ordinary Americans worry about job prospects and future income. The political environment remains highly charged. Among other things, that makes it harder to predict how abrupt future tax and spending changes will be. The financial turmoil in Europe has added another dimension to the unease here. These forces explain why we have not seen a V-shaped recovery typical of past post- World War II deep recessions. Instead, the pattern is more reminiscent of recoveries from previous financial crises. The stubbornly slow recovery and high unemployment also explain why the Federal Reserve has instituted such aggressive and sustained monetary stimulus aimed at boosting economic growth and bringing down unemployment. Congress assigned the Fed two goals in conducting monetary policy: maximum employment and price stability. Over the past few decades, we’ve done pretty well on our price 3 3 Feroli et al. (2012). stability objective. Indeed, despite the turmoil of the past five years, inflation has averaged almost exactly the 2 percent rate that the Federal Open Market Committee designated as our medium-run target. However, we are still very far from our maximum employment mandate. Despite recent progress in the labor market, the unemployment rate remains far too high. The events of the past several years have caused some to ask whether the forces holding back growth are primarily structural in nature, rather than cyclical. In a nutshell, they argue that the lackluster growth reflects fundamental forces in the supply side of the economy, not a shortfall in demand. If this conjecture is right, then monetary policy should not be used so aggressively to try to boost demand. Instead, it needs to be recalibrated to reflect the reality of this supposed “new normal” for the economy. This debate is often couched in terms of the unemployment rate. Broadly speaking, economists fall into two camps. One group argues that changes in the structure of the economy are pushing up the unemployment rate. The other group maintains that high unemployment is the result of a severe downturn, which significantly cut demand for goods and services, rather than a shortage of supply. Those who favor a structural explanation argue that many jobseekers lack the skills employers need. For example, computer industry employers are having a hard time finding qualified workers. But they’re not likely to find such employees in the ranks of jobless construction workers. If such labor market mismatches are widespread, they could be boosting the unemployment rate. To explore this further, I’m going to introduce the concept of the natural rate of unemployment. The natural rate is basically an equilibrium jobless rate that pushes inflation 4 neither up, nor down. Before the recession, most economists thought this rate was around 5 percent or a bit less. Today though, economists in the structural camp argue that the natural rate has risen substantially, largely because of the labor market mismatches I described. The idea is that a lot of people are unemployed not because jobs are lacking, but because those jobs require skills unemployed workers don’t have. If this were correct, then our 8.2 percent unemployment rate might not be that far above the natural unemployment rate. In other words, we might not really be so far from the Fed’s goal of maximum sustainable employment. Unfortunately, there is no way to know exactly what the natural rate of unemployment is. It’s not a number you can look up in a statistical table. In fact, the natural rate is the subject of intensive economic research and debate. Economists estimate it using a variety of economic and statistical models, and no two estimates agree. In addition, because it fluctuates over time due to changes in labor force demographics and other factors, economists must regularly refine these estimates as new data come in. In the final analysis, which camp is right is an empirical question. A key finding of this research is that mismatch and other factors may have indeed boosted the natural rate of unemployment a bit. But this explains only a small portion of the rise in the unemployment rate during the recession and recovery. In particular, research by my colleagues across the Federal Reserve System suggests that job mismatches are relatively limited in scope.4 The difficulty some Silicon Valley companies find hiring software engineers is not enough to fundamentally transform the labor market. Other factors besides skill mismatches may have helped push up the natural unemployment rate. One temporary factor may be the 5 4 See Barnichon and Figura (2010, 2011), Valletta and Kuang (2010b), Barlevy (2011), and Neumark and Valletta (2012) for further discussion and analysis on the quantitative role of mismatch in increasing unemployment during the past few years. extension of unemployment insurance payments from the usual 26 weeks to as long as 99 weeks.5 Based on this research, I conclude that mismatches and other labor market inefficiencies have raised the natural unemployment rate from about 5 percent before the recession to between 6 to 6½ percent today.6 Most of these factors should recede over the next few years. The effects of the temporary extension of unemployment insurance benefits will fade. And mismatches should diminish as workers retrain, and construction and other hard-hit industries recover. Once these adjustments have occurred, I expect the natural rate of unemployment to settle at 5½ percent. The important point is that today’s unemployment rate is about 2 percentage points above my estimate of the natural rate. That is, the elevated rate of unemployment is primarily due to a shortage of demand, not to structural changes in the labor market. The factors I mentioned earlier—tight credit, government contraction, and uncertainty—all work to reduce desired spending by households, businesses, and government below the level consistent with full employment. My forecast is that the economy will continue on a path of moderate growth over the next few years. As a result, the unemployment rate will gradually decline, reaching about 7 percent at the end of 2014. Given this forecast, the unemployment rate will remain above the natural rate for several more years. To reiterate, the nation remains far from the Fed’s assigned goal of maximum sustainable employment. Under these circumstances, and with inflation close to our 2 percent target and 6 5 See Valletta and Kuang (2010a). 6 For other estimates of the natural rate of unemployment, see Weidner and Williams (2011), Daly et al. (2011), and the Congressional Budget Office (2012). well under control, it’s essential that we keep strong monetary stimulus in place for quite some time. Thank you very much. 7 References Barlevy, Gadi. 2011. “Evaluating the Role of Labor Market Mismatch in Rising Unemployment.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives, Third Quarter, pp. 82–96. http:// www.chicagofed.org/digital_assets/publications/economic_perspectives/ 2011/3qtr2011_part1_barlevy.pdf Barnichon, Regis, and Andrew Figura. 2010. “What Drives Movements in the Unemployment Rate? A Decomposition of the Beveridge Curve.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-48. http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/ 2010/201048/201048abs.html Barnichon, Regis, and Andrew Figura. 2011. “What Drives Matching Efficiency? A Tale of Composition and Dispersion.” Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-10. http://www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/feds/2011/201110/201110abs.html Congressional Budget Office. 2012. The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2012 to 2022. Washington, DC (January). http://www.cbo.gov/publication/42905 Daly, Mary, Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Sahin, and Robert Valletta. 2011. “A Rising Natural Rate of Unemployment: Transitory or Permanent?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2011-05. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2011/wp11-05bk.pdf Feroli, Mike, Ethan Harris, Amir Sufi, and Ken West. 2012. “Housing, Monetary Policy, and the Recovery.” Presentation to the 2012 U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York, February 24. http:// research.chicagobooth.edu/igm/usmpf/2012/download.aspx Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2011. “Financial Crises, Credit Booms, and External Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons.” IMF Economic Review 59, pp. 340–378. http://www.palgrave- journals.com/imfer/journal/v59/n2/abs/imfer20118a.html Neumark, David, and Rob Valletta. 2012. “Worker Skills and Job Quality.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-13 (April 30). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012-13.html Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009. “The Aftermath of Financial Crises.” NBER Working Paper 14656 (January). http://www.nber.org/papers/w14656 Valletta, Rob, and Katherine Kuang. 2010a. “Extended Unemployment and UI Benefits.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2010-12 (April 19). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2010/ el2010-12.html Valletta, Rob, and Katherine Kuang. 2010b. “Is Structural Unemployment on the Rise?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2010-34 (November 8). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2010/ el2010-34.html Weidner, Justin, and John C. Williams. 2011. “What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate? FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-05 (February 14). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/ el2011-05.html Williams, John C. 2012a. “The Federal Reserve and the Economic Recovery.” Presentation to The Columbian’s 2012 Economic Forecast Breakfast, Vancouver, WA, January 10. http://www.frbsf.org/ news/speeches/2012/john-williams-0110.html 8 Williams, John C. 2012b. “The Slow Recovery: It’s Not Just Housing.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-11, (April 9). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012-11.html 9

1 Presentation to the California Bankers Association, 121st Annual Convention Dana Point, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on May 4, 2012 Bank Regulation in the Post-Crisis World 1 Good morning. It’s a great pleasure to be with you at the 121 st annual convention of the California Bankers Association. This is my first opportunity as president of the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank to meet with the CBA. I look forward to continuing the productive relationship we’ve built between our two organizations over the years. The Fed has been under quite a lot of scrutiny in recent years. One of my goals here is to help improve understanding of what we are doing, both as regulators and monetary policymakers. During the past 120 years, the banking industry has transformed dramatically. But one thing hasn’t changed. Banks rooted in local communities continue to play an essential role in the American economy. Community bankers have detailed knowledge of the people and businesses in their towns, cities, and regions that can’t be duplicated by computer algorithms. That makes community banks uniquely suited to serve customers who might otherwise fall through the cracks in the financial system. The theme of my talk is how the recent housing boom and bust, and the financial crisis and severe recession that followed, continue to affect us. These events have shaped the economic recovery and transformed the regulation of the financial system. I’ll start by looking at the role the financial sector played in the crisis. I’ll then consider the regulatory response, which 1 I want to thank Cynthia Course, John Fernald, Maureen O’Byrne, Mark Spiegel, and Sam Zuckerman for their help in preparing these remarks. 2 is aimed at avoiding another near-breakdown of the financial system. I’ll note some of the steps the Fed has taken to help community banks navigate a shifting regulatory landscape. The crisis has also shaped the monetary policy environment. So I’ll close by offering my outlook for the economy and my perspective on monetary policy. As always, my remarks represent my own views and not those of others in the Federal Reserve System. I am highlighting the financial crisis because it remains the backdrop for the way we at the Fed do our job today. Not all recessions start with a financial crisis. But this one emphatically did. Its origins lay in the largest and most dangerous financial bubble of the post- World War II era. From subprime lenders, to Main Street mortgage bankers, to global investment banks, financial institutions got swept up in the euphoria of a housing market in which prices seemed to be on a nonstop ride upward. Many community banks got too deeply involved in construction and land development lending. Suffice it to say, the story ended badly. 2 Out of this debacle came an all-important lesson: Excesses in the financial system brought us perilously close to economic catastrophe. It is no exaggeration to say that we were on the brink of another Great Depression. Though we avoided the worst, the effects on the economy were severe. Millions of people lost jobs or homes. Many thousands of businesses failed. For the Fed, working the way we did before the crisis is simply not an option. To avoid another disaster, more effective regulation of our financial system is essential. At the Fed, the fundamental rethinking of bank regulation and supervision began while the storm was still blowing at full strength. The crisis revealed a number of flaws in our system of financial regulation. Some were at the microprudential level—the oversigh t of individual institutions. But the most critical shortcomings were at the macroprudential level. We didn’t pay sufficient attention to the stability of the financial system as a whole. Nor did we fully 2 For more on the financial crisis and the economy, see Williams (2012). 3 comprehend the degree to which turmoil in the financial system could wreak havoc on the economy. We faced the crisis with a regulatory framework left over from the Great Depression, built on a foundation of deposit insurance and Federal Reserve lender-of-last-resort protection. The goal was to indemnify depositors and prevent runs. With this safety net in place, the key role of supervision and regulation was microprudential, that is, to ensure the soundness of banks. The idea was that the stability brought by the safety net and effective microprudential supervision of each institution would protect the financial system as a whole. Unfortunately our concentration on the safety and soundness of individual depository institutions was wholly inadequate in an age of global interdependency, and when transactions handled by nonbanks dwarfed those in the highly regulated banking system. Gaping holes in regulatory coverage allowed systemically important companies in the shadow banking system to escape oversight. The disasters at Lehman Brothers and AIG demonstrated that we needed a new approach. Specifically, we had to find ways of addressing the problems caused by financial institutions that were “too big to fail,” that is, institutions whose failure could have unacceptable systemic consequences. The result, Chairman Bernanke recently said, is that the Fed “reoriented itself from being ... primarily a supervisor of a specific set of financial institutions toward being an agency with a broader focus on systemic stability as well.”3 I would cite several key lessons learned from the crisis in this regard. First, we needed to identify and apply tougher regulatory treatment to institutions whose failure could jeopardize the financial system as a whole, whether they are banks or nonbanks. Second, truly addressing too big to fail required a credible mechanism to liquidate troubled systemically important institutions 3 Bernanke (2012). 4 in a way that didn’t endanger financial stability. Third, and more generally, we needed to be forward-looking in identifying and responding to emerging threats. On the first point, during the crisis, fear of failure of some of our largest financial institutions had catastrophic effects on the financial system and the economy. In crafting a macroprudential regime, we concentrated on the nation’s large, systemically important financial institutions—SIFIs in the new re gulatory lexicon. Many of these institutions were so tightly connected with other institutions that their failures would have implications far beyond their individual resolution costs. In this way, individual failures could amplify the effects of shocks and potentially become systemic events. For example, if an institution is sufficiently large and interconnected, its failure can trigger abrupt deleveraging by its creditors and counterparties. Such an event can cause widespread declines in asset values. Those in turn can touch off a new round of deleveraging. Financial institutions that seemed to have solid balance sheets may suddenly become vulnerable. A key milestone came early in 2009 when the Fed and other agencies conducted the first round of stress tests on 19 of the largest banking companies. We examined whether they had enough capital to withstand an even more severe recession than the one then under way. These were mainly microprudential exercises, but they included some macroprudential elements. For example, we assessed whether these institutions would have the capital they needed not just to survive, but to remain effective providers of financial services. The Dodd-Frank Act, passed in 2010, codified the most important elements of systemic supervision. It creates incentives for systemically important institutions to reduce their size, complexity, and interconnectedness. Bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in 5 assets are subject to requirements that include tougher capital and liquidity standards, limits on incentive compensation, and development of living wills that provide for orderly liquidation. Dodd-Frank also created the Financial Stability Oversight Council, including the Fed and other agencies, in part to coordinate the regulation of systemically important nonbank institutions. Last month, the Council issued a rule spelling out how it will identify nonbanks that could potentially threaten U.S. financial stability. It will take into account characteristics such as size, interconnectedness, leverage, and reliance on short-term funding. The new law also helps address the too-big-to-fail problem by allowing troubled systemically important financial institutions to be shuttered. It gives the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation “orderly liquidation authority” to close such institutions in a way that minimizes spillovers into the financial system. Another integral part of all financial regulation is the need to be forward-looking. At the microprudential level, book value capital ratios are often lagging indicators of a bank’s condition.4 An adequate assessment of a bank’s vulnerabilities must consider not only current capitalization, but also asset concentrations, trading activities, exposures to other institutions, and ability to withstand financial and economic shocks. The crisis taught us that macroprudential regulation must also be forward-looking in identifying emerging threats to the system. Part of the Oversight Council’s charter is to watch for red flags in the financial system, such as excessive growth in credit, leverage, and asset prices. Moreover, a forward-looking macroprudential approach must consider how the financial system is likely to evolve over time. For example, what systemic issues are raised by new financial products, such as complex derivatives? 4 Tarullo (2012). 6 The key point about regulation in the post-crisis era is that we need a distinct regime for systemically important institutions. For such institutions, the main public interest is preventing economically damaging financial crises. Of course, issues such as systemic risk and too big to fail don’t apply to community banks. Supervision of smaller financial institutions remains focused on microprudential issues. Dodd-Frank appropriately exempts smaller banks from most of the tests and requirements applied to bigger banks. For example, the Dodd-Frank stress testing requirements only cover institutions with more than $10 billion in assets. That said, it’s important that all of us keep in mind the microprudential lessons of the financial crisis. Bankers and regulators alike need to be forward-looking in evaluating risk, which means asking the kinds of what-if questions that come up in stress tests. For example, in today’s low-rate environment, it’s very important that all banks evaluate their sensitivity to changes in interest rates. And scenario planning is especially appropriate for community banks with concentrations in particular asset classes, such as commercial real estate. It’s particularly important to think through these risks when a bank is considering a capital redemption or return of capital to shareholders. At community banks, these exercises don’t have to rely on complex econometric models. In many cases, a simple spreadsheet will do. The point is that supervisors are looking for community bankers to think along these lines as a regular part of risk management. I fully recognize that there are costs to increased regulation. In its design and implementation, Dodd-Frank has tried to reduce those costs by focusing on institutions whose operations bear most critically on the stability of the financial system as a whole. However, we understand there could be spillovers and unintended consequences that affect financial 7 institutions of all sizes. The truth is, there’s plenty of uncertainty for all of us about how recent reforms will play out. For that reason, we believe it’s essential to clarify supervisory expectations as they take shape. Moreover, we recognize how vital it is for the Fed to consider your views on proposed policies. That brings me to a critical point: The Fed has always had a two-way dialog with the banking industry. Now, in this period of heightened regulatory scrutiny, it’s all the more important that we take full advantage of our lines of communication. Listening to bankers attentively and clearly explaining our supervisory policies help minimize unintended regulatory burdens. With this in mind, we’ve taken a number of steps to broaden and deepen our dialog with the industry, particularly the community banking sector. In 2010, the Fed created Community Depository Institutions Advisory Councils, or CDIAC, for each of the 12 Reserve Banks and the Federal Reserve Board. The Councils provide a forum for representatives from smaller banks, credit unions, and savings associations to tell us what’s on their minds—not only about local market conditions, but also about supervisory policies. Hearing from bankers makes us better supervisors and helps us understand what’s happening on the economy’s front lines. Such conversations complement the other information and data I look at in formulating my views about the economy and the policy recommendations I make in the Federal Open Market Committee. At the San Francisco Fed, we have several long-standing programs that allow us to meet with bankers outside the supervisory context. In our Community Perspectives program, Reserve Bank officers visit senior managers of District financial institutions. The Banker Forum program conducts meetings with small groups of bank CEOs and directors. 8 Increasingly, we rely on technology to help bankers understand the changing regulatory landscape and emerging supervisory policies. At the national and Reserve Bank levels, we have several telephone and Internet offerings in which officers and examiners discuss supervisory initiatives, sound practices, and red flags they’re seeing in the field. Nationally, our most popular programs are Ask the Fed conference calls and the Outlook Live webinar series. For example, last month, a San Francisco Fed examiner and other Fed experts took part in a discussion of real estate lending in Lexington, Kentucky, before a live and nationwide telephone audience of 1,200 bankers. The discussion covered market conditions and supervisory policies, including debt restructurings, appraisal reviews, and allowances for loan and lease losses. Of course, the legacy of the financial crisis is much more than a regulatory matter. The crisis has had a profound effect on the economy over the past few years. Monetary policymakers are still dealing with its aftereffects. Let me briefly outline how this is playing out. Congress assigned the Fed two key goals in conducting monetary policy: maximum employment and price stability. We’ve done pretty well on our price stability objective. Despite the turmoil of the past five years, inflation has averaged almost exactly the 2 percent rate that the FOMC designated as our medium-run target. We are still very far from our maximum employment mandate, but things are clearly improving. We have now regained about 40 percent of the 8.8 million jobs lost during the downturn. All the same, the unemployment rate remains far too high. I am increasingly hopeful that the recovery has entered a phase of self-sustaining growth. Consumer confidence and spending have improved. The manufacturing sector has revived notably, thanks to demand from businesses, households, and overseas customers. 9 Overall though, the expansion has lacked the vigor of many past recoveries. This is not surprising. Recessions associated with financial crises tend to be more severe and last longer than other downturns, and recoveries from them tend to be weaker.5 The economy faces significant risks as well. I’ll mention two: global economic stresses, especially the European sovereign debt situation, and budget trends at all levels of government in the United States. As far as global risk is concerned, the euro area’s trouble with the debt of many member nations is my biggest worry. Already, the crisis has taken a serious economic toll in Europe. Moreover, events last year showed that financial turmoil in Europe could quickly spread to markets here. European leaders have managed to avoid a blowup for now. But the underlying problem of unsustainable debt hasn’t been solved. Even if Europe staves off a renewed financial crisis, the region’s economies are likely to struggle for a long while as they carry out wrenching structural reforms and aggressive fiscal austerity measures. This will cut into demand for U.S. exports for some time. Second, in our own country, budgetary troubles have forced state and local governments to sharply cut spending. At the national level, a number of spending cuts and tax increases are scheduled to kick in at the end of the year, including an end to the payroll tax holiday and expiration of the Bush-Obama tax rate reductions. These abrupt changes, if they occur, could make it harder for the recovery to gain further momentum. These risks weigh on the economy even if the worst doesn’t happen. They cause businesses and consumers to feel uncertain about the economy’s prospects. Such uncertainty may prompt entrepreneurs to shy away from hiring and investing, and may make households wary of spending. 5 Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2011). 10 In sum, the economy is doing much better, but is still fragile. On balance, I expect the economy’s moderate growth pace to continue. My forecast calls for real gross domestic product to expand about 2½ percent this year and 2¾ percent next year. The unemployment rate is likely to be around 8 percent through the end of the year and a little below that next year. Inflation should be close to our 2 percent target for 2012 as a whole, and somewhat below that in 2013 and 2014, as still-subdued labor compensation growth damps inflationary pressures. Banking conditions reflect this mixed economic picture. Clearly though, the recovering economy has benefited the industry. Across the nation, banks are returning to health. Stress tests of the nation’s largest banking organizations were completed earlier this year. They showed that capital levels at most of these banks would still be adequate, even if the economy went through an extreme, and highly unlikely, downturn. Smaller banks are in better shape too. Here, in California, where the recession was ferocious, community banks are slowly improving. Many have strengthened asset quality, liquidity, and capital. This is very encouraging. Loan demand has been weak, but it appears to be picking up as the recovery gains traction. While businesses continue to invest in productivity improvements, they remain cautious about taking on big capital projects. But that may be changing. The aggregate volume of new commercial and industrial loans has been rising slowly, which bodes well for earnings. At the Fed, of course, we want banks to make soundly underwritten loans. In the 12th District, financially healthy banks with solid balance sheets are generally extending credit in a way that’s good for the economy. In the fourth quarter of 2011, loans grew at an annual rate of almost 8 percent among the District’s strongest banks—those with a regulatory rating of 1 or 2 11 on the 5-point CAMELS scale. It’s the weaker banks with financial problems left over from the crisis that aren’t in a position to expand lending. What about monetary policy? In terms of the Fed’s dual mandate, I expect us to be in line with, or slightly below, our inflation target over the next few years. We’re making progress on the employment part of our mandate, but we have a long way to go. Substantial risks remain that could cause the economy to perform worse than I expect. Under these circumstances, it’s crucial that we continue our highly accommodative monetary policy. Of course, very low interest rates won’t last forever. As the economy picks up, the Fed will reduce accommodation and begin to raise interest rates. In addition, we will unwind the unconventional monetary policies, which have involved purchases of Treasury and mortgage agency securities.6 But, that day is still far off. I realize that low interest rates create a tough operating environment for banks. However, in setting monetary policy, our mandate from Congress is to focus on the economic goals of maximum employment and price stability. Clearly, a solid economic recovery is in the best interest of the banking system as well. Let me close by reiterating that the economic health of our country depends on strong and vibrant community banks. Close communication with community banks and others in the financial industry will make us better supervisors and better monetary policymakers. If we do our job right, then you are in a better position to do your job right. And doing our job right means that we don’t wait to interact until examination time. We hope that you take advantage of our educational and training opportunities, and forums for communication. We need your ideas, suggestions, and constructive criticism. We value our continuing dialog with you. Thank you very much. 6 Board of Governors (2011). 12 References Bernanke, Ben S. 2012. “Fostering Financial Stability.” Speech at the 2012 Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Stone Mountain, GA, April 9. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20120409a.htm Board of Governors. 2011. “Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee,” June 21–22. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20110622.pdf Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2011. “Financial Crises, Credit Booms, and External Imbalances: 140 Years of Lessons.” IMF Economic Review 59, pp. 340–378. http://www.palgrave-journals.com/imfer/journal/v59/n2/abs/imfer20118a.html Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2009, “The Aftermath of Financial Crises.” NBER Working Paper 14656 (January). http://www.nber.org/papers/w14656 Tarullo, Daniel K. 2012. “Developing Tools for Dynamic Capital Supervision.” Speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Annual Risk Conference, Chicago, IL, April 10. http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/tarullo20120410a.htm Williams, John C. 2012. “The Federal Reserve and the Economic Recovery.” Presentation to The Columbian’s 2012 Economic Forecast Breakfast, Vancouver, WA, January 10. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2012/john-williams-0110.html

1 Presentation to Seattle-Area Community Leaders Bellevue, WA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on June 6, 2012 The Economic Outlook: Global and Domestic Challenges to Growth 1 Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to be with you today. You know, I’m a big Giants fan, and I’m thrilled to visit Tim Lincecum’s hometown. Now, Timmy is having a tough start this season. But I have great faith in his ability to bounce back. The subject of my talk is another story about getting back on track—but this one concerns our nation’s economy. We are now nearly three years into a recovery from a very severe recession. We’ve made up a lot of ground. But the aftereffects of that terrible downturn are still with us, particularly an unacceptably high unemployment rate. This afternoon, I’ll offer my economic outlook for the period ahead. I’ll describe some looming threats that could cause growth to fall short of my expectations, most notably the drama playing out in Europe. I’ll close with my thoughts about Federal Reserve policy. I should note that my remarks represent my own views and not those of others in the Federal Reserve System. As I noted, our economy has been expanding for nearly three years now. But the pace of growth has been considerably less robust than in the typical post-World War II recovery. And the gains have been halting. Sometimes the economy seems to build up a head of steam. At other times, the momentum flags. This sputtering progress reflects a constellation of forces that 1 I want to thank John Fernald, Mark Spiegel, and Sam Zuckerman for their assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 has weighed on economic performance, including the most traumatic housing crash since the Great Depression, tight credit, and widespread uncertainty.2 Despite these obstacles, the nation has been adding jobs, consumer sentiment has improved over the past year, and household spending has been on the rise. Credit is still tight, but it’s easier to borrow than it used to be. For those who can get credit, borrowing costs are exceptionally low, thanks in part to the Fed’s low-interest-rate policies. Overall, consumer and business demand pent up during the downturn is slowly reviving. Take motor vehicles. Car sales plummeted during the recession and people made do with what they had in the garage. In 2011, the average age of motor vehicles on the road reached a record 10.8 years. But people get tired of driving old, worn-out cars. With the economy improving and auto financing rates at rock bottom, it’s not surprising that traffic in auto showrooms has been brisk. Motor vehicle sales over the first five months of this year are up more than 12 percent over the same period last year. Similarly, businesses have been carrying out some of the capital investment postponed during the downturn, especially in the information technology area. Over the past year, business investment on equipment and software rose over 8 percent, adjusted for inflation. We’re even seeing glimmerings of good news on the housing front. To be sure, we’ve been fooled by false dawns in housing before. Nonetheless, a number of indicators suggest that we’ve started to claw our way off the bottom. Nationally, house prices no longer appear to be falling. And there are signs that inventories of unsold homes are coming down. There’s still an enormous backlog of foreclosed properties. However, anecdotal reports suggest that those 2 See Williams (2012a) for a discussion of the financial roots of the crisis and how they have affected the pace of recovery. 3 properties have been pretty well picked over, encouraging builders to break new ground. As a result, home building is finally rising, though it’s still at extraordinarily low levels. All these are the good signs for our economy. But some others aren’t so encouraging. Two major developments have been holding back growth, and they threaten to derail the recovery in the future. The first is the budget squeeze at all levels of government. Federal spending rose in response to the downturn, but that’s been unwinding. At the same time, state and local governments have been implementing austerity programs as they seek to close budget gaps. Since the recovery began, states and local government payrolls have fallen by about half a million workers. The fiscal burden on the economy could turn significantly worse at the end of this year, when federal spending cuts and tax increases are scheduled to kick in. Unless Congress acts, numerous significant tax reductions will expire next year. In addition, large spending cuts will take place automatically under the sequestration procedure agreed to by Congress and the White House. A recent Congressional Budget Office report suggested that scheduled cuts in spending and increases in taxes could knock around 4 percentage points off economic growth in 2013. Fortunately, I don’t think that will happen. I expect an agreement will be reached that will forestall such a sudden massive swing to fiscal contraction. Still, federal fiscal policy is moving toward greater belt tightening, and that will put a significant drag on economic growth next year. Moreover, the uncertainty surrounding the federal budget appears already to be taking a toll on business and consumer confidence. The second development restraining the U.S. economy is the European sovereign debt crisis. Needless to say, Europe’s prospects are vitally important to the United States. Our economy is closely tied to Europe on a number of levels. First, the countries of the European 4 Union take close to a fifth of our total exports. Second, our financial systems are bound tightly together. Developments in European financial markets spread to our markets as well. To some extent, this is already happening. Europe’s economic slowdown is limiting demand for our exports. As worries about Europe have escalated, investors across the globe have flocked to the safety of high-quality investments, such as U.S. Treasury securities. This has pushed Treasury yields down to levels not seen since the 1940s. On their own, lower Treasury rates help U.S. economic growth. However, other spillovers from Europe are offsetting these benefits. The flow of money to the United States has boosted the value of the dollar, which makes our goods and services more expensive overseas. The European crisis has also prompted investors to avoid risky assets more generally, including U.S. stocks and corporate bonds. 3 Lower stock prices and higher credit costs weigh on both the willingness and the wherewithal of American consumers and businesses to spend. Amid these crosscurrents, we’ve managed to maintain a moderate pace of economic growth, including job gains of about 150,000 per month over the past year. I’m sure you noticed the disappointing employment report for May. However, in looking at the economy, it’s important not to get carried away by one month’s data. We saw very good jobs numbers early this year, and some commentators rushed to declare that the economy was taking off. More recently, we’ve seen weak numbers, which has prompted commentary that the economy has stalled. The fact is, these data fluctuate from month to month. Even the weather can cause big swings in job growth. In thinking about where the economy is headed, we should focus on underlying trends and not get caught up in short-term gyrations. In that regard, the underlying 3 Hale, Marks, and Nechio (2012) show that U.S. corporate bond spreads tend to rise as a result of negative shocks in Europe. 5 trend in job growth is probably closer to the 150,000 monthly job gain number that we’ve seen over the past year than to the recent weaker data. Adding jobs at such a pace should bring the unemployment rate down slowly and steadily. Surprisingly though, the unemployment rate has fallen much faster over the past year than one would expect, given the moderate pace of job gains. Just in the past nine months, the unemployment rate has declined nearly a percentage point. If it were to continue to drop at this pace, it would reach 5½ percent by the summer of 2014. That would put it close to its normal, long-term trend level. In fact, I don’t expect the unemployment rate to keep dropping that fast. It’s more likely to come down much more gradually over the next few years. To understand why, we have to look at how the unemployment rate is measured. Each month, households are surveyed about whether family members were working and, if not, whether they were actively looking for a job. If they weren’t looking, they aren’t considered part of the labor force. So, if an unemployed person stops looking for work, then the official count of the unemployed drops by one. Clearly, such a decline doesn’t represent a real improvement in the labor market. It’s just the opposite. And there’s the key to a significant part of the decline in the unemployment rate over the past year or so. Lots of people have simply stopped looking for work and left the labor force. Officially, they are no longer counted as unemployed, even if they want a job. In thinking about what’s going to happen to the unemployment rate over the next few years, a critical question is whether these people will rejoin the labor force when jobs become available. We can get a clue by examining more closely just who has been dropping out of the labor force. To do that, it helps to look at the labor force participation rate, which is the percentage of adults in the labor force. Since the start of the recession, the participation rate has dropped from 6 66 percent to a little under 64 percent, a substantial fall of about 2 percentage points. About half of this decline reflects long-running demographic trends.4 For example, there is an ongoing process of lower labor force participation as the baby boom generation reaches retirement age. Most of these boomers are unlikely to reenter the labor force. However, the other half of the falling labor force participation rate reflects a large exodus of young people and adults of prime working age. Many of the prime-age workers who have left the labor force report that they want jobs and are available to work. They just aren’t actively looking for a job, so they’re not counted as unemployed. Most of these people will probably return to the labor force as things get better. Indeed, many of them have already done so. Overall labor force participation has leveled off over the past several months, and participation among prime-age males appears to have picked up. As these workers come back into the labor force, I expect the unemployment rate to fall more slowly than it has over the past year. In a sense, this is just arithmetic. Some new jobs will be filled by people reentering the workforce who weren’t previously counted as unemployed. Thus, as workers reenter the labor force, the unemployment rate is going to come down more gradually—even if we create jobs at the past year’s pace. Putting it all together, my forecast calls for real gross domestic product to expand at a moderate pace of about 2¼ percent this year and about 2½ percent next year. I expect the unemployment rate to remain at or a bit above 8 percent for the remainder of this year, and then gradually decline to a little above 7 percent by the end of 2014. However, the uncertainty around this forecast is great. I mentioned the looming threat of automatic large tax increases and cuts in spending at the start of next year. And the ongoing European crisis represents another wild card for the U.S. economy. It’s impossible to predict 4 Aaronson, Davis, and Hu (2012). The authors examine participation trends since 1999. 7 with any certainty how the situation in Europe will play out. My forecast assumes that Europe’s distressed pattern of the past two years will continue. The severe austerity measures implemented in many European countries have choked off economic growth. And that makes it harder to trim government deficits. Recurrent spikes in fear and uncertainty are followed by piecemeal actions that buy time. What hasn’t emerged is a credible, comprehensive solution to Europe’s problems. Not surprisingly, the approach Europe has taken so far hasn’t worked well. We’ve seen this in Greece, where each effort to contain the crisis has unraveled. Now, fears that Greece could go through a disorderly default and drop the euro are again capturing headlines. These worries have caused people to pull their investments and bank deposits out of Greece, which makes things worse. The crisis has also flared up in Spain, illustrating the need for a much more comprehensive, pan-European approach. The Spanish banking system needs to be recapitalized on a large scale. Failure to do so would undermine confidence in the banking system, and that could lead to a run on the banks. Spain would then find itself in a massive credit crunch, further damaging the economy. But recapitalization isn’t easy. The Spanish government faces high borrowing costs because investors worry that Spain could go the way of Greece. So it’s difficult to raise the funds for recapitalization. It’s a chicken-and-egg problem. If the government can make a convincing case that it will do what’s necessary to back the banking system while meeting its own debt obligations, things can work out. But, if doubts arise, then the government’s borrowing costs could skyrocket, making it impossible to meet its goals. Without a viable backstop from its European partners, the fear of such an outcome could become a self-fulfilling prophecy. 8 As we learned from the financial crisis of 2007–09, events can spin out of control once panic takes over. A development that on its own might not be disastrous, such as another Greek default or even its abandonment of the euro, could set off contagion that would undermine confidence in other countries. The effects could overwhelm private credit markets in Europe, causing a financial meltdown comparable to what we saw here during the financial crisis. Needless to say, if that were to happen, the U.S. economy would be harmed on a number of levels. Our trade with Europe would suffer greatly. And our financial markets would be severely strained. On that somber note, let me turn to monetary policy. I’ll start by citing the dual mandate Congress has assigned the Fed: achieving maximum employment and price stability.5 In terms of maximum employment, it’s safe to say that most people would view the current 8.2 percent unemployment rate as far too high. I completely agree. But, is 7 percent too high? What about 6 percent? Why shouldn’t we aim for 0 percent? Economists have given this question a great deal of thought. By maximum employment, we mean the highest level that can be sustained without pushing inflation up. So, how far are we now from that holy grail of maximum employment? This is where things get complicated. Maximum employment is not a fixed number. It’s a moving target, depending on how efficient the labor market is at matching workers with jobs. For example, if people have to move or learn new skills because of structural shifts in the economy, they may not be ready for the jobs that are out there. We may need lots of nurses, but not many construction workers now. At the Fed, we use the unemployment rate as an important yardstick for determining how far we are from maximum employment. Here I want to introduce the concept of the natural rate 5 The Federal Reserve Act also calls for moderate long-term interest rates. See Williams (2012a) for a discussion of the Federal Reserve’s dual mandate. 9 of unemployment. Essentially, it’s a way of expressing this concept of maximum employment in terms of the unemployment rate. In other words, the natural rate of unemployment is the equilibrium rate that pushes inflation neither up nor down. The labor market disruptions I just mentioned have made the market less efficient, which raises the natural, noninflationary rate of unemployment. I estimate that this natural rate was about 5 percent before the recession, but is currently around 6¼ percent.6 In May, the unemployment rate was 8.2 percent, about 2 percentage points above my estimate of the natural rate. So, by this measure, we are very far from our maximum employment mandate. And, as I mentioned earlier, I expect the unemployment rate to be above 7 percent until late 2014. I don’t expect we’ll be at maximum employment until 2016. The second part of the Fed’s dual mandate is price stability. Earlier this year, the Fed’s policymaking committee, the FOMC, stated that a 2 percent inflation rate was most consistent with maximum employment and price stability, and we set that rate as our target. Over the past year, prices rose 1.8 percent, according to the Fed’s preferred measure of inflation. I expect inflation to come in below the 2 percent target both this year and in 2013. The main reason is a weak job market, which has kept labor compensation costs contained. We’ve also seen substantial declines in oil and other commodity prices recently as concerns about global economic growth have intensified. In sum, I see the Fed falling short on both our maximum employment and inflation mandates for some time. And the turmoil in Europe and government fiscal retrenchment in the United States raise the danger that the economy could perform worse than I expect. For these reasons, it’s crucial that we maintain our current highly stimulatory monetary policy stance. As 6 See Daly et al. (2011) and Williams (2012b). 10 part of this, we’ve stated our intention to keep our benchmark short-term interest rate at exceptionally low levels at least through late 2014. We must also stand ready to do even more if needed to best achieve our statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability. The April FOMC statement indicated that the “Committee will regularly review the size and composition of its securities holdings and is prepared to adjust those holdings as appropriate to promote a stronger economic recovery in a context of price stability.” If the outlook for growth worsens to the point that we no longer expect to make sustained progress on bringing the unemployment rate down to levels consistent with our dual mandate, or if the medium-term outlook for inflation falls significantly below our 2 percent target, then additional monetary accommodation would be warranted. In such circumstances, an effective tool would be further purchases of longer-maturity securities, potentially including agency mortgage-backed securities. Past purchases have succeeded in lowering borrowing costs and improving financial conditions, thereby supporting economic recovery. As I’ve tried to make clear, these are highly uncertain times, and our crystal balls are much cloudier than usual. At the Fed, we must be vigilant, and ready to adjust monetary policy as circumstances warrant. Thank you very much. 11 References Aaronson, Daniel, Jonathan Davis, and Luojia Hu. 2012. “Explaining the Decline in the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate.” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago Fed Letter 296 (March). http://chicagofed.org/digital assets/publicati ons/chicago fed letter/2012/cflmarch2012 296.pdf Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert Valletta. 2011. “A Rising Natural Rate of Unemployment: Transitory or Permanent?” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2011-05. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2011/wp11-05bk.pdf Hale, Galina B., Elliot Marks, and Fernanda Nechio. 2012. “Are U.S. Corporate Bonds Exposed to Europe?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-17 (June 4). http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2012/el2012-17.html Williams, John C. 2012a. “The Federal Reserve and the Economic Recovery.” Presentation to The Columbian’s 2012 Economic Forecast Breakfast, Vancouver, WA, January 10. http://www.frbsf.org/news/speeches/2012/john-williams-0110.html Williams, John C. 2012b. “Update of ‘What Is the New Normal Unemployment Rate?’” May 8 update to FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-05. http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/letter/2011/el2011- 05-update.pdf
