Statement by Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond before the Committee on Financial Services U.S. House of Representatives Washington, D.C. June 26, 2013 Good morning. I am honored to speak to the Committee about the Dodd-Frank Act and the persistence of “too big to fail.” At the outset, I should point out that within the Federal Reserve System, the Board of Governors has sole authority to write rules implementing the requirements of the Dodd-Frank Act. Federal Reserve Banks supervise financial institutions under authority delegated to them by the Board of Governors. In keeping with Board of Governors guidance, I will not discuss any current or potential Federal Reserve rule-making. I also should say that my comments today are my own views and do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve or my colleagues at other Federal Reserve Banks. 1 My views have been informed by both my leadership of the Fifth Federal Reserve District over the last seven years and my experience as a research economist studying banking policy for the prior 25 years. The problem known as “too big to fail” consists of two mutually reinforcing expectations. First, some financial institution creditors feel protected by an implicit government commitment of support should the institution face financial distress. This belief dampens creditors’ attention to risk and makes debt financing artificially cheap for borrowing firms, leading to excessive leverage and the overuse of forms of debt — such as short-term wholesale funding — that are most likely to enjoy such protection. Second, policymakers at times believe that the failure of a large financial firm with a high reliance on short-term funding would result in undesirable disruptions to financial markets and economic activity. This expectation induces policymakers to intervene in ways that let short-term creditors escape losses, thus reinforcing creditors’ expectations of support and firms’ incentives to rely on short-term funding. The result is more financial fragility and more rescues. The Orderly Liquidation Authority of Title II of the Dodd-Frank Act gives the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation the ability, with the agreement of other financial regulators, to take a firm into receivership if it believes the firm’s failure poses a threat to financial stability. 2 Title II gives 2 the FDIC the ability to borrow funds from the Treasury (specifically, the Orderly Liquidation Fund at the Treasury) to make payments to creditors of the failed firm. The funds are to be repaid from recoveries on the assets of the failed firm or from assessments against the largest, most complex financial companies. While the FDIC is to pay creditors no more than they would have received in a liquidation of the firm, the Act provides the FDIC with broad discretion to pay more.3 This encourages short-term creditors to believe they would benefit from such treatment and therefore continue to pay insufficient attention to risk and invest in fragile funding arrangements. Given widespread expectations of support for financially distressed institutions in orderly liquidations, regulators will likely feel forced to provide support simply to avoid the turbulence of disappointing expectations. We appear to have replicated the two mutually reinforcing expectations that define “too big to fail.” Expectations of creditor rescues have arisen over the last four decades through the gradual accretion of precedents. Research at the Richmond Fed has estimated that one-third of the financial sector’s liabilities are perceived to benefit from implicit protection, based on actual government actions and policy statements. 4 Adding implicit protection to explicit protection programs such as deposit insurance, we found that 57 percent of financial sector liabilities were expected to benefit from government guarantees as of the end of 2011. This figure was about 45 percent at the end of 1999. A financial system without the broad expectation of government rescues for creditors would likely look different ― potentially quite different ― from the financial system we currently have. Without the expectation of implicit government guarantees, the incentives of market participants would be better aligned with our public policy goal of a financial system that effectively allocates capital and risks. Large financial firms themselves would want to be less leveraged and less reliant on unstable short-term funding. Institutions and markets would, accordingly, be more resilient in response to financial stress, and policymakers could credibly commit to forgo incentive-corroding rescues. The alternative, accepting the inevitability of an implicit federal backstop and trying to correct the resulting distortions through the regulation of firm size, structure and capital, would lead to far less desirable results, I believe. It would tilt financial innovation toward bypassing regulatory constraints and relying on fragile funding methods that are most likely to elicit government protection. The result would be ever-increasing regulatory costs and repeated bouts of financial instability. Reducing the probability that a large financial firm becomes financially distressed ― through enhanced standards for capital and liquidity, for example ― is useful, but will never be enough. The path toward a stable financial system requires that the unassisted failure of financial firms does not put the financial system at risk. The resolution planning process prescribed by Section 165(d) in Title I of the Dodd-Frank Act provides the road map for this journey. A resolution plan, or “living will,” is a description of a firm’s strategy for rapid and orderly resolution under the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, without government assistance, in the event of material financial distress or failure. It spells out the firm’s organizational structure, key management information systems, critical operations and a mapping of the relationship between 3 core business lines and legal entities. The heart of the plan is the specification of the actions the firm would take to facilitate rapid and orderly resolution and prevent adverse effects of failure, including the firm’s strategy to maintain the operations of and funding for their critical operations and material entities. The Federal Reserve and the FDIC can jointly determine that a plan is “not credible” or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the Bankruptcy Code, in which case the firm would be required to submit a revised plan to address identified deficiencies. A resubmission could include plans to change the business operations and corporate structure in order to eliminate deficiencies. If the Fed and the FDIC jointly determine that the revised plan does not remedy identified deficiencies, they can require tighter capital, leverage liquidity requirements or restrict the growth, activities or operations of the firm. In essence, regulators can order changes in the structure and operations of a firm to make it resolvable in bankruptcy without government assistance. The living will process can address the frequently heard objections to ending government rescues. Cooperation between international regulators in a crisis is often cited as an impediment to orderly resolution. Forming distinct legal entities for the material overseas operations of globally active firms, with separate capital and liquidity holdings, can solve this problem by facilitating the expeditious sale of material foreign operations and obviating dependence on cross-national negotiations about interaffiliate movements in capital and funding. The so-called “liquidity needs” of failing institutions is often cited as a stumbling block to resolving financial firms in bankruptcy. The U.S. Bankruptcy Code allows the bankrupt firm to obtain, subject to court approval, “debtor-in-possession,” or DIP, financing that is generally senior to pre-existing creditors. Such financing can be useful to fund ongoing operations. Other creditors often find it advantageous to approve DIP funding, despite the dilution of their own claims, because it ensures continued access to trade credit. The FDIC’s authority to lend to distressed institutions under its Orderly Liquidation Authority amounts to government-provided DIP financing. The beneficial feature of privately provided DIP financing is the presumption that, because it’s provided by market participants but also approved by creditors and the court, it’s fairly priced and thus unsubsidized and does not unduly disadvantage any particular class of creditors. Indeed, this is why unassisted bankruptcy is so critical to ending “too big to fail” and why firms were instructed not to assume extraordinary government support in their resolution plans. A financial firm’s liquidity requirements in bankruptcy, however, are a direct function of decisions made prior to entering bankruptcy. A credible living will would include plans for funding critical operations, without government support, throughout the resolution process. Some recent proposals to address the “too big to fail” problem would make structural changes to financial firms ― imposing quantitative limits on their size or prohibiting certain risky activities. I am open to the notion that such restrictions may ultimately be necessary to achieve a more stable financial system, but I do not believe we have a strong basis yet for determining exactly what activity and size limits should be adopted. The living will process, however, will provide an objective basis for decisions about how the structure or activities of large financial firms need to be altered in order to assure orderly unassisted resolution. In addition, the process of writing 4 credible living wills would illuminate efforts to identify ways in which the bankruptcy code could be improved to make the resolution of financial firms more orderly.5 Re solution planning will require a great deal of hard work.6 But I see no other way to ensure that policymakers have confidence in unassisted bankruptcy and that investors are convinced unassisted bankruptcy is the norm. Resolution planning provides the framework for identifying the actions we need to take now to ensure that the next financial crisis is handled appropriately, in a way that is fair to taxpayers and establishes the right incentives. O nce robust and credible resolution plans are in place, we would be in a position to responsibly wind down the Orderly Liquidation Authority and other financing mechanisms, such as the Federal Reserve’s remaining 13(3) powers to lend in “unusual and exigent circumstances.” By allowing creditors to escape losses, such lending distorts incentives and exacerbates moral hazard. Eliminating the ability to provide ad hoc support to firms in financial distress would cement our commitment to orderly unassisted resolutions. 1 I am grateful to John Weinberg for assistance in preparing this statement. 2 For a comparison of the Orderly Liquidation Authority provisions with the U.S. bankruptcy process, see Sabrina R. Pellerin and John R. Walter, “Orderly Liquidation Authority as an Alternative to Bankruptcy,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, First Quarter 2012, vol. 98, no. 1, pp. 1-31. 3 See Pellerin and Walter, pp. 16-19. 4 The Richmond Fed’s estimates of the size of the federal financial safety net are available at https://www.richmondfed.org/publications/research/special_reports/safety_net. 5 See Kenneth E. Scott and John B. Taylor (eds.), Bankruptcy Not Bailout: A Special Chapter 14, Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 2012. 6 For more on resolution planning, see Jeffrey Lacker, “Ending ‘Too Big To Fail’ Is Going to Be Hard Work,” Speech at the University of Richmond, Richmond, Va., April 9, 2013.

1 Economic Outlook, June 2013 June 28, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Judicial Conference of the Fourth Circuit White Sulphur Springs, W.Va. It’s a pleasure to join you in this pleasant setting to discuss the economic outlook. Before I begin, I should emphasize that the views expressed are my own and should not be attributed to anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. 1 Let’s begin with some good news about the economic situation; inflation remains well contained. Over the last 12 months, our most reliable measure of prices, the price index for personal consumption expenditure, has risen by only 1 percent. That’s on the low side of our recent experience. Inflation has been fluctuating around 2 percent for two decades now, and just 21 months ago, inflation was 2.9 percent. There appears to be widespread confidence that the Federal Reserve will keep inflation low and stable, consistent with our announced inflation goal of 2 percent. Indeed, most forecasters view the current readings on inflation to be a temporary phenomenon and expect inflation to run at or a little below 2 percent over the next few years. Household surveys and financial market measures also indicate that inflation is expected to remain near its longer-term average. My own view is that the transitory factors depressing inflation are likely to ebb, and we’ll see inflation edge back toward the Federal Open Market Committee’s target of 2 percent by next year. In contrast to inflation, which over time is determined by central bank actions, real economic growth and labor market conditions are affected by a wide variety of factors that are outside a central bank’s control. And it’s real economic conditions that many now view as disappointing. To get a handle on that disappointment, think back to the beginning of the new millennium and recall the pervasive optimism of that time. Much of that optimism was based on experience. Over the previous half-century, we had enjoyed remarkable economic performance — real gross domestic product grew at a 3.5 percent annual rate between 1950 and 2000. Since 2000, though, growth has fallen short of that long-term average. We had a very severe recession in 2008 and 2009, our worst since the 1930s, and growth has only averaged 2 percent since the end of 2009, well below the longer-run average. Looking ahead, the key question regarding the economic outlook is whether growth will remain relatively low. Many forecasters expect growth to pick up 2 to over 3 percent next year. I have become increasingly persuaded, however, that low growth rates are likely to persist for several years. To see the logic behind this expectation, it is helpful to break GDP growth into two components. One is the growth in employment, and the other is growth in labor productivity, measured as GDP per worker. Labor productivity increased at an average rate of 1.8 percent per year from 1950 to 2000. In this expansion, labor productivity increased rapidly in the last half of 2009, as is typical when coming out of a deep recession. But since then, productivity has been only 0.9 percent at an annual rate, and thus slower productivity growth is responsible for a significant portion of the growth shortfall in this expansion, relative to the late 20th century. Productivity growth is the consequence of many disparate factors affecting the deployment of innovations, including research and development, business capital expenditure, regulatory and tax policies, labor force skills and public infrastructure investment. Note that monetary policy is not on this list. After accounting for productivity growth, the rest of the reduction in GDP growth has been due to slower employment growth. Employment grew at a 1.7 percent annual rate from 1950 to 2000. Employment fell dramatically in the recession and its immediate aftermath, but has expanded at only a 1.1 percent annual rate since the end of 2009. It should not be surprising to see relatively slow growth in employment now, though, since the number of people of normal working age is itself growing slowly. For example, the civilian population aged 16–64 is only growing at a 0.4 percent annual rate. The part of the population growing most rapidly is above age 65, as aging baby boomers are hitting traditional retirement benchmarks in increasing numbers. In addition to slowing population growth, labor force participation is also falling, even taking age into account. The most dramatic fall has been among young people, aged 16 to 24, whose labor force participation rate fell from over 59 percent in December 2007 to less than 55 percent now. But participation has declined for other age groups as well ― the participation rate of so-called prime-age workers, aged 25 to 54, has fallen from 83.1 percent in December 2007 to 81.3 percent currently. Part of the decline in participation rates could be due to a sluggish overall economic environment. Another part may be due to structural factors such as an expansive safety net. For example, the number of potential workers receiving disability payments has risen almost 2 percent over the last year. And among young people, falling labor force participation seems related to higher school attendance, which could be motivated by the secular upward trend in the wage gap between educated and less-educated workers. Note that except for the effect of the economy on labor force participation, these factors behind slowing employment growth are also independent of monetary policy. To summarize then, the slow growth in real GDP in this expansion is related to both lower productivity growth and lower employment growth. While economists understand the principles underlying productivity growth, it’s quite difficult to parse the causes of medium-term swings in productivity growth, particularly as they are happening. At this juncture, low productivity growth has persisted long enough that I think the best guess is that it will remain low for an extended period. Some of the shortfall in employment could be due to the lingering effects of the Great 3 Recession on labor force participation, but at this point, four years since the recession ended, I doubt this effect is very large. I think longer-run structural trends, such as an aging population and higher school attendance among young people, are important drivers of the falling participation rate. And other persistent structural impediments, which I will discuss in a moment, seem to be depressing growth as well. Thus, the combination of relatively low productivity and employment growth leads me to conclude that real GDP growth will fluctuate around a 2 percent trend for the foreseeable future. This view, based on medium- to long-run structural factors, contrasts with the views of some leading economic forecasters that I mentioned earlier. They believe that after a brief period of sluggish growth, real GDP will accelerate significantly. They see growth as being temporarily restrained by “headwinds” that limit spending and will dissipate relatively soon. A few years ago I subscribed to that view as well, and I would routinely predict that growth was about to accelerate after a quarter or two. Year after year though, our forecasts of acceleration were proven wrong, and growth remained near 2 percent. Eventually I started feeling an affinity for Charlie Brown, trying time after time to kick the football that Lucy kindly offers to hold for him, only to yank it away. I began to re-examine my basic premise that growth would soon accelerate behind my forecast, and I came to appreciate the structural factors that appear to be persistently limiting growth. Although growth has averaged 2 percent since the end of 2009, our experience lately has been somewhat choppy, with significant fluctuations above and below 2 percent from quarter to quarter. One exception to this choppiness has been housing activity, which is finally on a solid growth path. New housing starts have more than doubled since the low point in 2009 and have risen by 29 percent over the last 12 months. Home prices are also on an upswing, rising almost 12 percent on average over the last 12 months. Now I should caution that home building is still far below the levels we saw before the recession, and even below the typical levels of the 1990s. Moreover, residential investment is less than 3 percent of GDP, so housing by itself is not going to have a large effect on total GDP growth. But having said that, the improvement in housing activity has bolstered the confidence of many households in the market value of their most important asset. Rising confidence would be a good thing for consumer spending, which accounts for over 70 percent of GDP. Over the last 12 months, real consumer spending has risen by 1.8 percent, in line with GDP growth and the growth in real personal income. But the increase in federal taxes that took effect in January took a sizable bite out of take-home pay, and real after-tax personal income has risen only 1.1 percent since last year this time. Despite these headwinds, consumer spending has held up pretty well so far this year. The more persistent restraint on consumer spending in this expansion has been the aftereffects of the income and wealth shocks that hit American households during the Great Recession. Memories of these losses have undoubtedly made individuals more cautious about spending commitments. And while consumers have made great progress restoring some semblance of order to their balance sheets, much remains to be done. For example, close to 20 percent of all residential mortgages are still underwater. So even 4 though consumers have been fairly resilient in recent months, these fundamentals make it hard for me to be bullish about a pickup in consumer spending growth. Business capital spending, on the other hand, is likely to make a solid contribution to growth over the next few years. While investment fell sharply during the recession, new technologies continued to be developed and improved. There are ample motives to implement these better technologies, even in the absence of rapid growth. Business fixed investment rose 5-½ percent last year, and most forecasters expect solid growth to continue. I would agree. Thus the private sector seems to be in reasonably good shape, and if I could stop here, my growth forecast would be greater than 2 percent. But for completeness, I need to mention other important factors. First, the federal fiscal outlook is a mess. Last year, the federal deficit exceeded $1 trillion and was almost 7 percent of GDP. Projections by the Congressional Budget Office show the deficit declining for several years but then increasing, without bound, as a fraction of GDP. That large deficit puts the stock of federal debt on a steep upward trajectory. In other words, the current course is unsustainable, and some combination of higher taxes and less spending growth is inevitable. It is not clear, however, what adjustments will be made to specific taxes and spending programs. This pervasive uncertainty has undoubtedly affected household and business decisions, and it appears unlikely that we’ll soon see a grand bargain that will put the federal budget on a sustainable, long-term path. Another challenge comes from the need for businesses to adapt to the large volume of new regulation that has been added in recent years. This is not the place to argue the ultimate merits of any particular legislation, but I would simply note that even if net social benefits of new regulations are significantly positive, businesses may still face large compliance costs that in turn affect hiring and investment decisions. Moreover, many key decisions regarding implementation of far-reaching regulations have yet to be made, or fully litigated, I might add. The magnitude of the uncertainty facing firms and households is bound to be elevated relative to the past. For example, we hear often from our contacts that they are worried about how to respond to new health care requirements, many of which remain to be written. The fiscal sector is clearly a net impediment to growth right now. Forecasting is nothing if not a humbling endeavor, but rather than say “caveat emptor,” I will supply you with a list of reasons I could be wrong. Medium-term productivity forecasting is notoriously imprecise, as the 1990s demonstrated. Productivity growth could conceivably come in stronger over the next few years, and that could pass through to real wage gains that propel consumer spending at a faster rate. Also on the positive side, growth for our major trading partners could improve more rapidly than expected, which would boost export demand and incomes. Thus I cannot dismiss the possibility that growth will be somewhat better than I expect. But there are also downside risks to the forecast. It is not clear that countries in the Euro area have solved their fiscal and competitive challenges, and thus there is a chance that stagnant conditions there prove more persistent, and growth languishes this year and next. Moreover, several emerging market economies are facing significant challenges right now, and should their 5 adjustments prove more formidable than expected, their growth could suffer. Closer to home, implementation of provisions of the Affordable Care Act later this year could prove highly consequential for hiring incentives, despite whatever benefits it might bring, and thus could conceivably slow down job growth around year-end. So one shouldn’t take my outlook for moderate growth for granted, either. I should add one important qualification to my portrayal of the economic outlook. At a longer horizon ― that is, the next couple of decades ― I am fundamentally quite optimistic about prospects for the U.S. economy. The resilience inherent in our institutional framework, the strength of our great research institutions and the intrinsic capabilities of our workforce all auger well for our capacity to develop and apply the innovations that drive gains in our standards of living over time. At this point in discussing the outlook, you may have noticed that one topic is missing, and so I’ll conclude with some thoughts on monetary policy. Federal Reserve policy is exceptionally accommodative right now, with short-term interest rates near zero and our balance sheet about four times the size it was before the financial turmoil began in 2007. Moreover, the balance sheet continues to expand, consistent with Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke’s announcement last week that the Federal Open Market Committee anticipates reducing the pace of asset purchases later this year and ending purchases around mid-year 2014, provided incoming data are broadly consistent with the Committee’s forecast. This means that over the course of the next 12 months, the Committee will be reducing only the pace at which it is adding accommodation. In other words, the Federal Reserve is not only leaving the punch bowl in place, we’re continuing to spike the punch, though at a decreasing rate over the next year. A highly stimulative policy was the appropriate response to a severe recession of 2008 and 2009, in my view. Growth has resumed, however, and it appears as if it’s limited, in large part, by structural factors that monetary policy is not capable of offsetting. In this situation, the benefit- cost trade-off for further monetary stimulus does not look promising. I seriously doubt additional monetary stimulus can provide much impetus to real growth right now. But further stimulus does increase the size of our balance sheet and correspondingly increases the risks associated with the “exit process” when it becomes time to withdraw stimulus. That is why I have not supported the current asset purchase program. I did, however, think it wise of Chairman Bernanke to clarify the Committee’s expectations regarding how the pace of asset purchases is likely to evolve. Bond and stock markets fell sharply in response, but that should not be too surprising. The Chairman’s statement forced financial market participants to re-evaluate the likely total amount of securities the Fed would buy under this open-ended purchase plan ― in other words, how much liquor would ultimately be poured into the punch bowl. Market participants also had to reconsider their estimate of when the Federal Reserve would begin to remove the punch bowl by raising interest rates. These reassessments appear to have warranted price changes across an array of financial assets. As market participants gain additional insight from the words of Federal Reserve officials or by policy actions in coming quarters, further asset price volatility seems likely. 6 This type of volatility is a normal part of the process of incorporating new information into financial asset prices and should not interfere with the moderate-growth scenario that I have presented today. And I would emphasize that keeping inflation low and stable is within the capability of any modern central bank. On that score, the recent behavior of inflation has been heartening. Measures of inflation expectations remain within ranges consistent with price stability, and the low current inflation readings are likely to be transitory. Inflation is likely to remain well contained, and that is the single most important contribution a central bank can make to economic growth. 1 I would like to thank Roy Webb for assistance in preparing these remarks.

1 “A Look Back at the History of the Federal Reserve” August 29, 2013 Jeffrey M. Lacker President Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Christopher Newport University Newport News, Virginia The Federal Reserve, like many other central banks around the world, has been on the hot seat ever since the astonishing events of the financial crisis of 2008. Views about the Federal Reserve span a wide range, from those who would abolish the Federal Reserve outright and return to the pre-Fed monetary regime that tied the value of money to the value of gold, to those who applaud the institution for heroically preventing a repeat of the Great Depression. In between there are those who propose reforms to the legislation governing the Fed, and others who would leave the Federal Reserve Act alone but encourage the Fed to learn the right lessons from the crisis. Why the divergent views? Public debate has focused on the unprecedented interventions in financial markets and with failing financial firms and the unique operational independence the Fed enjoys relative to other government entities. In our time together, I’ll try to help you understand the current controversies surrounding the Fed. 1 To really understand these controversies, it helps to understand some of our unique characteristics as a central bank. And to do that, I’ll argue that it’s essential to go back to the founding of the Federal Reserve System in 1913 and learn why we were founded and why we were structured the way we were. It turns out that those who created the Federal Reserve 100 years ago wrestled with the same two critical questions that animate debate today: (1) our independence, that is, the structure of our governance and our accountability to the American people, and (2) what sort of assets the Federal Reserve Banks should invest in. These questions were hotly debated when the Fed was founded. I believe that the trade-offs and tensions involved are essential for an appreciation of the current debates and how central banking is likely to evolve as we enter our second century. Views on these questions differed then, just as views differ now. In that connection, I should caution that the views I will share with you are my own and do not represent the official views of the Federal Reserve System. So let’s cast our minds back 100 years to the signing of the Federal Reserve Act by President Woodrow Wilson on December 23, 1913. Why did the founders feel the need to create something like the Federal Reserve? The short answer they would have given is, “the currency problem,” by which they meant that the supply of currency did not expand and contract appropriately with the needs of the economy. This was evident during seasonal increases in the need for money, and during banking panics, when people wanted to withdraw their bank deposits 2 and hold currency instead. When people talked about the Fed’s role in coping with financial panics, what they had in mind was expanding the currency supply. Money and Banking Before the Fed But to understand the currency problem, you have to know a little bit about how money and the banking system worked back then. It was different from what we’re used to today. I should warn you that I’ll be discussing some obscure workings of the banking system back then, but I think you’ll see they’re important to the story, so bear with me. The most prominent feature of the U.S. banking system a hundred years ago was that it was incredibly fragmented. Laws prevented banks from operating branches, and as a result, there were a large number of individual banks. Banks generally had just one office, and essentially every little town had its own bank. There were nearly 30,000 banks in the United States in 1913. Laws limiting branching have gone away, and as a result, there are about 7,000 banks today. What did people use for money? Coins, for one. They used gold coins, like this beautiful double eagle. But for small transactions, a gold coin of the right value would be impractically tiny. So large-value gold coins were supplemented by smaller-valued coins made out of silver or copper. For very large transactions, however, coins were too bulky, and people preferred banknotes. Banknotes were paper currency issued by private banks. Here, I have to say a word or two about the National Bank Act, a law passed in 1863, during the Civil War. 2 It authorized the chartering of “national banks” by the federal government ― up until that time, banks had been chartered by the states, who issued their own paper currency. The 1863 law authorized national banks to issue paper notes too, like the ones you see here, and a tax was levied on state bank notes that drove them out of circulation. National bank notes had to be backed by holdings of U.S. government bonds. This generated an immediate demand for government bonds, and so it helped finance the Civil War ― or, more precisely, one side of the Civil War. The process of issuing national banknotes was somewhat cumbersome. A national bank had to purchase the appropriate federal bonds; this was usually arranged through other banks in major financial centers. The bonds then had to be deposited with the U.S. Treasury, which then authorized the printing of notes by the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, using printing plates held by the Treasury. The notes were then shipped to the bank. The difficulty of this process plays an important role later in the story. 3 Clearing and Settling Interregional Payments The decades between the Civil War and the founding of the Fed saw rapid growth in interregional trade within the United States. Transportation networks were improving rapidly, and manufacturers were selling goods around the country. Making large payments at a distance posed special difficulties, however. Banknotes were poorly suited for the job because they were payable on demand to the bearer, and thus required insurance against theft when shipped. A convenient alternative was the check. If a check was lost or stolen, but someone presented it for 3 payment, the bank could refuse to pay, so checks are to some degree safer than banknotes. Checks became the payment instrument of choice in interregional trade. To understand the founding of the Fed, it helps to grasp some of the details of how checks moved around the banking system back then.4 It will help to focus on a concrete example. So imagine a general store in Newport News in the 1890s that sells potbellied stoves made by a manufacturer in Brooklyn. The store owner writes a check drawn on his bank in Newport News, payable to the manufacturer, and mails it. The manufacturer deposits the check in his account at his Brooklyn bank. (Keep in mind that there wasn’t an iPhone to scan the check into.) Now what happens though? How does the Brooklyn bank get paid for the check drawn on the bank in Newport News? More generally, how did banks clear and settle checks? Two different institutional mechanisms developed to facilitate check clearing. One was the clearinghouse. 5 Any decent-sized city would have many individual banks, and they would band together in order to economize on the costs of presenting checks to each other for payment. Instead of each bank sending clerks directly to each of the other banks, they would send a pair of clerks to a central location. This engraving depicts the New York Clearinghouse some time in the 1850s. (This admittedly is earlier than 1913, but the operations basically looked the same, with the possible exception of the top hats and cutaways.) One clerk from each bank would move around the outside of the circle of desks, presenting bundles of checks in succession to clerks from the other banks. The clerk sitting behind the desk would tally the amount of checks presented by the other banks. After the presentation of checks was complete, clearinghouse clerks would collate and reconcile all the banks’ tally sheets. At the end of the process, each bank has either a net obligation due to the clearinghouse, that is to the other banks, or else a net obligation due from the clearinghouse. They could either settle up that day, or carry over the balance to the next day. Clearinghouses were an important feature of the banking system, both before the Fed and for many years after. In fact, as I’ll discuss later on, the Federal Reserve Banks were modeled after the clearinghouses of the time, and several of their features were adopted for the Reserve Banks. First, banks that were members of the clearinghouse were often owed funds by the clearinghouse ― that is, by other clearinghouse banks. As a result, member banks had a keen interest in each other’s financial health. So clearinghouses set standards for membership, required periodic financial statements and regularly audited their member banks. In other words, clearinghouses performed functions very much like the supervision and regulation now performed by federal agencies, including the Federal Reserve. A second key feature of clearinghouses is that they were owned by their member banks. A board of directors, chosen by member banks, would set clearinghouse policies and rules and oversee the operations of the clearinghouse. Each Reserve Bank is overseen by its own board of directors. Clearinghouses worked well in cities, where sending couriers to a central location every day was convenient. But outside the cities, banks were geographically dispersed. Here’s where the second institutional mechanism used to clear checks comes in. It was called “correspondent banking.” 6 All the banks outside the cities ― they were called “country banks” ― established relationships with a number of other banks; these were called their “correspondents.” If the country bank 4 received a check drawn on a distant bank, it would be sent to a correspondent to collect for them. Similarly, if the city correspondent bank received a check drawn on the country bank, they would send it to the country bank for payment. This slide shows a page from a publication that listed each bank and their correspondents. So if you were a bank in Brooklyn, and one of your customers deposited a check drawn on, say, the First National Bank of Newport News, you would just look them up in this book and find out who their correspondents were. The correspondents are listed at the bottom of their entry ― I’ve outlined them in a red box. You could send it to the correspondent and get paid for it. One critical feature of this system is that banks kept deposits with their correspondents. So the First National Bank of Newport News would have accounts with the banks listed at the bottom of its entry. These were called “reserve accounts” or just “reserves,” and they played a critical role in the banking system. When checks came in to the city bank drawn on the correspondent country bank, the city bank would subtract (or debit) the amount from the country bank’s account. Similarly, when the country bank sent checks for the city bank to collect for them, the city bank would add (or credit) the amount to its account. If you multiply this picture across the nation, you end up with an intricate web of correspondent relationships linking very small country banks to larger banks in nearby cities to banks in the very largest financial centers ― New York and Chicago. Through this network of relationships, people were able to make payments easily to people at great distances across the United States, analogous to the way electronic payment systems, like the credit card and ATM networks, link banks together in a way that enables payments to flow. The economics are very similar, it turns out. The “Currency Problem” I have given you an overview of the internal workings of the banking system in 1913, just before the Fed was founded. So what was the problem with this system that motivated the founding of the Fed? One word: inelasticity. At times, the supply of currency just did not expand rapidly and flexibly enough. Here’s an illustration of that idea in a cartoon from 1909. Uncle Sam is pictured in the foreground, staring forlornly at a sheaf of wheat. His suspenders ― they called them “galluses” then ― are labeled “U.S. currency.” His buttons are labeled “financial center.” In the background, President Teddy Roosevelt explains the problem to a man labeled Congress: “You see, those galluses ought to have rubber in them, so that when Uncle Sam stoops to move the sheaf there won’t be much strain on the buttons.” To understand what they were talking about, think of the banking system as a whole; the public can hold bank deposits or banknotes. At times, people prefer more notes and fewer deposits than usual. One of those times was the fall harvest season, when more currency was needed to make the payments necessary to move crops to market; picture middlemen needing cash to pay farmers, who then use the cash to pay for supplies or repay loans. The holiday season in November and December was another time when the demand for currency rose; picture lots of people getting currency out of the bank to go shopping. But remember those cumbersome requirements associated with issuing new banknotes under the National Bank Act. That meant 5 the banks found it difficult to issue new notes. Country banks would turn to their correspondents for notes to meet the demand for withdrawals, which transmitted the strains to the big financial centers. The banking system had a hard time accommodating the increase in demand for currency. What was needed was a more elastic supply. Those of you who have had an economics class are probably thinking, what about the price system? Isn’t that how economies deal with scarcity? Well, the workings of the price system actually were evident back then. The price of money, as you economics students are aware, is the rate of interest ― that’s the opportunity cost of holding noninterest-earning currency, as opposed to holding interest-earning assets. Here is a plot (the blue line) of the average interest rate on commercial paper in New York (a good representative financial market interest rate in those days), shown for various months of the year in the 20 years before the founding of the Fed. You can see that from September through December, interest rates were substantially higher, about a full percentage point on average, compared to other months of the year. This is fairly direct evidence of the inelasticity that people were concerned about. After the founding of the Fed (the gold line), the curve is relatively flat, which is evidence that the Fed was able to better accommodate the seasonal swings in the demand for currency. 7 The inelasticity problem was also evident during financial panics. These were episodes, generally during economic downturns, in which a sizeable number of people attempted to withdraw their money from banks. In other words, the public wanted to shift out of deposits into currency. These “bank runs” tended to happen in response to rumors of insolvency at one or more banks. Again, the cumbersome and time-consuming process for issuing new banknotes under the National Bank Act limited the response in the total supply of notes. Interest rates would spike up, as banks attempted to secure banknotes to meet the demand for withdrawals. Banks turned to a number of expedients when faced with runs. One response when demand for notes was particularly acute was to “suspend payments,” meaning that banks would refuse to allow depositors to withdraw banknotes. At times, clearinghouses would declare suspensions for all their member banks. Often deposits weren’t entirely frozen, however. Banks would issue “cashier checks” or other instruments that acted as substitutes for currency. These substitutes were viewed as inconvenient stop-gap measures, however. Earlier I mentioned that country banks held deposits at correspondent banks. When their customers’ withdrawals started rising, country banks would ask their correspondent banks for shipments of banknotes, to be paid for with their reserve account balances. During financial panics, clearinghouse banks would sometimes refuse those withdrawal requests in order to preserve cash for themselves. The Panic of 1907 was the last straw; it sparked a concerted national effort to identify appropriate reforms to the currency system. Much debate ensued and numerous proposals were advanced, culminating in passage and signing of the Federal Reserve Act in December of 1913. 8 What did the Federal Reserve Act do? According to the preamble of the Act, the intent was “to furnish an elastic currency.” That is, they wanted the aggregate supply of currency to be able to expand when the demand for currency rose, as it did during seasonal crop movements and the large-scale deposit withdrawals associated with banking panics. You’ll also notice that the 6 preamble says “to afford a means of discounting commercial paper.” I’ll say more about that later. The Federal Reserve Act How would the Federal Reserve furnish an elastic currency? The natural model was the city clearinghouses.9 In banking crises, the clearinghouses often issued certificates to be circulated by their member banks as a substitute for currency withdrawals. (The clearinghouses were not legally entitled to issue bank notes themselves.) Therefore, the Act authorized the establishment of a set of banks modeled on the clearinghouses of the day. They called them “federal reserve banks,” because they would hold the reserves of the banking system, instead of having those reserves held in the banks in large cities. Reserve banks would have the power to issue notes, just as the national banks did at the time, except that the reserve banks would not be subject to the cumbersome requirements of the National Bank Act that made the supply of notes so inelastic. Because the reserve banks were modeled after the clearinghouses, it was natural to provide them with the other features associated with clearinghouses. Thus the reserve banks were membership organizations, owned and operated by their member banks, much like a joint venture. They were given authority to examine their members for safety and soundness, just as the clearinghouses did. 10 And they were given the power to clear and settle checks for their members as well, a core function of the clearinghouses.11 Key Issue: Structure, Governance and Accountability Perhaps the most visible aspect of the structure of the Federal Reserve was hotly debated: the number and location of the reserve banks themselves. One early version of the Federal Reserve Act would have created a single reserve bank with branches around the country. This riled populists, however, and tapped into the deep-rooted 19th century American aversion to large financial institutions and financial center interests. Carter Glass, the congressman from Lynchburg, Virginia, who chaired the House Committee on Currency and Banking and helped draft the final version of the legislation, insisted on a system of regional reserve banks. President Woodrow Wilson, however, a leader of the progressive movement, insisted that because the reserve banks had a substantial public purpose, they should be supervised by a federal agency. So the Act established what is now called the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System to oversee the operations and policies of the reserve banks. The Board also has the power to appoint three of the nine members of each Reserve Bank’s board of directors ― the other six are elected by member banks, and only three of them can be bankers. Members of the Board of Governors are appointed by the president of the United States and confirmed by the Senate. The Federal Reserve thus was created with a hybrid public-private governance structure. This structure has provided a measure of independence from political pressures that can induce an excessively short-run focus. That independence has been valuable, particularly in keeping inflation under control. But it comes with a responsibility to be accountable to our democratic institutions for the results of the conduct of policy. 7 The Fed’s governance structure also was hotly debated during the drafting of the legislation. It has been questioned and amended over the years and remains controversial today. For example, critics have charged that the role of bankers on Reserve Banks’ boards has biased them toward the interests of the banking industry, at the expense of the public interest. Others, however, cite the valuable operational expertise and economic information that bankers bring to the Fed. The financial reform legislation passed in 2010 in response to the financial crisis ― the Dodd-Frank Act ― imposed restrictions limiting the role of bankers in selecting the top officers of the Reserve Banks.12 More broadly, the Federal Reserve has made significant moves toward greater transparency into its operations and decision-making over the last 20 years. This photo shows a gathering of all the Reserve Bank directors and the Board of Governors in October 1914, assembled on the steps of the Treasury in Washington. If the analogous group were assembled today, I can assure you of two things: You’d see greater diversity and fewer hats. Key Issue: What Assets Should the Federal Reserve Hold? Perhaps the most critical question the founders had to decide was what the Reserve Banks should hold as assets. The Federal Reserve notes that were authorized by the Act are liabilities of the Reserve Banks. The Reserve Banks also accepted deposits from member banks, another liability. The original goal of the founding of the Federal Reserve was to ensure that the quantity of the Fed’s currency and reserve deposit liabilities would expand elastically when needed. This left the authors of the Act with some discretion as to what assets the Federal Reserve Banks would hold. One asset that was natural to consider was gold, either in the form of coins or bullion. The country was on the gold standard at the time, and that required that banknotes be convertible into gold on demand. The founders decided to mimic the design of other central banks and require that Reserve Banks hold a certain amount of gold ― 40 percent of the value of their notes outstanding, and 35 percent of the value of the bank deposits they accepted. This ensured that the Reserve Banks’ money supply would tend to expand or contract with the movement of gold into and out of the country, as required by the rules of the gold standard. But beyond gold, what assets should the reserve banks hold? One option was U.S. government bonds. The pre-Fed regime that required backing by government bonds was viewed as problematic, however, for the reasons I’ve already described. In addition, money backed only by government bonds was associated with inflationary wartime finance and thus viewed as potentially destabilizing. That left private-sector assets. There were active markets for private bonds, but these were relatively risky at the end of the 19 th century, and stocks were even riskier. European central banks at the time, particularly the Bank of England, provided a natural alternative model, however. They held financial instruments called “bills of exchange”; similar instruments in the United States were called commercial paper. These were short-term (3- to 6- month maturity) obligations that arose out of the financing of trade. Because they were secured by goods in transit and endorsed by banks, they were relatively safe. Conservative eligibility requirements and an endorsement by the borrowing bank (a kind of guarantee) helped further reduce the risk to the central bank. So the Federal Reserve Banks were given the authority to make loans backed by certain types of commercial paper or purchase certain types of such commercial paper. This is reflected in the third part of the preamble purpose of the Federal Reserve Act: “to afford a means of rediscounting commercial paper.” They called it 8 “rediscounting,” because the initial loan was essentially the purchase of an obligation at discount, which reflected an implied interest rate, and the Fed was discounting it a second time. During World War I, the Reserve Banks were granted the power to hold Treasury securities, and thereafter they used purchases of Treasury securities in the open market to influence monetary conditions. Acquiring Treasury securities in the open market avoided the cumbersome collateral- posting procedure required under the national bank rules. It is important to note that the Fed creates money whether it buys Treasury securities, buys commercial paper or makes a loan. When a Reserve Bank acquires an asset, it credits the reserve account of the bank of the party from whom it acquires the asset. When a Reserve Bank makes a loan, it credits the reserve account of the party to whom it is making a loan. In either case, the new reserve account balances can be withdrawn by the bank, and Federal Reserve notes would be paid out, effectively converting the reserve balances into currency. In either case, the supply of currency plus reserves has increased. The key lesson here is that, for the purposes of the original goal of the Federal Reserve Act ― that is, to solve the currency problem that the Fed was founded to solve and stem financial panics ― it doesn’t matter whether the Fed lends or buys Treasury securities. Either one expands the supply of currency and reserves that people are clamoring for. This highlights an important distinction regarding central bank activities. Some actions change the total amount of currency and bank reserves in circulation. These are best referred to as “monetary policy.” Actions that change the composition of the central bank’s asset portfolio, but leave the amount of currency and bank reserves unchanged can be thought of as “credit policy,” since they involve intervening in credit markets by buying one instrument and selling another. 13 Credit policy has the potential to direct funds to particular sectors or particular private entities, either funds they would not otherwise have obtained or on terms they would not otherwise have obtained. The “currency problem” that the founders were seeking to solve was a monetary problem, not a credit problem. This distinction is directly relevant to controversies about the Fed’s crisis lending programs, because they had little to do with monetary policy, in this sense, and thus little to do with the original goal of the Federal Reserve Act to furnish an elastic currency. Several emergency lending programs were introduced early in the crisis, prior to September 2008. 14 Lending under these programs was all offset by sales of Treasury securities, so the supply of currency plus reserves did not increase. Instead, the lending programs reallocated credit, effectively selling Treasury securities to the public and using the proceeds to provide funds to private entities on terms they would not otherwise have obtained in the marketplace. Similarly, the loan made in connection with the failure of Bear Stearns in March 2008 was offset through sales of Treasury securities. Because the Reserve Banks remit all of their excess earnings to the U.S. Treasury, the fiscal implications for the federal budget were exactly as if the Treasury had issued new debt and made the loan. Later, in the fall of 2008, the Fed drove short-term interest rates essentially to zero and stopped offsetting emergency lending. Clearly, though, the Fed could have driven interest rates to zero without the emergency lending programs by simply buying large quantities of Treasury securities. Since the crisis, the Fed has dramatically expanded the size of its asset holdings by acquiring longer-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities, or MBS. The 9 Fed could have expanded its portfolio an equal amount through purchases of Treasury securities only. Compared to that benchmark policy, buying agency MBS channels funds to mortgage borrowers, financed through sales of Treasury securities to the public. In popular accounts of the crisis, you may have come across references to the Fed as “the lender of last resort.” This phrase is often used to describe the prescriptions of Henry Thornton, the British economist, and Walter Bagehot, a British essayist and journalist. Both men wrote influential books on central banking: Thornton at the beginning of the 1800s, and Bagehot in the 1870s. Their recommendations to the Bank of England have been distilled into the phrase: “Lend freely at a high rate on good collateral.”15 This dictum is often invoked to support extensive central bank lending in episodes of financial distress. But Thornton and Bagehot wrote when lending was the primary mechanism by which the Bank of England increased the stock of money in circulation. Their writings make clear that they were not recommending rescues for insolvent institutions, and that their prescriptions were about monetary policy, not credit policy. The Debate Continues: The Future of Central Banking Some modern writers instead interpret the “lender of last resort” idea liberally to justify an expansive approach to central banking, in which all available tools, both monetary and credit policy, are used to minimize financial system “disruptions.” They read central bank charters as implying a “financial stability mandate.” 16 Although the term “financial stability” was not at all common 100 years ago, they construe the founders of the Federal Reserve System as motivated by a broad desire to minimize and prevent financial panics, even beyond simply satisfying increased demands for Federal Reserve Bank money. The view that financial markets are inherently fragile and unstable provides support for this approach.17 In contrast, a narrow and more restrained view of central banking emphasizes the critical core function of managing the monetary liabilities of the central bank.18 Experience after the demise of the gold standard in the 1970s has demonstrated that a measure of independence is a critical ingredient in the success of monetary policy. Aggressive use of a central bank’s asset portfolio to channel credit to particular economic sectors or entities threatens dragging the central bank into distributional politics and places that governance arrangement at risk.19 This more limited approach is supported by the view that excessive financial market instability tends to be induced by government rescues, and that policymakers should be humble about their ability to identify constructive interventions in particular financial markets.20 The evolution of the Federal Reserve, and central banking more generally around the world, will be driven, I suspect, by how the tension between these two approaches plays out. I just hope that future debates are informed by the rich deliberations that accompanied the founding of the Federal Reserve. 1 I am grateful to Patricia Wescott for assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz. “A Monetary History of the United States: 1867–1960,” Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963; Allan H. Meltzer, “A History of the Federal Reserve, Volume 1,” Ch icago: University of Chicago Press, 2003; and Bruce Champ, “The National Banking System: A Brief History,” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 0723, December, 2007. 10 3 Bruce Champ, Neil Wallace, and Warren E. Weber, “Resolving the National Bank Note Puzzle,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Spring 1992, vol. 16, iss. 2, pp. 13-21. 4 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, Jeffrey D. Walker, and John A. Weinberg, “The Fed’s Entry into Check Clearing Reconsidered,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, v. 85/2, Spring 1999, pp. 1-31. 5 James G. Cannon, “Clearing-Houses: Their History, Methods and Administration,” London: Smith, Elder, & Co., 1900; and James G. Cannon, “Clearing Houses,” National Monetary Commission, Government Printing Office: Washington, D.C., 1910. 6 See Spahr (1926). 7 Jeffrey A. Miron, “Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate, and the Founding of the Fed,” American Economic Review, March 1986, vol. 76, no. 1, pp. 125-140. 8 On the creation of the Fed see Elmus Wicker, “The Great Debate on Banking Reform: Nelson Aldrich and the Origins of the Fed,” Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press, 2005; and Eugene White, “The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System, 1900-1929,” Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983. 9 Charles Goodhart, “The Evolution of Central Banks,” Cambridge, Ma.: MIT Press, 1988; Richard Timberlake, “The Central Banking Role of Clearinghouse Associations,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, February 1984, vol. 16, pp. 1-15; Gary Gorton, “Clearinghouses and the Origin of Central Banking in the United States,” Journal of Economic History, June 1985, vol. XLV, no. 2, pp. 277-283; and Gary Gorton and Donald Mullineaux, “The Joint Production of Confidence: Endogenous Regulation and Nineteenth Century Commercial-Bank Clearinghouses,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, November 1987, vol. 19, pp. 457-468. 10 National banks were already supervised by the Comptroller of the Currency, as they are today, so the reserve banks were just given authority to supervise the state banks that joined the Federal Reserve System. 11 See Lacker, Walker and Weinberg (1999). 12 Specifically, section 1107 of the Dodd-Frank Act says that only Class B directors (nonbankers elected by member banks) and Class C directors (appointed by the Board of Governors) can elect the president and first vice president (chief operating officer) of the reserve bank. 13 This distinction is discussed at length by Marvin Goodfriend and Robert G. King, "Financial Deregulation, Monetary Policy, and Central Banking," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, May/June 1988, vol. 74, no. 3, pp. 3-22. 14 These were the Term Auction Facility and the Primary Dealer Credit Facility. See http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst.htm for detailed information on the Board of Governors’ website on all of the Fed’s credit and liquidity programs. See http://timeline.stlouisfed.org/ for a financial crisis timeline. 15 Henry Thornton, “An Enquiry Into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain,” 1802, Edited and with an Introduction by F.A. Von Hayek, New York: Rinehart and Co., 1939. Walter Bagehot, “Lombard Street,” London: Harry S. King and Co., 1873. For explanation and discussion of Thornton and Bagehot’s views on the lender of last resort, see Thomas M. Humphrey, “Lender of Last Resort: The Concept in History,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, March/April 1989, pp. 8-16; and Michael D. Bordo, “The Lender of Last Resort: Alternative Views and Historical Experience,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Review, January/February 1990, pp. 18-29. 16 See Bank for International Settlements, “Central bank governance and financial stability,” May 2011, http://www.bis.org/publ/othp14.pdf for an overview of financial stability mandates for central banks. 17 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Economics and the Federal Reserve After the Crisis.” Speech at Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, PA, February 12, 2013, and “Understanding the Interventionist Impulse of the Modern Central Bank,” Speech at Cato Institute 29th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, D.C., November 16, 2011. 18 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Perspectives on Monetary and Credit Policy,” Speech to the Shadow Open Market Committee Symposium, New York, NY, November 20, 2012. 19 Marvin Goodfriend, “The Elusive Promise of Independent Central Banking,” Bank of Japan, Monetary and Economic Studies, November 2012, vol. 30, pp. 39-54. 20 See Jeffrey M. Lacker, “Economics and the Federal Reserve After the Crisis.” Speech at Franklin and Marshall College, Lancaster, PA, February 12, 2013.
