Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the American Economic Association/American Finance Association Joint Luncheon, San Diego, California Share Thank you, Claudia, and thanks to the American Economic Association and the American Finance Association for the opportunity to speak to you on a topic of growing interest to our profession and of great importance to understanding the causes and implications of the financial crisis. 1 Everyone here today, I'm sure, is familiar with the tumultuous events that introduced many Americans to the concept of systemic risk. To recap briefly, losses arising from leveraged investments caused a few important, but perhaps not essential, financial institutions to fail. At first, the damage appeared to be contained, but the resulting stresses revealed extensive interconnections among traditional banks, investment houses, and the rapidly growing and less regulated shadow banking sector. Market participants lost confidence in their trading partners, and, as the crisis unfolded, the financial sector struggled to cope with a massive withdrawal of liquidity, the collapse of one of its most prominent institutions, and a 40 percent drop in equity prices. 2 The effects of the crisis were felt far beyond the financial sector as credit dried up and a mild recession became something far worse. You are also, no doubt, familiar with the political response to that crisis. After considerable debate, the Congress passed sweeping reform legislation designed to place the nation's financial infrastructure on a more solid foundation. I'm referring, of course, to the banking panic of 1907. The legislation that President Wilson signed in December 1913 created the Federal Reserve, providing the nation with a lender of last resort to respond to such crises. 3 As we approach the centennial of the Federal Reserve System, it is striking how many of the challenges of that era remain with us today. In 1907, the correspondent banking networks that helped concentrate reserves in New York and other money centers also made the banking system highly interconnected. Today, our capability to monitor and model financial outcomes is vastly greater, and the tools available to the Federal Reserve are vastly more powerful, than the private capital and moral suasion that financier J. P. Morgan summoned in 1907 to stabilize the banks and trusts. But as we learned during the recent crisis, the financial system has also grown much larger and more complex, and our efforts to understand and influence it have, at best, only kept pace. Complex links among financial market participants and institutions are a hallmark of the modern global financial system. Across geographic and market boundaries, agents within the financial system engage in a diverse array of transactions and relationships that connect them to other participants. Indeed, much of the financial innovation that preceded the most recent financial crisis increased both the number and types of connections that linked borrowers and lenders in the economy. The rapid growth in securitization and derivatives markets prior to the crisis provides a stark example of this phenomenon. As shown in figure 1 , between 2000 and 2007, the notional value of collateralized debt obligations outstanding increased from less than $300 billion to more than $1.4 trillion. 4 From 2004, the earliest date for which comprehensive data are available, to 2007, the outstanding notional amount of credit default swap (CDS) contracts increased tenfold, from $6 trillion to $60 trillion. 5 This incredible growth in securitization and derivatives markets reflects a significant increase in the number, types, and complexity of network connections in the financial system. Financial economists have long stressed the benefits of interactions among financial intermediaries, and there is little doubt that some degree of interconnectedness is vital to the functioning of our financial system. Economists take a well-reasoned and dim view of autarky as the path to growth and stability. Banks and other financial intermediaries channel capital from savers, who often have short-term liquidity demands, into productive investments that typically require stable, long-term funding. Financial intermediaries work with one another because no single institution can hope to access the full range of available capital and investment opportunities in our complex economy. Connections among market actors also facilitate risk sharing, which can help minimize (though not eliminate) the uncertainty faced by individual agents. Yet experience--most importantly, our recent financial crisis--as well as a growing body of academic research suggests that interconnections among financial intermediaries are not an unalloyed good. Complex interactions among market actors may serve to amplify existing market frictions, information asymmetries, or other externalities. The difficult task before market participants, policymakers, and regulators with systemic risk responsibilities such as the Federal Reserve is to find ways to preserve the benefits of interconnectedness in financial markets while managing the potentially harmful side effects. Indeed, new regulations required by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act) and changes in supervisory practices by the Federal Reserve and other financial regulators are intended to do just that. In my remarks, I will discuss a few of the major regulatory and supervisory changes under way to address the potential for excessive systemic risk arising from the complexity and interconnectedness that characterize our financial system. The design of an appropriate regulatory framework entails tradeoffs between costs and benefits, and to illustrate them, I will discuss in some detail proposals currently under consideration to mitigate risk in over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, which proved to be an important channel for the transmission of risk during the recent crisis. I am quite aware that some reforms in the wake of the financial crisis, including those pertaining to derivatives, have been controversial. In connection with recent rulemakings--and, more broadly, in the arena of public debate--critics have asked whether complexity and interconnectedness should be treated as potential sources of systemic risk. This is a legitimate question that the Federal Reserve welcomes and itself seeks to answer in its roles of researcher, regulator, and supervisor. Let me say at the outset, though, that a lack of complete certainty about potential outcomes is not a justification for inaction, considering the size of the threat encountered in the recent crisis. Responsible policymakers try to make decisions with the best information available but would always like to know more. With that in mind, I'll begin by briefly surveying research that highlights ways in which network structure and interconnectedness can give rise to or exacerbate systemic risk in the financial system. The Economics of Interconnectedness and Systemic Risk Academic research that explores the relationship between network structure and systemic risk is relatively new. Not surprisingly, interest in this field has increased considerably since the financial crisis. A search of economics research focusing on "systemic risk" or "interconnectedness" since 2007 yields 624 publications, twice as many as were produced in the previous 25 years. 6 That's not to say that economists were blind to the importance of networks before the financial crisis. In 2000, Franklin Allen and Douglas Gale, for example, developed an important model of financial networks that provides insight into how networks can influence systemic risk. 7 In the model studied by Allen and Gale, systemic risk arises through liquidity shocks that can have a domino effect, causing a problem at one bank to spread to others, potentially leading to failures throughout the system. In their model, interbank deposits are a primary mechanism for the transmission of liquidity shocks from one bank to another. Allen and Gale compare two canonical network structures: a "complete" network, in which all banks lend to and borrow from all other banks, and an "incomplete" network, in which each bank borrows from only one neighbor and lends to only one other neighbor. Figure 2 , panel A, presents an example of a complete network, and figure 2, panel B, an example of an incomplete network. In the case of the complete network, banks benefit from diversified funding streams. A liquidity shock at one bank is less likely to cause the bankruptcy of another bank since the shock can be distributed among all banks in the system. In the incomplete network, funding is not diversified. A liquidity shock at one bank is more likely to cause liquidity problems at other connected banks because the same shock is spread over fewer banks and is therefore larger and more destabilizing. The principle behind this result is familiar and basic to economics: Diversification reduces risk and improves stability. While this idea is compelling, both economic research and the events of the financial crisis suggest that it is incomplete. In their classic paper on bank runs, Douglas Diamond and Philip Dybvig showed how rational and prudent actions by individual depositors to limit their own risks may be highly destabilizing to an institution designed to transform short-term liabilities into long-term assets. 8 Xavier Freixas, Bruno Parigi, and Jean-Charles Rochet show that a similar kind of collective action problem can arise in a network akin to a modern check-clearing system in which credit extensions among banks allow claims on one institution to be fulfilled by another. 9 Such a system is socially useful because it allows depositors to shift funds among banks without forcing banks to sell illiquid assets, thus enabling society as a whole to undertake more productive, long-term investment. But in times of stress or uncertainty, such systems can be subject to coordination failures: A "gridlock" equilibrium can arise in which depositors at each bank withdraw funds early in order to avoid losses arising from credit extensions to other banks whose depositors are also expected to force an early liquidation of assets. In Freixas, Parigi, and Rochet (2000), interbank credit extensions, while useful, can result in institutions that are "too interconnected to fail." These models underscore that the pattern of connections throughout a financial network determines the systemwide implications of liquidity shocks or other financial stresses in one part of the network. This finding is one reason why efforts to collect more and better data on the precise linkages among financial institutions are so important. Without such comprehensive and detailed data, it is simply not possible to understand how stress in one part of the network may spread and affect the entire system. Networks that are more interconnected are inherently more complex than those in which market participants have fewer links to one another, and complexity can exacerbate the kinds of coordination problems highlighted by Diamond and Dybvig and by Freixas, Parigi, and Rochet. Of course, "complexity" is difficult to define in a completely systematic and satisfactory manner, but one way emphasized in recent work by Hyun Song Shin is to consider the number of links required to connect savers to borrowers. 10 Shin's analysis of interconnectedness among financial institutions is based on the idea that the ultimate amount of lending and borrowing that can occur in an economy is determined by economic fundamentals such as income growth, which change only slowly over time, whereas interbank claims can grow or contract far more quickly. Of course, claims within the entire financial system net out to zero, but they do affect the leverage of the institutions involved. In Shin's model, financial institutions seek to take on more leverage during a boom, when banks have strong capital positions and risks are perceived to be low, but can increase leverage, in the aggregate, only by borrowing and lending more intensively to each other. This causes the resulting network of intertwining claims to extend further and further. Conversely, when fundamental conditions or market sentiments change and financial institutions prefer to shed risk, they can deleverage in the short term only by withdrawing credit from one another. Such deleveraging can be particularly destabilizing in longer intermediation chains as debt claims that are called by one financial intermediary to shore up its own assets adversely affect the liability sides of other institutions' balance sheets. As deleveraging accelerates and more and more financial institutions hoard liquidity, other institutions may become concerned that their own funding may dry up and may preemptively withdraw funding from others. Fundamentally strong institutions are forced to liquidate assets at fire sale prices, which results in more deleveraging and instability. More-complex network structures are likely to be more opaque than less complex ones. For example, as the number of intermediaries standing between borrowers and lenders grows, it becomes increasingly difficult to understand how one member of the network fits into the overall system. The well-publicized difficulties that some mortgage borrowers have had in simply figuring out who owns their mortgages illustrates the extent to which lengthening intermediation chains have increased the complexity of the financial system. Moreover, in many cases, market participants may have strong incentives not to disclose their connections to one another. If a bank has a profitable relationship with a borrower, it may be unwilling to disclose it to other banks for fear that competitors will reduce or eliminate the rents that it earns. Ricardo Caballero and Alp Simsek illustrate how a lack of information can create systemic risk in financial networks. 11 In a model that is structurally similar to the incomplete interbank network model of Allen and Gale, Caballero and Simsek examine how banks might respond to news of a liquidity shock when each bank knows the identities of its own counterparties but not the identities of its counterparties' counterparties. The authors posit that banks deal with this uncertainty by appealing to the "maximin principle": Each seeks to maximize profits under the assumption that the network is configured in the worst possible manner from its own perspective. Because each behaves as though the network structure is "stacked against it," when banks learn of an adverse liquidity shock, each tends to sell more of its illiquid assets and withdraw more funding from its counterparties than it would if it had access to complete information about the structure of interbank credit relationships. As in Shin's model, this excessive deleveraging can create a vicious cycle, magnifying the effects of the initial shock. The four models we've discussed thus far are aimed at exploring general features of financial networks. As such, they are necessarily somewhat abstract. With a few narrow exceptions, they treat all market participants as similar in size and in range of activities, and they use relatively simplistic network structures. In the past few years, research on financial networks has moved beyond stylized models of interbank relationships to examine the propagation of shocks in more-realistic settings. Recent research by Gai, Haldane, and Kapadia and by Cont, Moussa, and Santos examines how shocks propagate in network structures in which some banks are larger and more interconnected than others. 12 Using numerical simulations, Gai, Haldane, and Kapadia show that, in concentrated networks, contagion occurs less frequently and is less severe for low degrees of network connectivity. Contagion is significantly more likely at higher levels of connectivity. In a concentrated financial network with a few key players, and when liquidity shocks are targeted at the most connected institutions, distress at highly connected banks spreads widely through the rest of the system. In this sense, the intuition of Allen and Gale--that highly connected networks are resilient to systemic shocks--can be misleading. In an empirical study of 3,000 Brazilian banks, Cont, Moussa, and Santos find that, not surprisingly, institutions with larger interbank exposures tend to be more systemically important. But, critically, they also find that an institution's position within the financial network plays a significant role. A bank that does business with a large number of relatively weak counterparties may have greater systemic importance than an institution with a similar number of counterparties that are better equipped to manage potential losses. The work of Gai, Haldane, and Kapadia and that of Cont, Moussa, and Santos suggest that detailed and comprehensive data on the structure of financial networks is needed to understand the systemic risks facing the financial system and to gauge the contributions to systemic risk by individual institutions. I will describe in a moment how the Federal Reserve is using such data to enhance its understanding of the OTC derivatives market. This line of research suggests that a one-size-fits-all approach to the regulation of financial intermediaries may not be appropriate. So, what have we learned from this brief tour through recent research on interconnectedness and systemic risk? We have seen how interconnectedness can be a source of strength for financial institutions, allowing them to diversify risk while providing liquidity and investment opportunities to savers that would not be available otherwise. But more-numerous and more-complex linkages also appear to make it more difficult for institutions to address certain types of externalities, such as those arising from incomplete information or a lack of coordination among market participants. These externalities may do little harm or may even be irrelevant in normal times, but they can be devastating during a crisis. The Global Policy Response to Reduce Systemic Risk Governments around the globe have responded to the financial crisis by adopting a strong, multifaceted, and coordinated reform agenda aimed at reducing systemic risk. At a meeting in Pittsburgh in September 2009, governments in the Group of Twenty (G‑20) endorsed work already under way in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to improve capital and the management of liquidity risk in the banking system. 13 I'll briefly review several Basel Committee initiatives that address interconnectedness and systemic risk, but first, let me focus on one in particular: higher capital requirements for global systemically important banks (GSIBs). Enhanced capital standards for GSIBs serve to limit the risks undertaken by the largest, most interconnected institutions whose distress has the greatest potential to impose negative externalities on the broader financial system. A framework of higher minimum regulatory capital standards for these institutions was issued by the Basel Committee in November 2011, and indicators of interconnectedness account for a significant proportion of the overall score used to determine whether a bank will be subject to higher standards. 14 As shown by Gai, Haldane, and Kapadia, among others, highly interconnected firms can transmit shocks widely, impairing the rest of the financial system and the economy. We saw, for example, that when Lehman Brothers failed, the shock was transmitted through money market mutual funds to the short-term funding and interbank markets. While some participants in each of these sectors had direct exposures to Lehman, many more did not. Moreover, even in cases in which direct exposures to Lehman were manageable, the turmoil caused by Lehman's failure added stress to the system at a particularly unwelcome time. In this way, the failure of a highly interconnected institution such as Lehman imposes costs on society well in excess of those borne by the firm's shareholders and direct creditors. Accordingly, tying enhanced capital requirements to interconnectedness improves the resilience of the system. Of course, higher capital requirements are not costless; they may raise financing costs for some borrowers, and they have the potential to induce institutions to engage in regulatory arbitrage. An important ongoing agenda for research and policy is the design and implementation of data-based measures of interconnectedness to ensure that our understanding of financial system interconnections evolves in tandem with financial innovation. While enhanced capital standards for GSIBs are an important tool for managing systemic risk that arises through interconnectedness, they are not the only tool. The Basel Committee's program contains a number of initiatives that will help manage interconnectedness and systemic risk. These measures include countercyclical capital buffers, liquidity requirements, increased capital charges for exposures to large financial institutions, large exposure rules, and deductions from capital for equity investments in banks. 15 These and other initiatives will all play a role in managing the effect of complexity and interconnectedness on financial stability. In fact, the multifaceted nature of the reform program is an important design principle. One of the lessons of the recent financial crisis was that capital alone is not sufficient to prevent or stem a crisis. Multiple channels for reform initiatives will enhance systemic stability. Managing Tradeoffs between Reducing Systemic Risk and Increasing Costs: OTC Derivatives Market Reforms In addition to the banking reforms I just discussed, the G-20 also committed to reduce risk in OTC derivatives markets by enacting reforms to improve transparency and decrease counterparty exposures among market participants. These policies must be considered carefully, as they are apt to increase the cost of financial intermediation and that of hedging risk. To illustrate the tradeoffs policymakers and regulators must manage when crafting such policies, I'll next discuss in some detail a set of initiatives currently being implemented by prudential, market, and systemic risk regulators around the world to address weaknesses in OTC derivatives markets. An OTC derivative is a privately negotiated contract between a pair of counterparties to exchange future cash flows that depend on the performance of an underlying asset or benchmark index. Unlike an immediate purchase or sale of assets, OTC derivatives require one or both sides of the transaction to make payments in the future. Counterparty risk is therefore a key element of OTC derivatives transactions. The scale and significance of counterparty risks in the OTC derivatives markets are large and, as we saw, can have economy-wide implications. The prudent management, regulation, and oversight of these risks are critical to ensuring that derivatives markets serve to diversify, rather than exacerbate, systemic risk. Significant problems with the functioning, regulation, and oversight of derivatives markets became apparent during the financial crisis. These problems are perhaps best exemplified by the widespread effects of large losses by American International Group, Inc. (AIG), on its OTC structured finance and credit derivatives positions. In the absence of government intervention, AIG's failure would have exposed its counterparties to substantial losses at a time of significant financial stress and uncertainty for them and the financial system. Indeed, for a time, the prospect of AIG's failure exacerbated the already impaired functioning in important segments of the OTC market, and, as that happened, it became more costly or even impossible for firms to manage financial risks. Derivatives positions originally undertaken by some firms to hedge risk could not be unwound and instead became sources of risk. AIG's failure revealed, in stark and spectacular fashion, systemic problems inherent in the structure and functioning of OTC derivatives markets that had increased the fragility of the financial system, exposing the rest of the economy to unnecessary systemic risks. Central clearing mandates, minimum margin standards, and data reporting requirements are among the tools that regulators now intend to use to mitigate counterparty risk and improve transparency, thus reducing uncertainty. The September 2009 commitment of the G-20 to require that standardized OTC derivatives be cleared through central counterparties is directly aimed at reducing systemic risk by changing the structure of the network of derivatives counterparty exposures. 16 In the absence of a central counterparty, the network of counterparty exposures associated with a class of OTC contracts might look something like panel A in figure 3 . Each market participant has counterparty risk exposures to one or more other market participants. Although each participant knows its own risk exposure, it is unlikely to have complete information on its counterparties' exposures to others. Such opacity can engender the kind of information-related gridlock that we observed in the fall of 2008 and that is explored in the research of Caballero and Simsek. Moreover, because market participants commonly have partially or fully offsetting positions with multiple counterparties, a fully bilateral network is inefficient from a risk-management standpoint: Gains in the value of positions with one counterparty cannot be netted against losses in the value of positions with other counterparties. By taking one side of every trade, a central counterparty serves to transform the mesh network shown in panel A of figure 3 into something that looks more like the hub-and-spoke network illustrated in panel B. This network structure has no effect on the exposure of individual market participants to the assets or indexes underlying the derivatives contracts in question, but it dramatically simplifies and improves the transparency of the network of counterparty risk exposures. 17 Central clearing can yield important advantages over a fully bilateral market structure. The simpler hub-and-spoke network structure is more transparent, and the central counterparty is well positioned to impose common margin requirements on all market participants. Central clearing facilitates the netting of gains and losses across multiple market participants, which has the potential to significantly reduce each participant's aggregate counterparty risk exposure. Rather than managing its counterparty risk exposure to all other trading partners, a market participant needs to manage only its exposure to the central counterparty. The central counterparty acts as a pure intermediary and takes no net position in any of the underlying contracts that it clears, so it can experience losses only when a clearing member defaults and has posted insufficient margin to cover the cost of replacing its open positions. Central counterparties are typically designed to distribute any losses they do incur in a relatively predictable way across all clearing members. In this way, central clearing provides for a transparent mutualization of counterparty risks among participants. Central counterparties are designed to be narrowly focused on intermediation and not the provision of credit and liquidity. This structure improves the chances that, in the event of a significant market stress, market functioning will not be threatened by the failure of market infrastructure itself. Of course, the other side of this coin is that adding a central counterparty introduces a single point of failure for the network, making it critical that the central counterparty itself be well managed and well regulated. To help ensure this result, title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act adopted stronger safeguards than in the past for central counterparties that clear OTC derivatives. Title VIII aimed at strengthening the supervision of financial market utilities, including central counterparties designated as systemically important, by requiring annual examinations as well as ex ante reviews of material rule and operational changes. In April 2012, the international organizations that set standards for financial market infrastructures such as central counterparties published new and stronger standards for these entities. U.S. regulators, including the Federal Reserve, participated actively in this work and are expected to make formal proposals for incorporating the new standards into U.S. regulations as soon as possible. More fundamentally, however, a central counterparty's ability to manage risk is determined by its ability to accurately value the contracts it clears on a frequent and possibly real-time basis and to rapidly replace open positions at or near current prices in the event that a clearing member defaults. Requiring less-liquid and highly customized derivatives to be cleared would likely increase systemic risks, as clearinghouses would not be well positioned to manage the complex risks of such derivatives. The G-20 mandate explicitly recognizes this important limitation on the benefits of central clearing, and it requires only that standardized OTC derivatives be centrally cleared. Accordingly, the G-20 commitment has effectively managed the costs and benefits of central clearing in establishing a global clearing mandate. However, limiting central clearing to standardized derivatives means that a significant proportion of less standardized OTC contracts will continue to be written on a bilateral basis without the benefit of a central counterparty. The International Monetary Fund estimates that one-third of interest rate and credit derivatives and two-thirds of equity, commodity, and foreign exchange derivatives will not be suited to standardization and will remain non-centrally cleared. 18 As more-standardized derivatives migrate to central clearing, it will be important to remain vigilant in managing the risks from non-centrally-cleared derivatives exposures. 19 One important tool for managing the systemic risks of non-centrally-cleared derivatives is margin requirements. 20 Globally, regulators have been working on standards for margin requirements on non-centrally-cleared derivatives that would provide for harmonized rules and a level playing field, which is crucial given the global nature of derivatives markets. In July, the Basel Committee and the International Organization of Securities Commissions proposed a framework for margin requirements on non-centrally-cleared derivatives. 21 The finalized framework will inform rulemakings of the Federal Reserve and other U.S. regulators. The proposed framework would require financial firms and systemically important nonfinancial firms to collect two types of margin. First, they would be obligated to collect variation margin on a regular basis, so if a derivative loses market value, the party experiencing a loss must realize the loss immediately. This requirement codifies current best market practice, since the largest derivatives dealers already exchange variation margin daily. However, and importantly, the framework extends this prudent risk-management practice to other derivatives counterparties. Requiring timely payment of variation margin will go a long way toward ensuring that an AIG-like event will not happen again, since current exposures will not be allowed to build over time to unmanageable levels. 22 Moreover, variation margin requirements will ensure that market participants will know that counterparties that they deal with will not be carrying large uncollateralized exposures that could impair their ability to perform in the future. Those requirements diminish the likelihood of the kind of information gridlock explored by Caballero and Simsek. More controversially, the proposed framework requires the collection of initial margin. While variation margin collateralizes current derivatives losses, initial margin collateralizes future losses that could occur in the event of a counterparty's default. In essence, initial margin is a kind of performance bond. In the event that a counterparty does not perform as required, the initial margin is used to replace the position with a new counterparty. It is here that some of the most significant policy tradeoffs arise, because higher initial margin requirements will make it more costly for market participants to use derivatives to hedge risk. Liquid resources that are set aside as initial margin cannot be deployed for other purposes. Given the sheer size and scope of derivatives markets, requiring initial margin on all derivatives transactions could result in significant opportunity and liquidity costs. In a public comment letter to the Federal Reserve and other regulators, the International Swaps and Derivatives Association estimated that initial margin requirements could lock up as much as $1.7 trillion in liquid assets globally. 23 This number is eye opening, to say the least. In an effort to better gauge the liquidity costs of initial margin requirements, the Federal Reserve, as part of the international group of prudential and market regulators that issued the July proposal, has conducted a detailed impact study to quantify the liquidity costs associated with initial margin requirements. The results of this study, as well as comments received on the proposal, will help ensure that in the final framework, the need to reduce systemic risk is appropriately balanced against the resulting liquidity costs. Even in light of the significant costs of initial margin, it seems clear that some requirements are needed. The current use and application of initial margin is inconsistent, and a more robust and consistent margin regime for non-centrally-cleared derivatives will not only reduce systemic risk, but will also diminish the incentive to tinker with contract language as a way to evade clearing requirements. Robust and consistent initial margin requirements will help prevent the kind of contagion that was sparked by AIG: They would serve, in effect, to limit the effects of interconnectedness within the financial network. The failure of a financial counterparty could be contained in the manner described by Allen and Gale. As I noted in connection with variation margins, initial margin requirements would also improve transparency because derivative market participants will know that their counterparties are at least partially insulated from defaults. Of course, these benefits need to be appropriately balanced against the burdens imposed by initial margin. But it seems highly unlikely that the status quo is consistent with achieving the goals of the G‑20 to reduce the potential for systemic risk in the OTC derivatives markets that could threaten the financial system. Finally, let me turn to data requirements. Both the research that I have highlighted today and practical experience demonstrate that market, prudential, and systemic risk authorities need detailed information on derivatives transactions and bilateral positions to assess evolving market risks and to execute their financial stability responsibilities. Indeed, the Federal Reserve has already used preliminary information from the Depository Trust & Clearing Corporation's Trade Information Warehouse to construct network graphs of the CDS market such as the one illustrated in figure 4 . The data enable identification, for example, of firms, such as A and B in figure 4, that are large net sellers of protection. Such information can play a valuable role in supervision. Moreover, the analyses for monitoring and measuring systemic risks suggested and described by Gai, Haldane, and Kapadia and by Cont, Moussa, and Santos require this kind of detailed data to gain a holistic view of systemic risk. Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Act requires that data on U.S. swaps transactions be reported to swaps data repositories regulated by the Commodity Futures Trading Commission or to securities-based swaps data repositories regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Similar European regulations impose trade reporting requirements on swaps transacted in Europe. But there is still no guarantee, due to confidentiality concerns and legal barriers to data sharing, that the data reported into these trade repositories will ultimately be accessible to all of the regulators who require the data to obtain a holistic view of the derivatives market. Given that the derivatives market is global in scope, access to those data is essential for authorities with systemic risk responsibilities, such as the Federal Reserve, to monitor and respond to risks. To make this point concrete, it is unclear whether we will be able, on a regular and comprehensive basis, to produce the sort of analysis illustrated by figure 4. In order to effectively monitor market developments and systemic risks, it is crucial that regulators across jurisdictions and countries share data on a consistent and regular basis. While better data and more transparency are important for monitoring and responding to the buildup of systemic risks, we do, of course, also recognize the confidentiality concerns. Information is a valuable resource to most financial market participants, and unnecessarily burdensome or overly revealing information disclosures could compromise the position of market participants and reduce incentives for trade, thus decreasing liquidity and market efficiency. Dodd-Frank's real-time reporting requirements for swaps transactions recognize this important point by allowing for delayed reporting of large "block trades" where immediate reporting could reveal and undermine a participant's position and ultimately discourage market transactions, depth, and liquidity. In this way, enhanced reporting and transparency requirements are being set to provide the public and regulators with useful information without compromising market integrity. Moreover, while market integrity and appropriate confidentiality are important considerations, the events of the financial crisis have clearly shown that effective systemic risk management demands more, and not less, data disclosure. Concluding Remarks I began this talk by describing the events surrounding the banking panic of 1907 and the founding of the Federal Reserve. A lesson from that episode, as relevant today as it was then, was that financial stability is essential to sustained economic growth and prosperity. Just as the banking panic of 1907 revealed fundamental weaknesses in our financial system, so, too, did the financial crisis of 2007 and 2008. The recent crisis showed that some financial innovations, over time, increased the system's vulnerability to financial shocks that could be transmitted throughout the entire economy with immediate and sustained consequences that we are still working through today. Some of these vulnerabilities were a consequence of innovations that increased the complexity and interconnectedness of aspects of the financial system. In response to the crisis and the weaknesses it revealed, governments around the globe are acting to improve financial stability and reduce the risks posed by a highly interconnected financial system. These efforts, of course, must account for the costs of new rules and ensure that these costs are clearly outweighed by the benefits. I am confident that the policies I have described today will make the economy more resilient to financial shocks and help reduce the risk of another crisis, while properly balancing these important benefits against the necessary costs. In striking this balance, government has been guided by new research that has added to our understanding of systemic risk. And this work continues. I have no doubt that some of you here today will perform that research and make those discoveries. So, allow me to close by offering my thanks, in advance, for those contributions. I hope my talk today has made it clear that the work of safeguarding our financial system will depend on these efforts and insights, which will empower policymakers to make the right decisions. References Allen, Franklin, and Douglas Gale (2000). " Financial Contagion ," Journal of Political Economy , vol. 108 (February), pp. 1-33. Bank for International Settlements (2009). Revisions to the Basel II Market Risk Framework . Basel, Switzerland: BIS, July. --------- (2010). The Basel Committee's Response to the Financial Crisis: Report to the G-20 (PDF) . Basel, Switzerland: BIS, October. --------- (2011). Global Systemically Important Banks: Assessment Methodology and the Additional Loss Absorbency Requirement . Basel, Switzerland: BIS, November. --------- (2012a). Margin Requirements for Non-Centrally-Cleared Derivatives . Basel, Switzerland: BIS, July. --------- (2012b). " Semiannual OTC Derivatives Statistics at End-June 2012, " BIS, November, (accessed December 18, 2012). Caballero, Ricardo J., and Alp Simsek (2011). "Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity," Massachusetts Institute of Technology Department of Economics Working Paper 09-28. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT, April. Cont, Rama, Amal Moussa, and Edson Bastos e Santos (forthcoming). "Network Structure and Systemic Risk in Banking Systems," in Jean-Pierre Fouque and Joe Langsam, eds., Handbook of Systemic Risk . New York: Cambridge University Press. Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig (1983). " Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity ," Journal of Political Economy , vol. 91 (June), pp. 401-19. Dow Jones & Company (2012). " Dow Jones Industrial Average, " via Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, FRED Economic Data, "Dow Jones Averages" data release, (accessed December 18, 2012). Duffie, Darrell, and Haoxiang Zhu (2011). "Does a Central Clearing Counterparty Reduce Counterparty Risk?" Review of Asset Pricing Studies , vol. 1 (December), pp. 74-95. Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011). The Financial Crisis Inquiry Report (PDF) . Washington: Government Printing Office. Freixas, Xavier, Bruno M. Parigi, and Jean-Charles Rochet (2000). " Systemic Risk, Interbank Relations, and Liquidity Provision by the Central Bank, " Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 32 (August), pp. 611-38. Gai, Prasanna, Andrew Haldane, and Sujit Kapadia (2010). " Complexity, Concentration and Contagion, " Journal of Monetary Economics , vol. 58 (July), pp. 453-70. Group of Twenty (2009). Leaders' Statement: The Pittsburgh Summit , item 13 under "Strengthening the International Financial Regulatory System." Pittsburgh, Pa.: G-20, September. International Monetary Fund (2010). Global Financial Stability Report: Meeting New Challenges to Stability and Building a Safer System . Washington: IMF, April. International Swaps and Derivatives Association (2012). Comment letter from Robert Pickel on the Federal Reserve's proposed rule on margin and capital requirements for covered swap entities (Docket No. R-1415) (PDF) , November 26. Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (2012). " Statistics ," SIFMA, (accessed December 18, 2012). Shin, Hyun Song (2009). " Financial Intermediation and the Post-Crisis Financial System (PDF) ," paper presented at the Eighth Bank for International Settlements Annual Conference, held at the Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland, June 25-26. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. I am indebted to members of the Board staff-- Celso Brunetti , Cecilia Caglio , Sean Campbell , Erik Heitfield , and John Maggs--who contributed to the preparation of these remarks. Return to text 2. The level of the Dow Jones industrial average dropped 43.8 percent between November 15, 1906 (94.25), and November 15, 1907 (53.00). See Dow Jones & Company (2012). Return to text 3. See Federal Reserve Act, ch. 6, 38 Stat. 251 (1913). Return to text 4. See Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association (2012). Collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) are a general class of securitized products consisting of bonds that represent claims on the future cash flows generated by a variety of financial assets, including corporate debt and mortgage-backed securities. Growth in notional amounts of CDOs is indicative of the growth in economic exposure. Return to text 5. A CDS is a derivative contract in which one party, the protection "seller," agrees to insure another party, the protection "buyer," from default on an underlying bond or index of bonds in exchange for a fee. Notional amounts do not reflect the economic exposure in these markets, which is a small fraction of the notional value, but the growth noted here is indicative of the growth in exposure. See Bank for International Settlements (2012b). Return to text 6. A search for either "interconnectedness" or "systemic risk" in article abstracts of academic research cataloged by EconLit results in 311 entries from 1988 to 2006. The same search conducted for the period from 2007 through the present yields 624 entries. Restricting the search to articles that have appeared in peer-reviewed journals reduces the number of entries between 1988 and 2006 to 186 and the number of entries between 2007 and the present to 375. Return to text 7. See Allen and Gale (2000). Return to text 8. See Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Return to text 9. See Freixas, Parigi, and Rochet (2000). Return to text 10. See Shin (2009). Return to text 11. See Caballero and Simsek (2011). Return to text 12. See Gai, Haldane, and Kapadia (2010) and Cont, Moussa, and Santos (2012). Return to text 13. See Group of Twenty (2009). Return to text 14. See Bank for International Settlements (2011). It should also be noted that while the assessment methodology depends on interconnectedness, the specific measures employed will be continually reviewed and updated as appropriate. Return to text 15. For a description of these and related regulatory initiatives, see Bank for International Settlements (2010). Return to text 16. See Group of Twenty (2009), "Improving Over-the-Counter Derivatives Markets" (in item 13). Return to text 17. For clarity, figure 3, panel B, illustrates an idealized centrally cleared network in which only one central counterparty clears all trades. In practice, it is entirely possible that more than one central counterparty may accept a given class of contracts for clearing. Research by Darrell Duffie and Haoxiang Zhu, among others, shows that central clearing exhibits significant economies of scale and scope (Duffie and Zhu, 2011). As in other economic enterprises that exhibit strong positive network effects, the potential efficiency gains from consolidation in central clearing need to be appropriately weighed against the countervailing benefits afforded by greater competition among central counterparties. Return to text 18. See International Monetary Fund (2010). Return to text 19. For example, participants and their supervisors will need to closely monitor the risk positions flowing from non-centrally-cleared derivatives to ensure that removing centrally cleared derivatives from existing bilateral netting arrangements will not inadvertently lead to significant growth in risk concentrations from non-centrally-cleared derivatives. Return to text 20. In addition to margin standards, enhanced capital standards prescribed by Basel 2.5 will serve as an important tool for managing systemic risk. See Bank for International Settlements (2009). Return to text 21. See Bank for International Settlements (2012a). Return to text 22. As documented by the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, from 1998 to 2007, AIG, through its subsidiary AIG Financial Products, built up huge indirect exposures to real-estate-backed debt by writing OTC credit protection on structured finance products, including mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations that were in many cases ultimately backed by mortgages. Importantly, because AIG enjoyed a credit rating of AAA for much of this period, its derivatives counterparties did not typically require it to post collateral at the time that new contracts were written. Rather, AIG agreed to post collateral only if contracts fell in market value and AIG itself was downgraded. AIG was first downgraded to AA in the spring of 2005. It faced its first margin calls for credit default swaps covering mortgage-backed collateralized debt obligations in mid-2007. Initially, AIG was able to delay or minimize the collateral it had to post by disputing the contract valuations proposed by its counterparties. But as the bonds it had insured continued to fall in value and AIG was further downgraded, it faced increasing and ultimately insurmountable collateral demands from its derivatives counterparties. For more information, see Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission (2011). Return to text 23. See International Swaps and Derivatives Association (2012). Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: January 04, 2013 Back to Top

Vice Chair Janet L. Yellen At the "A Trans-Atlantic Agenda for Shared Prosperity" conference sponsored by the AFL-CIO, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, and the IMK Macroeconomic Policy Institute, Washington, D.C. Share Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today about the Federal Reserve's efforts to strengthen the recovery and pursue a goal that it shares with the labor movement: maximum employment. 1 As an objective of public policy, maximum employment doesn't appear in the U.S. Constitution, in any presidential decree, or even in the mission statement of the Labor Department. A law passed in 1946 made it a general goal for the U.S. government, but so far the Federal Reserve is the only agency assigned the job of pursuing maximum employment. The 1977 law spelling out that responsibility also assigned the goal of stable prices, and we call this combination of objectives the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. 2 With so many people today unable to find work, it might seem odd to highlight such an ambitious and distant goal for employment. I do so because the gulf between maximum employment and the very difficult conditions workers face today helps explain the urgency behind the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts to strengthen the recovery. My colleagues and I are acutely aware of how much workers have lost in the past five years. In response, we have taken, and are continuing to take, forceful action to increase the pace of economic growth and job creation. In the three years after the Great Recession ended, growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) averaged only 2.2 percent per year. In the same span of time following the previous 10 U.S. recessions, real GDP grew, on average, more than twice as fast--at a 4.6 percent annual rate. 3 So, why has the economy's recovery from the Great Recession been so weak? The slow recovery was preceded, of course, by the deepest recession since the end of the Second World War. The bursting of an unprecedented housing bubble, together with the financial crisis that followed, dealt a huge blow to demand. These developments robbed homeowners of wealth built over a generation, impaired their access to credit, decimated retirement savings, and shattered the confidence of consumers. Businesses slashed capital spending and payrolls, and real GDP contracted by 4.7 percent, more than twice the average for the 10 other recessions since World War II. The Great Recession was also the longest postwar recession--it lasted 18 months, compared with an average of 10 months for the others. The experience of the United States and other advanced economies suggests that deeper recessions are usually followed by stronger-than-average recoveries. While it's also true that longer recessions tend to result in weaker recoveries, even after accounting for this factor, this recovery has been significantly weaker than past experience would have predicted. The dashed line in exhibit 1 shows how real GDP would have been expected to increase in this recovery, based on the experience of the United States and other advanced economies and given the depth and duration of the Great Recession. 4 The gap between the actual and the predicted path of real output gives a sense of how much economic performance has lagged in this recovery. But the implications of this result may seem a little abstract, so let me illustrate the same idea in a way that tries to show the burden that workers continue to bear in this slow recovery. Exhibit 2 shows how employment has declined and recovered following several previous recessions. The employment measure attempts to control for the fact that demographic changes and other factors have altered the trend, or potential, workforce over the years. For example, in the 1970s, the pool of potential workers was expanding as baby boomers and an increasing share of women moved into the labor force, such that employment needed to rise relatively quickly just to absorb these additional workers. More recently, the aging of the population has put downward pressure on labor force participation, so employment hasn't had to grow as quickly to keep pace with the potential workforce. Even after making this adjustment, however, the Great Recession stands out both for the magnitude of the job losses that attended the downturn and for the weak recovery in employment that occurred after the recession ended. In trying to account for why this recovery has been so weak, it is helpful to first consider several important factors that have in the past supported most economic recoveries. By this I don't mean everything that contributes to economic growth, but rather those things that typically play a key role when the U.S. economy is recovering from recession. Think of these as the tailwinds that usually promote a recovery. The first tailwind I'll mention is fiscal policy. History shows that fiscal policy often helps to support an economic recovery. Some of this fiscal stimulus is automatic, and intended to be. The income loss that individuals and businesses suffer in a recession is partly offset when their tax bills fall as well. Government spending on unemployment benefits and other safety-net programs rises in recessions, helping individuals hurt by the downturn and also supporting consumer spending and the broader economy by replacing lost income. These automatic declines in tax collections and increases in government spending are often supplemented with discretionary fiscal action--tax rate cuts, spending on infrastructure and other goods and services, and extended unemployment benefits. These discretionary fiscal policy actions are typically a plus for growth in the years just after a recession. For example, following the severe 1981-82 recession, discretionary fiscal policy contributed an average of about 1 percentage point per year to real GDP growth over the subsequent three years. 5 However, discretionary fiscal policy hasn't been much of a tailwind during this recovery. In the year following the end of the recession, discretionary fiscal policy at the federal, state, and local levels boosted growth at roughly the same pace as in past recoveries, as exhibit 3 indicates. But instead of contributing to growth thereafter, discretionary fiscal policy this time has actually acted to restrain the recovery. State and local governments were cutting spending and, in some cases, raising taxes for much of this period to deal with revenue shortfalls. At the federal level, policymakers have reduced purchases of goods and services, allowed stimulus-related spending to decline, and have put in place further policy actions to reduce deficits. I was relieved that the Congress and the Administration were able to reach agreement on avoiding the full force of the "fiscal cliff" that was due to take effect on January 1. While a long-term plan is needed to reduce deficits and slow the growth of federal debt, the tax increases and spending cuts that would have occurred last month, absent action by the Congress and the President, likely would have been a headwind strong enough to blow the United States back into recession. Negotiations continue over the extent of spending cuts now due to take effect beginning in March, and I expect that discretionary fiscal policy will continue to be a headwind for the recovery for some time, instead of the tailwind it has been in the past. A second tailwind in most recoveries is housing. Residential investment creates jobs in construction and related industries. Before the Great Recession, housing investment added an average of 1/2 percentage point to real GDP growth in the two years after each of the previous four recessions, considerably more than its contribution to growth at other times. 6 During this recovery, in contrast, residential investment, on net, has contributed very little to growth since the recession ended. The reasons are easy to understand, given the central role that housing played in the Great Recession. Following an extended boom in construction driven in large part by overly loose mortgage lending standards and unrealistic expectations for future home price increases, the housing market collapsed--sales and prices plunged and mortgage credit was sharply curtailed. Tight mortgage credit conditions are continuing to make it difficult for many families to buy homes, despite record-low mortgage interest rates that have helped make housing very affordable. I'm encouraged by recent improvement in the residential sector, but the contribution of housing investment to overall economic activity remains considerably below the average seen in past recoveries, as exhibit 4 shows. Beyond the direct effects on residential investment, the extraordinary collapse in house prices resulted in a huge loss of household wealth--at last count, net home equity is still down 40 percent, or about $5 trillion, from 2005. 7 This loss of wealth has weighed on the finances and spending of many homeowners. Households are less able to tap their home equity to deal with economic shocks, fund their children's education, or start new businesses. For some households, the collapse in house prices has left them underwater on their mortgages, and thus less able to refinance or sell their homes. Another important tailwind in most economic recoveries is one that tends to be taken for granted--the faith most of us have, based on history and personal experience, that recessions are temporary and that the economy will soon get back to normal. Even during recessions, households' expectations for income growth tend to be reasonably stable, which provides support for overall spending. In the most recent recession, however, surveys suggest that consumers sharply revised down their prospects for future income growth and have only partially adjusted up their expectations since then ( exhibit 5 ). The recovery has also encountered some unusual headwinds. The fiscal and financial crisis in Europe has resulted in a euro-area recession and contributed to slower global growth. Europe's difficulties have blunted what had been strong growth in U.S. exports earlier in the recovery by sapping demand worldwide. Let me say a few words now, and more later, about the role of monetary policy in this recovery. The Federal Reserve typically plays a large role in promoting recoveries by reducing the federal funds rate and keeping it low until the economy is again on a solid footing. Reducing the federal funds rate tends to reduce other interest rates and boost asset prices, thus encouraging spending and investment throughout the economy. As it has before, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in 2007 started reducing the federal funds rate at the first signs of economic weakness and made sharper rate cuts as the recession deepened. As in some past recoveries that were disappointingly slow, the FOMC has kept rates low well after the end of the recession. But unlike the past, by December 2008 the Committee had reduced the federal funds rate effectively to zero. Because that rate, for practical purposes, cannot be cut further, this level is referred to as the effective lower bound. Without the option of using its conventional policy tool, and with the recession getting worse, the FOMC decided to employ unconventional tools to further ease monetary policy, even though the efficacy of these tools was uncertain and it was recognized that their use might carry some potential costs. The better known of these tools is the purchase of large amounts of longer-term government securities, which is commonly referred to as quantitative easing. The other unconventional tool is known as forward guidance--providing information about the future path of short-term interest rates anticipated by the Committee. Both of these approaches are intended to address a gap caused by the effective lower bound. This gap is the shortfall between what the FOMC likely would do in current economic circumstances, were it able to reduce the federal funds rate below zero, and the reality that the rate can't be cut further. I believe that the Federal Reserve's asset purchases and other unconventional policy actions have helped, and are continuing to help, fill this gap and thus shore up aggregate demand. The evidence suggests that the FOMC's actions have lowered short- and longer-term private borrowing rates and boosted asset prices. 8 However, while this contribution has been significant, lower interest rates may be doing less to increase spending than in past recoveries because of some unusual features of the Great Recession and the current recovery. For example, as I noted, the housing crisis left many homeowners with high loan-to-value ratios and damaged credit records, creating barriers to their access to credit, while the financial crisis led many banks to lend only to borrowers with higher credit scores. As a consequence, the proportion of households that have been able to take advantage of declining rates to refinance their mortgages or to borrow to purchase new homes has probably been lower than in past recoveries. In addition, pronounced uncertainty about economic conditions has weighed on capital spending decisions and may have blunted the normal effect of lower interest rates on business investment. These are the major reasons why I believe this recovery has been so slow. After a lengthy recession that imposed great hardships on American workers, the weak recovery has made the past five years the toughest that many of today's workers have ever experienced. The unemployment rate now stands at 7.9 percent. To put this number in perspective, while that's a big improvement from the 10 percent reached in late 2009, it is now higher than unemployment ever got in the 24 years before the Great Recession. Moreover, the government's current estimate of 12 million unemployed doesn't include 800,000 discouraged workers who say they have given up looking for work. And, as exhibit 6 shows, 8 million people, or 5.6 percent of the workforce, say they are working part time even though they would prefer a full-time job. A broader measure of underemployment that includes these and other potential workers stands at 14.4 percent. The effects of the recession and the subsequent slow recovery have been harshest on some of the most vulnerable Americans. The poverty rate has risen sharply since the onset of the recession, after a decade in which it had been relatively stable, and stands at 15 percent of the population, significantly above the average of the past three decades. 9 Even those today who are fortunate enough to hold jobs have seen their hourly compensation barely keep pace with the cost of living over the past three years, while labor's share of income--as measured by the percent of production by nonfinancial corporations accruing to workers as compensation--remains near the postwar low reached in 2011 ( exhibit 7 ). Compared with the 7.9 percent unemployment rate for all workers, the unemployment rate for African Americans is 13.8 percent. The unemployment rate for those without a high school diploma is 12 percent. For young people--workers 16 to 19 years old--the unemployment rate is 23.4 percent, little changed from the end of the recession. Among African Americans in that age group, 38 percent of those in the labor force can't find a job. Another gauge of the effect that this slow recovery has had on workers is how long it is taking to find a job. At its worst point in the 1980s, the median length of unemployment for those looking for a job was 12 weeks, but the median since the Great Recession has averaged 20 weeks and now stands at 16 weeks. Three million Americans have been looking for work for one year or more; that's one-fourth of all unemployed workers, which is down from 2011's peak but far larger than was seen before the Great Recession. These are not just statistics to me. We know that long-term unemployment is devastating to workers and their families. Longer spells of unemployment raise the risk of homelessness and have been a factor contributing to the foreclosure crisis. When you're unemployed for six months or a year, it is hard to qualify for a lease, so even the option of relocating to find a job is often off the table. The toll is simply terrible on the mental and physical health of workers, on their marriages, and on their children. 10 Long-term unemployment is also a great concern because it has the potential to itself become a headwind restraining the economy. Individuals out of work for an extended period can become less employable as they lose the specific skills acquired in their previous jobs and also lose the habits needed to hold down any job. Those out of work for a long time also tend to lose touch with former co‑workers in their previous industry or occupation--contacts that can often help an unemployed worker find a job. Long-term unemployment can make any worker progressively less employable, even after the economy strengthens. A factor contributing to the high level of long-term unemployment in the current recovery is the relatively large proportion of workers who have permanently lost their previous jobs, as opposed to being laid off temporarily. For example, in past recessions, a considerable share of jobs lost in construction has been temporary, but that isn't the case this time. Construction employment fell from its peak of 7.7 million in 2006 to a low of 5.4 million in 2011. Only about 300,000 of those 2.3 million jobs have returned and most won't, at least for many years. In general, individuals who permanently lose their previous jobs take longer to become reemployed than do those on temporary layoff, are more likely to have to change industries or occupations to find a new job, and earn significantly less when they become reemployed. 11 The greater amount of permanent job loss seen in the recent recession also suggests that there might have been an increase in the degree of mismatch between the skills possessed by the unemployed and those demanded by employers. This possibility and the unprecedented level and persistence of long-term unemployment in this recovery have prompted some to ask whether a significant share of unemployment since the recession is due to structural problems in labor markets and not simply a cyclical shortfall in aggregate demand. This question is important for anyone committed to the goal of maximum employment, because it implicitly asks whether the best we can hope for, even in a healthy economy, is an unemployment rate significantly higher than what has been achieved in the past. For the Federal Reserve, the answer to this question has important implications for monetary policy. If the current, elevated rate of unemployment is largely cyclical, then the straightforward solution is to take action to raise aggregate demand. If unemployment is instead substantially structural, some worry that attempts to raise aggregate demand will have little effect on unemployment and serve only to stoke inflation. This question is frequently discussed by the FOMC. 12 I cannot speak for the Committee or my colleagues, some of whom have publicly related their own conclusions on this topic. However, I see the evidence as consistent with the view that the increase in unemployment since the onset of the Great Recession has been largely cyclical and not structural. For example, the rise in unemployment during the recession was accompanied by a dramatic decline in job vacancies and was widespread across industry and occupation groups. Job losses in the construction and financial services industries were particularly large--hardly surprising given the collapse in these sectors in 2008 and 2009--but manufacturing and other cyclically sensitive industries were hit hard as well, and employment in these industries has likewise recovered slowly. Moreover, if skills mismatch in the labor market has led to an excess supply of workers in some sectors and a shortage of workers in others, then we would expect to see an atypical amount of variation in the balance between job openings and unemployment across sectors. Based on this insight, researchers Ed Lazear and Jim Spletzer constructed quantitative measures of mismatch across industries and occupations. 13 They found that their mismatch indexes were indeed elevated at the end of the Great Recession, as exhibit 8 shows. But these measures have fallen over the course of the recovery to near pre-recession levels. In addition, widespread mismatch between job vacancies and workers across different sectors might be expected to cause wage rates to rise relatively quickly in sectors with many job openings and relatively slowly in sectors with an excess supply of available workers. But work by Jesse Rothstein fails to uncover evidence of such a pattern. 14 This and related research suggests to me, first, that a broad-based cyclical shortage of demand is the main cause of today's elevated unemployment rate, and, second, that whatever problems there may be today with labor market functioning are likely to be substantially resolved as the broader economy improves and bolsters the demand for labor. I don't mean to suggest that there aren't some workers who have been stranded by structural changes in the economy. More can and should be done to help dislocated workers acquire new skills to transition from industries and occupations with fewer opportunities. But making this transition will be much easier in a healthy economy, which is one reason why I am encouraged by the evidence that elevated unemployment is indeed largely cyclical. I will now describe what the Federal Reserve is doing to try to raise demand and create jobs. I have described the two unconventional policy tools that the FOMC has employed since it reduced the target federal funds rate in 2008 to its effective lower bound. The first is large-scale asset purchases, intended to lower long-term interest rates to encourage borrowing for spending and investment. Between 2008 and mid-2011, the FOMC purchased agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS), agency debt, and Treasury securities totaling $2.3 trillion. In 2011, the FOMC began the maturity extension program, under which it reduced its holdings of short-term Treasury securities and used the proceeds to purchase an equivalent amount of longer-term Treasury securities. However, as the scheduled endpoint of that program approached, it became clear that the economy remained weak, and the FOMC took a series of steps to provide further impetus to the recovery. In June 2012, the Committee extended its maturity extension program until the end of the year. Then in September, it made a major new commitment to asset purchases. Unlike its past purchase programs, which were fixed in size, this time the FOMC stated its determination to continue the program, provided that inflation remains well contained, until it judges that there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. The Committee currently intends to purchase MBS and Treasury debt at a pace that will add about $85 billion per month of such securities to the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. In determining the size, pace, and composition of these purchases over time, the Committee will also take into account ongoing assessments of their efficacy and costs. The second unconventional policy tool that the FOMC has used is forward guidance, in the form of more-explicit and more-detailed information about the future path of monetary policy. The longer-term interest rates that most profoundly influence housing demand, capital spending, and asset prices depend on current and expected future levels of short-term interest rates, such as the federal funds rate that has been the Fed's conventional monetary policy tool. Signaling the future path of the federal funds rate can therefore directly affect interest rates today on auto loans, home mortgages, and bonds issued by companies and state and local governments, even when the current level of the federal funds rate cannot be lowered. The FOMC has substantially expanded its forward guidance in recent years. In 2009, the Committee stated that economic conditions "are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period." 15 In 2011, the FOMC said this period would likely last "at least through mid-2013," and extended this date guidance several times. 16 A disadvantage of this calendar-based approach was that it might not be clear whether changes in the date reflect changes in the FOMC's outlook for growth, for inflation, or a shift in the desired stance of policy. In December 2012, the FOMC therefore replaced the date with greater detail on the economic conditions that would warrant maintaining the federal funds rate at its present, exceptionally low level. Specifically, it stated that near-zero rates would likely remain appropriate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends and "at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored." 17 It deserves emphasis that a 6-1/2 percent unemployment rate and inflation one to two years ahead that is 1/2 percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent objective are thresholds for possible action, not triggers that will necessarily prompt an immediate increase in the FOMC's target rate. In practical terms, it means that the Committee does not expect to raise the federal funds rate as long as unemployment remains above 6‑1/2 percent and inflation one to two years ahead is projected to be less than 1/2 percentage point above its 2 percent objective. When one of these thresholds is crossed, action is possible but not assured. Moreover, these thresholds for possible action do not reflect any change in the Committee's longer-run goals. With respect to maximum employment, most FOMC participants continue to estimate that the longer-run normal unemployment rate lies in a range of 5.2 to 6 percent, and the Committee continues to believe an inflation rate of 2 percent (as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures) is most consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. Indeed, the Committee reaffirmed these longer-run goals, first adopted in January 2012, just last month. 18 Of course, our control over the economy is imperfect, and so temporary deviations from the FOMC's specific longer-term goals will sometimes occur. Importantly, these quantitative goals are neither ceilings nor floors for inflation and unemployment, and the Committee will take a balanced approach to returning both measures to their objectives over time. I believe the policy steps we have taken recently are in accord with this balanced approach. With employment so far from its maximum level and with inflation currently running, and expected to continue to run, at or below the Committee's 2 percent longer-term objective, it is entirely appropriate for progress in attaining maximum employment to take center stage in determining the Committee's policy stance. While the Committee's longer-term goals remain unchanged, what has changed is that the FOMC is now providing more information about how it expects to pursue its inflation and employment goals. In particular, we will employ our policy tools, as appropriate, to raise aggregate demand and employment in the context of continued price stability, consistent with our balanced approach. That's good news for workers, because I believe that these steps will increase demand, and more demand means more jobs. It will be a long road back to a healthy job market. It will be years before many workers feel like they have regained the ground lost since 2007. Longer-term trends, such as globalization and technological change, will continue to pose challenges to workers in many industries. Let me close with some words of encouragement. The job market is improving. The progress has been too slow, but there is progress. My colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve are well aware of the difficulties faced by workers in this slow recovery, and we're actively engaged in continuing efforts to promote a stronger economy, more jobs, and better conditions for all workers. Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. I am indebted to members of the Board staff--John Maggs, Karen Pence , Jeremy Rudd , and William Wascher --who contributed to the preparation of these remarks, and to Board staff members Sejla Karalic and Christopher Nekarda for assistance with the exhibits. Return to text 2. The law calls on the Federal Reserve to "promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates." See section 2A of the Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. §225a as added by act of Nov. 16, 1977 (91 Stat. 1387) and amended by acts of Oct. 27, 1978 (92 Stat. 1897); Aug. 23, 1988 (102 Stat. 1375); and Dec. 27, 2000 (114 Stat. 3028)). Return to text 3. The average for other postwar recoveries would be even higher if one were to exclude the three-year periods following the 1957-58 and 1980 recessions, which included at least part of subsequent recessions. Return to text 4. The results in the figure are derived from a model that relates GDP growth in recoveries to recession depth and duration. See Greg Howard, Robert Martin, and Beth Anne Wilson (2011), " Are Recoveries from Banking and Financial Crises Really So Different? " International Finance Discussion Papers 1037 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November). Return to text 5. These calculations are based on Federal Reserve Board estimates of fiscal impetus, which measures the boost to aggregate demand from increased government purchases as well as the effects of changes in tax and entitlement policies on consumer and business spending. See Glenn Follette and Byron Lutz (2010), " Fiscal Policy in the United States: Automatic Stabilizers, Discretionary Fiscal Policy Actions, and the Economy ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-43 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June). Return to text 6. See Michael W. McCracken (2011), " Housing's Role in a Recovery (PDF) ," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Economic Synopses , no. 6 (February), pp. 1-2. Return to text 7. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release Z.1, " Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States ," table B.100, line 49 (Owners' Equity in Household Real Estate). Return to text 8. See Ben S. Bernanke (2012), " Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis ," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1. Return to text 9. Mean annual poverty rate for all people, U.S. Bureau of the Census. Return to text 10. See Steven J. Davis and Till Von Wachter (2011), "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.1-72. Return to text 11. See Louis S. Jacobson, Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan (1993), "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers," American Economic Review, vol. 83 (September), pp. 685-709. Return to text 12. See, for example, the minutes of several recent FOMC meetings held on December 11-12, 2012; September 12-13, 2012; and July 31-August 1, 2012: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 11-12, 2012 ," press release, January 3; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 12-13, 2012 ," press release, October 4; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July31-August 1, 2012 ," press release, August 22. Return to text 13. See Edward P. Lazear and James R. Spletzer (2012), "The United States Labor Market: Status Quo or a New Normal?" NBER Working Paper Series 18386 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September). See also Ayșegül Șahin, Joseph Song, Giorgio Topa, and Giovanni L. Violante (2012), "Mismatch Unemployment," NBER Working Paper Series 18265 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August). Return to text 14. See Jesse Rothstein (2012), "The Labor Market Four Years into the Crisis: Assessing Structural Explanations," Industrial and Labor Relations Review , vol. 65 (July), pp. 467-500. Return to text 15. For example, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), " FOMC Statement ," press release, March 18. Return to text 16. For example, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), " FOMC Statement ," press release, August 9. Return to text 17. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), " FOMC Statement ," press release, December 12. Return to text 18. The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF) , as amended effective on January 29, 2013, is available on the Board's website. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: February 11, 2013 Back to Top

in what has been an unusually weak recovery from a severe recession. I will discuss the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts in these circumstances to speed the U.S. economy's return to maximum employment in a context of price stability. 1 As you know, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has recently taken new steps to achieve this objective. In September, the Committee approved a new program of agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS) purchases, pledging to continue the program--contingent on favorable ongoing evaluations of its efficacy and costs--until there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. 2 Most recently, in December the Committee announced that it would purchase longer-term Treasury securities after completion of the maturity extension program. At the same time, it revamped its forward guidance for the federal funds rate, explicitly linking the path of that rate to quantitative measures of economic performance. 3 My goal today is to explain these policies and why I consider them appropriate under current conditions. With respect to the asset purchase program, I will discuss several economic indicators that I plan to consider in evaluating the outlook for the labor market and then offer my perspective at present on the program's efficacy and costs, an assessment I will continue updating in light of experience. The Outlook for the Labor Market and Inflation The Committee's recent actions are shaped by the fact that the labor market is still far from healed from the trauma of the Great Recession. Despite some welcome improvement, employment remains well below its pre-recession peak, reflecting an economy that is still operating far short of its potential. At 7.9 percent in January, the unemployment rate has declined from its recent peak of 10 percent in October 2009. But that's still higher than unemployment ever reached in the 24 years prior to the recent recession and well above the 5.2 to 6 percent that is the central tendency of FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. With economic activity constrained by fiscal consolidation, the lingering effects from the financial crisis, and the added headwinds of Europe's recession and debt problems, most FOMC participants reported in December that they expected only a gradual decline in unemployment over the next two years, to about 7 percent by the end of 2014. 4 The official estimate of 12 million currently unemployed does not include 800,000 more discouraged workers who say they have given up looking for work. 5 In addition, nearly 8 million people, or 5.6 percent of the workforce, say they are working part time even though they would prefer full-time jobs. A broader measure of underemployment that includes these and others who want a job stands at 14.4 percent, nearly double the 7.9 percent "headline" rate that is most commonly reported in the media. 6 The large shortfall of employment relative to its maximum level has imposed huge burdens on all too many American households and represents a substantial social cost. In addition, prolonged economic weakness could harm the economy's productive potential for years to come. The long-term unemployed can see their skills erode, making these workers less attractive to employers. If these jobless workers were to become less employable, the natural rate of unemployment might rise or, to the extent that they leave the labor force, we could see a persistently lower rate of labor force participation. In addition, the slow recovery has depressed the pace of capital accumulation, and it may also have hindered new business formation and innovation, developments that would have an adverse effect on structural productivity. In contrast to the large gap between actual and maximum employment, inflation, apart from fluctuations due to energy and other commodity prices, has been running for some time now a little below the rate of 2 percent per year that the Committee judges to be consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate. The Committee anticipates that inflation will continue to run at or below 2 percent over the medium term. Moreover, expectations for inflation over the next 5 to 10 years remain well anchored, according to surveys of households and professional forecasters. With employment so far from its maximum level and with inflation running below the Committee's 2 percent objective, I believe it's appropriate for progress in the labor market to take center stage in the conduct of monetary policy. Let me therefore turn to the FOMC's recent actions and describe how I see them promoting this important goal. Forward Guidance for the Federal Funds Rate I'll begin with the Committee's forward guidance for the federal funds rate. The FOMC has employed such forward guidance since 2003 but has relied more heavily on it since December 2008, when the target for the federal funds rate was reduced to its effective lower bound. In current circumstances, forward guidance can lower private-sector expectations regarding the future path of short-term rates, thereby reducing longer-term interest rates on a wide range of debt instruments and also raising asset prices, leading to more accommodative financial conditions. In addition, given the FOMC's stated intention to sell assets only after the federal funds rate target is increased, any outward shift in the expected date of liftoff for the federal funds rate suggests that the Federal Reserve will be holding a large stock of assets on its balance sheet longer, which should work to further increase accommodation. 7 Starting in March 2009, the FOMC's postmeeting statements noted that "economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate for an extended period," and in November of the same year added "low rates of resource utilization, subdued inflation trends, and stable inflation expectations" as justification for this stance." 8 In August 2011, the Committee substituted "at least through mid-2013" for the words "for an extended period." 9 This date was moved further into the future several times, most recently last September, when it was shifted to mid-2015. 10 Also in September, the Committee changed the language related to that commitment, dropping the reference to "low rates of resource utilization and a subdued outlook for inflation." Instead, it emphasized that "a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens," clarifying the Committee's intention to continue to provide support well into the recovery. 11 Finally, last December, the Committee recast its forward guidance for the federal funds rate by specifying a set of quantitative economic conditions that would warrant holding the federal funds rate at the effective lower bound. Specifically, the Committee anticipates that exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate will be appropriate "at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored." 12 An important objective of these changes in forward guidance is to enhance the public's understanding of the Committee's policy strategy and its "reaction function"--namely, how the FOMC anticipates varying its federal funds rate target in response to evolving economic developments. For example, the Committee's initial, calendar-based guidance did not clearly convey the rationale for the specified date. In particular, when the Committee extended the calendar date, the public was left to infer whether the change reflected a deterioration in the Committee's economic outlook or, instead, a decision to increase policy accommodation. In my view, the language now incorporated into the statement affirmatively conveys the Committee's determination to keep monetary policy highly accommodative until well into the recovery. And the specific numbers that were selected as thresholds for a possible change in the federal funds rate target should confirm that the FOMC expects to hold that target lower for longer than would be typical during a normal economic recovery. This improved guidance should help the public to accurately adjust their expectations for the federal funds rate in response to new financial and economic information, which should make policy more effective. 13 In addition, I hope that improved guidance will help to boost confidence in the outlook and bolster households' unusually depressed expectations for income gains, which in turn will spur a faster recovery. A considerable body of research suggests that, in normal times, the evolution of the federal funds rate target can be reasonably well described by some variant of the widely known Taylor rule. 14 Rules of this type have been shown to work quite well as guidelines for policy under normal conditions, and they are familiar to market participants, helping them judge how short-term rates are likely to respond to changing economic conditions. The current situation, however, is abnormal in two important and related ways. First, in the aftermath of the financial crisis, there has been an unusually large and persistent shortfall in aggregate demand. Second, use of the federal funds rate has been constrained by the effective lower bound so that monetary policy has been unable to provide as much accommodation as conventional policy rules suggest would be appropriate, given the weakness in aggregate demand. I've previously argued that, in such circumstances, optimal policy prescriptions for the federal funds rate's path diverge notably from those of standard rules. 15 For example, David Reifschneider and John Williams have shown that when policy is constrained by the effective lower bound, policymakers can achieve superior economic outcomes by committing to keep the federal funds rate lower for longer than would be called for by the interest rate rules that serve as reasonably reliable guides for monetary policy in more normal times. 16 Committing to keep the federal funds rate lower for longer helps bring down longer-term interest rates immediately and thereby helps compensate for the inability of policymakers to lower short-term rates as much as simple rules would call for. I view the Committee's current rate guidance as embodying exactly such a "lower for longer" commitment. In normal times, the FOMC would be expected to tighten monetary policy before unemployment fell as low as 6-1/2 percent. Under the new thresholds guidance, the public is informed that tightening is unlikely as long as unemployment remains above 6‑1/2 percent and inflation one to two years out is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the FOMC's 2 percent longer-run goal. 17 The evidence suggests that the evolution I've described in the Committee's forward guidance, particularly the new thresholds, has shifted the market's view of how forceful the FOMC intends to be in supporting the recovery. In the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Survey of Primary Dealers, for example, participants have repeatedly revised downward the unemployment rate at which they anticipate that tightening will first occur. 18 I mentioned that the FOMC's new forward guidance offers considerable insight into the Committee's likely reaction function, but I should note that the guidance it provides is not complete. For example, the Committee has not specified exactly how it intends to vary the federal funds rate after liftoff from the effective lower bound, although it has stated that "when the Committee decides to begin to remove policy accommodation, it will take a balanced approach." 19 This language is consistent with optimal policy prescriptions that call for lower-for-longer considerations to pertain to the path of the federal funds rate both before and after liftoff. In addition, the guidance specifies thresholds for possible action, not triggers that will necessarily prompt an increase in the federal funds rate. The FOMC statement therefore notes that "in determining how long to maintain a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy, the Committee will also consider other information, including additional measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments." 20 For example, the Committee could decide to defer action even after the unemployment rate has declined below 6‑1/2 percent if inflation is running and expected to continue at a rate significantly below the Committee's 2 percent objective. Alternatively, the Committee might judge that the unemployment rate significantly understates the actual degree of labor market slack. A decline in the unemployment rate could, for example, primarily reflect the exit from the labor force of discouraged job seekers. That is an important reason why the Committee will consider a broad range of labor market indicators. I will discuss some of the additional indicators I plan to consider in judging the strength of the labor market in connection with the Committee's current asset purchase program. The Federal Reserve's Asset Purchase Program Turning next to that program, the Federal Reserve initiated a new asset purchase program last September, extending it in December, under which the Federal Reserve is currently buying agency-guaranteed MBS at a pace of $40 billion per month and longer-term Treasury securities at a pace of $45 billion per month. As with the guidance for the federal funds rate, the Committee tied the new program to labor market conditions, stating that purchases would continue until there is a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market in a context of price stability. 21 The FOMC's earlier large-scale asset purchase programs, in contrast, were fixed in size and carried out on a specified schedule. The Committee has also noted that, in determining the size, pace, and composition of its asset purchases, it would take appropriate account of the likely efficacy and costs of such purchases. The purpose of the new asset purchase program is to foster a stronger economic recovery, or, put differently, to help the economy attain "escape velocity." By lowering longer-term interest rates, these asset purchases are expected to spur spending, particularly on interest-sensitive purchases such as homes, cars, and other consumer durables. Research on the effects of such asset purchases suggests that what matters for the reaction of longer-term interest rates to a purchase program is the extent to which the program leads market participants to change their expectations concerning the entire path of the Federal Reserve's holdings of longer-term securities. 22 Other things being equal, the greater the effect that a purchase program has on the expected path of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings, the more substantial should be the downward pressure on the term premium in longer-term interest rates. 23 By linking the pace of purchases and how long that pace will be maintained to the outlook for the labor market, the program acts as a sort of automatic stabilizer: As market perceptions of the prospects for the economy vary, so too should expectations of the pace and duration of asset purchases. In stating that asset purchases will continue, subject to caveats pertaining to efficacy and costs, until there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, the FOMC established a criterion that differs in three important respects from the forward guidance for the federal funds rate: (1) It is qualitative, not quantitative; (2) it refers to an improvement in the outlook for the labor market rather than an improvement in actual labor market conditions; and (3) it requires the Committee not only to consider progress toward its employment goal, but also to evaluate the efficacy and costs of asset purchases on an ongoing basis. The public is, naturally, eager to understand how the FOMC will approach such complex judgments. I cannot, of course, speak for the Committee on this issue, but I can spell out some of the key factors that will guide my conclusions. A "Substantial Improvement in the Outlook for the Labor Market" The first imperative will be to judge what constitutes a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market. Federal Reserve research concludes that the unemployment rate is probably the best single indicator of current labor market conditions. In addition, it is a good predictor of future labor market developments. Since 1978, periods during which the unemployment rate declined 1/2 percentage point or more over two quarters were followed by further declines over the subsequent two quarters about 75 percent of the time. That said, the unemployment rate also has its limitations. As I noted before, the unemployment rate may decline for reasons other than improved labor demand, such as when workers become discouraged and drop out of the labor force. In addition, while movements in the rate tend to be fairly persistent, recent history provides several cases in which the unemployment rate fell substantially and then stabilized at still-elevated levels. For example, between the fourth quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 2011, the unemployment rate fell 1/2 percentage point but was then little changed over the next two quarters. Similarly, the unemployment rate fell 3/4 percentage point between the third quarter of 2011 and the first quarter of 2012, only to level off over the subsequent spring and summer. To judge whether there has been a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market, I therefore expect to consider additional labor market indicators along with the overall outlook for economic growth. For example, the pace of payroll employment growth is highly correlated with a diverse set of labor market indicators, and a decline in unemployment is more likely to signal genuine improvement in the labor market when it is combined with a healthy pace of job gains. The payroll employment data, however, also have shortcomings. In particular, they are subject to substantial revision. When the Labor Department released its annual benchmarking of the establishment survey data last month, it revised up its estimate of employment in December 2012 by 647,000. In addition, I am likely to supplement the data on employment and unemployment with measures of gross job flows, such as job loss and hiring, which describe the underlying dynamics of the labor market. For instance, layoffs and discharges as a share of total employment have already returned to their pre-recession level, while the hiring rate remains depressed. Therefore, going forward, I would look for an increase in the rate of hiring. Similarly, a pickup in the quit rate, which also remains at a low level, would signal that workers perceive that their chances to be rehired are good--in other words, that labor demand has strengthened. I also intend to consider my forecast of the overall pace of spending and growth in the economy. A decline in unemployment, when it is not accompanied by sufficiently strong growth, may not indicate a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook. Similarly, a convincing pickup in growth that is expected to be sustained could prompt a determination that the outlook for the labor market had substantially improved even absent any substantial decline at that point in the unemployment rate. The Efficacy of Asset Purchases Let me turn next to the efficacy and potential costs of asset purchases, a topic discussed at recent FOMC meetings and that I suspect will be discussed at succeeding meetings as well. I see the currently available evidence as suggesting that our asset purchases have been reasonably efficacious in stimulating spending. There is considerable evidence that these purchases have eased financial conditions, and so have presumably increased interest-sensitive spending. 24 Research suggests that our purchases of mortgage-backed securities pushed down MBS yields and that MBS yields pass through, with a lag, to mortgage rates. 25 Indeed, I see the recent strength in housing and consumer durables, such as motor vehicle purchases, as partly reflecting the effect of reduced borrowing costs. Plausible, albeit uncertain, estimates of the ultimate economic effect of asset purchases can be obtained from simulations of the Board's FRB/US model. Such simulations suggest that a hypothetical program involving $500 billion in longer-term asset purchases would serve to lower the unemployment rate by close to 1/4 percentage point within three years while keeping inflation close to the Committee's 2 percent objective. One issue on which there has been considerable debate is whether low interest rates are doing as much to promote economic growth since the financial crisis as they would have before the financial crisis--whether the interest rate channel of transmission for monetary policy has been attenuated. I agree with those who think this channel has been partially blocked. Individuals who have impaired credit histories, have been unemployed, or hold underwater mortgages are experiencing great difficulty gaining access to credit, whether to buy or refinance a home, finance a small business, or support spending for other needs. Even those with good, but not stellar, credit histories and sufficient income are facing capacity constraints in the mortgage market. However, even if the interest rate channel is less powerful right now than it was before the crisis, asset purchases still work to support economic growth through other channels, including by boosting stock prices and house values. The resulting improvement in household wealth supports greater consumption spending. The Costs of Asset Purchases Turning to the potential costs of the Federal Reserve's asset purchases, there are some that definitely need to be monitored over time. At this stage, I do not see any that would cause me to advocate a curtailment of our purchase program. To address one concern that I have heard, there is no evidence that the Federal Reserve's purchases have impaired the functioning of financial markets, and, while we continue to monitor market function carefully, so long as we pursue our purchases sensibly, I do not expect market functioning to become a problem in the future. Further, I've argued previously, and still judge, that the FOMC has the tools it needs to withdraw accommodation, even if the balance sheet at that time is large. These tools include a new one, approved by the Congress during the financial crisis, which allows the Federal Reserve to pay banks interest on their reserves. A suite of supporting tools, such as reverse repurchase agreements with a wide range of counterparties and the Term Deposit Facility, are routinely tested to make sure that the Federal Reserve is prepared to use them and that they will work as planned. Two additional costs have been discussed at recent meetings of the FOMC. First, the expansion of the balance sheet has implications for the Federal Reserve's earnings from its asset holdings and, hence, for its remittances to the Treasury. Second, some have raised the possibility that the Committee's policies could have negative consequences for financial stability. With respect to the Federal Reserve's remittances, balance sheet operations are intended to support economic growth and job creation in a context of price stability and not to maximize Federal Reserve income. There is a possibility that the Federal Reserve's earnings from its assets and the remittances of those earnings to the Treasury will decline later in the decade, perhaps even ceasing entirely for some period. It is important to note, however, that any losses that could conceivably occur would not impair the Federal Reserve's conduct of monetary policy. 26 Further, even if remittances to the Treasury ceased for a time, it is highly likely that average annual remittances over the period affected by our asset purchases will be higher than the pre-crisis norms. Though our expanded portfolio of longer-term securities has in recent years translated into substantial earnings and remittances to the Treasury, the Federal Reserve has, to be sure, increased its exposure to interest rate risk by lengthening the average maturity of its securities holdings. As the economic recovery strengthens and monetary policy normalizes, the Federal Reserve's net interest income will likely decline. In particular, the Federal Reserve's interest expenses will increase as short-term interest rates rise, while reserve balances initially remain sizable. In addition, policy normalization may well involve significant sales of the Federal Reserve's agency securities holdings, and losses could be incurred in these sales. A recent study by the Board staff considered the effect of a number of scenarios on Federal Reserve income, based on assumptions about the course of balance sheet normalization that are consistent with the exit strategy principles adopted at the June 2011 FOMC meeting. 27 The projections resulting from this exercise imply that Federal Reserve remittances to the Treasury will likely decline for a time. In some scenarios, they decline to zero. Once the Federal Reserve's portfolio is normalized, however, earnings are projected to return to their long‐run trend. The study supports the conclusion that the Federal Reserve's purchase programs will very likely prove to have been a net plus for cumulative income and remittances to the Treasury over the period from 2008 through 2025, by which time it is assumed that the balance sheet has been normalized. 28 Focusing only on the ebb and flow of the Federal Reserve's remittances to the Treasury, however, is not, in my view, the appropriate way to evaluate the effect of these purchases on the government's finances. More germane is the overall effect of the program on federal finances. If the purchases provide even a modest boost to economic activity, increased tax payments would swamp any reduction in remittances. By depressing longer-term interest rates, the purchases also hold down the Treasury's debt service costs. These effects can be quantified through simulations of the Board's FRB/US model. In the simulation I described earlier, a hypothetical program involving $500 billion of asset purchases would reduce the ratio of federal debt to gross domestic product (GDP) by about 1.5 percentage points by late 2018. The lower debt-to-GDP ratio mainly reflects stronger tax revenue as a result of more-robust economic activity. Finally, let me comment on the possibility that our asset purchase program could threaten financial stability by promoting excessive risk-taking, a significant concern that I and my colleagues take very seriously. To put this concern in context, though, remember that during the most intense phase of the financial crisis, risk aversion surged. Even in the aftermath of the crisis, businesses, banks, and investors have been exceptionally cautious, presumably reflecting their concern about future business conditions, uncertainty about economic policy, and the perception of pronounced tail risks relating, for example, to stresses in global financial markets. I see one purpose of the Committee's accommodative policies as promoting a return to prudent risk-taking. Indeed, the return to more normal levels of risk-taking and the associated normalization of credit markets have been vital to recovery from the Great Recession. Of course, risk-taking can go too far, thereby threatening future economic performance, and a low interest rate environment has the potential to induce investors to take on too much leverage and reach too aggressively for yield. At this stage, there are some signs that investors are reaching for yield, but I do not now see pervasive evidence of trends such as rapid credit growth, a marked buildup in leverage, or significant asset bubbles that would clearly threaten financial stability. 29 That said, such trends need to be carefully monitored and addressed, and the Federal Reserve has invested considerable resources to establish new surveillance programs to assess risks in the financial system. In the aftermath of the crisis, regulators here and around the world are also implementing a broad range of reforms to mitigate systemic risk. 30 With respect to the large financial institutions that it supervises, the Federal Reserve is using a variety of supervisory tools to assess their exposure to, and proper management of, interest rate risk. To the extent that investors are reaching for yield, I see the low interest rate environment and not the FOMC's asset purchases, per se, as a contributing factor. It is true that asset purchases put downward pressure on the term premium component of longer-term rates, and that discontinuing purchases would likely cause term premiums to rise. But ending asset purchases before observing a substantial improvement in the labor market might also create expectations that the amount of accommodation provided would not be sufficient to sustain the improvement in the economy. This weakening in the economic outlook might bring down the expected path of the federal funds rate, with the result that longer-term interest rates might not rise appreciably, on net. Moreover, a weakening of the economic environment could also create significant financial stability risks. That said, financial stability concerns, to my mind, are the most important potential cost associated with the current stance of monetary policy. Conclusion In these remarks, I have reviewed recent FOMC policy actions--actions I have supported because I believe they will help foster a stronger recovery and keep inflation close to the Committee's longer-run target. I recognize that the Federal Reserve's highly accommodative policy entails some costs and risks. It will be important both to monitor them and to continue strengthening our financial system. However, insufficiently forceful action to achieve our dual mandate also entails costs and risks. There is the high cost that unemployed workers and their families are paying in this disappointingly slow recovery. There is the risk of longer-term damage to the labor market and the economy's productive capacity. At present, I view the balance of risks as still calling for a highly accommodative monetary policy to support a stronger recovery and more-rapid growth in employment. Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today at NABE's spring conference. References Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009a). " FOMC Statement ," press release, March 18. ------ (2009b). " FOMC Statement ," press release, November 4. ------ (2011a). " FOMC Statement ," press release, August 9. ------ (2011b). " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 21-22, 2011 ," press release, July 12. ------ (2012a). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, September 13. ------ (2012b). " Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement ," press release, December 12. ------ (2013). " Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 11-12, 2012 ," press release, January 3. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2013), " Employment Situation--January 2013 (PDF) ," press release, February 1. Carpenter, Seth B., Jane E. Ihrig, Elizabeth C. Klee, Daniel W. Quinn, and Alexander H. Boote (2013). " The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and Earnings: A Primer and Projections ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-01. Washington: Board of Governors, January. Clarida, Richard, Jordi Galí , and Mark Gertler ( 2000 ). "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory ," Quarterly Journal of Economics , vol . 115 (February), pp. 147-80. D'Amico, Stefania, William English, David López-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012). "The Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects," Economic Journal , vol. 122 (November), pp. F415-F446. D'Amico, Stefania, and Thomas B. King (forthcoming). "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply," Journal of Financial Economics . Gagnon, Joseph, Mathew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011). "The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases," International Journal of Central Banking , vol. 7 (March), pp. 3-43. Hamilton, James D., and Jing Cynthia Wu (2012). "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 44 (February supplement), pp. 3-46. Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore (2012). " The Federal Reserve's Portfolio and its Effects on Mortgage Markets ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-22. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June. Joyce, Michael A.S., Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011). "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom," International Journal of Central Banking , vol. 7 (September), pp. 113-61. Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen (2011). "The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , Fall, pp. 215-65. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 32 (November, part 2), pp. 936-66. Rudebusch, Glenn D. (2006). "Monetary Policy Inertia: Fact or Fiction?" International Journal of Central Banking , vol. 2 (December), pp. 85-135. Stein, Jeremy C. (2013). " Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses ," speech delivered at "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, February 5-7. Swanson, Eric T. (2011). "Let's Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Operation Twist and Its Implications for QE2," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , Spring, pp. 151-88. Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams (2013). " Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates (PDF) ," Working Papers Series 2012-02. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, January. Tarullo, Daniel K. (2012). " Financial Stability Regulation ," speech delivered at the Distinguished Jurist Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, October 10. Woodford, Michael (2012). " Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF) ," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 31-September 1. Yellen, Janet L. (2012a). " Perspectives on Monetary Policy ," speech delivered at the Boston Economic Club Dinner, Boston, June 6. ------ (2012b). " Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications ," speech delivered at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, Calif., November 13. ------ (2013). " A Painfully Slow Recovery for America's Workers: Causes, Implications, and the Federal Reserve's Response ," speech delivered at "A Trans-Atlantic Agenda for Shared Prosperity," a conference sponsored by the AFL-CIO, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, and the IMK Macroeconomic Policy Institute, held in Washington, February 11. 1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System. I am indebted to members of the Board staff--Stephanie Aaronson, Thomas Laubach, John Maggs, Edward Nelson, Devin Saiki, and William Wascher--who contributed to the preparation of these remarks. Return to text 2. See Board of Governors (2012a). Return to text 3. See Board of Governors (2012b). Return to text 4. In the December 2012 Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the central tendency of FOMC participants' projections for the unemployment rate in the final quarter of 2013 and 2014 was 7.4 to 7.7 percent and 6.8 to 7.3 percent, respectively. The central tendency omits the three lowest and three highest projections. The SEP is an addendum to the FOMC minutes and is available at Board of Governors (2013). Return to text 5. The most widely reported estimate of those in the labor force who are unemployed--12.3 million in January, rounded to 12 million, from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)--is seasonally adjusted. (Without seasonal adjustment, the actual estimate of unemployed in January was 13.2 million.) The BLS does not seasonally adjust its estimate of discouraged workers who have left the labor force, an estimate that was 804,000 in January. For more on the employment situation in January, see Bureau of Labor Statistics (2013). Return to text 6. In my view, and as I've argued elsewhere (Yellen, 2013), the evidence indicates that elevated unemployment and the disappointingly slow improvement in the labor market are primarily the result of weak aggregate demand and not an increase in structural unemployment. Return to text 7. Empirical studies of the Committee's date-based forward guidance suggest that changes in that guidance generated an appreciable effect on longer-term yields. See, for example, Swanson and Williams (2012) and Woodford (2012). Return to text 8. See Board of Governors (2009a, 2009b). Return to text 9. See Board of Governors (2011a). Return to text 10. See Board of Governors (2012a). Return to text 11. See Board of Governors (2012a). Return to text 12. See Board of Governors (2012b). Return to text 13. The new guidance should serve as an automatic stabilizer in the face of shifts in the outlook. For example, weaker economic data, suggesting that the thresholds will be reached later than previously anticipated, should lead market participants to push out the expected timing of liftoff, automatically promoting lower longer-term rates and an easing of financial conditions. See, for example, Yellen (2012b). Return to text 14. See, for example, Clarida, Gal í , and Gertler (2000) and Rudebusch (2006). Return to text 15. See, for example, Yellen (2012a, 2012b). Return to text 16. See Reifschneider and Williams (2000). Return to text 17. Setting the threshold above the unemployment rate's longer-run normal level recognizes the fact that monetary policy affects real activity and inflation with a lag so that, assuming inflation is near the Committee's long-run target, it will likely be necessary to begin the process of removing accommodation before the longer-run normal rate is reached. Return to text 18. The Survey of Primary Dealers is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website. Return to text 19. See Board of Governors (2012b). Return to text 20. See Board of Governors (2012b). Return to text 21. The Committee also indicated that it expects the asset purchase program to end well before the target for the federal funds rate is raised. Return to text 22. See Gagnon and others (2011). Return to text 23. Typically, investors demand a higher return as a condition for putting their funds into a longer-term security instead of investing in a series of short-term securities. The difference in expected returns on these two alternative investments is called a term premium. Return to text 24. Empirical studies have drawn on the experience of the Federal Reserve's large-scale asset purchases in recent years, as well as from earlier episodes in the United States and from the experience with asset purchases in the United Kingdom. See, for example, D'Amico and King (forthcoming), D'Amico and others (2012), Gagnon and others (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), Joyce and others (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jørgensen (2011), and Swanson (2011). Return to text 25. See Hancock and Passmore (2012). Return to text 26. See Carpenter and others (2013). Return to text 27. See Carpenter and others (2013) for the Board study; the exit strategy principles are in Board of Governors (2011b). Return to text 28. The extent of realized capital losses on sales of Federal Reserve assets depends on the precise securities sales policy that the Committee eventually decides to undertake. An increase in longer-term interest rates would lower the market value of the securities in the System Open Market Account (SOMA) portfolio. But the Federal Reserve would continue to receive interest income on those securities for as long as they remained in the SOMA portfolio, and securities held to maturity could roll off the portfolio without the Federal Reserve realizing losses on them. While the authors of the Board staff study used particular assumptions about future securities sales that are consistent with the exit strategy principles outlined by the Committee in June 2011, other strategies for sales that are equally consistent might lead to different results. Return to text 29. In a recent speech, Governor Jeremy Stein (2013) discussed several areas in which a noticeable increase in risk-taking behavior has emerged. Return to text 30. See, for example, a speech on financial stability regulation by Governor Daniel Tarullo (2012). Return to text Last Update: March 04, 2013 Back to Top
