U.S. Monetary Policy: A Global View ASSA Annual Meeting “Navigating the Crosscurrents: The Outlook for the Global Economy” January 3, 2020 Mary C. Daly President & CEO Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco The views expressed here are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of anyone else in the Federal Reserve System. The global economic landscape Slower trend growth Sources: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017). Trend growth Lower neutral real rate of interest (r*) Note: Blue-shaded area reflects range of minimum and maximum rates across four countries in sample (U.S., U.K., Japan, and Germany). Source: Jorda and Taylor (2019). Estimates of the neutral real rate of interest: Global and the U.S. Low global inflation Source: OECD. Core CPI inflation, 12-month change Slipping inflation expectations Note: CPI inflation expectations are plotted for the United States, HICP inflation expectations are plotted for the Euro Area. Source: Blue Chip Economic Indicators, OECD. Longer term mean inflation expectations, 5 years ahead 7 What does this mean for policy? 8 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? 9 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? Less room to maneuver in the U.S. Note: Dashed and dotted line segments indicate the median of rate projections from the FOMC's “Summary of Economic Projections” in September 2018 and December 2019. Source: Federal Reserve Board. Federal funds rate (set by FOMC; with projections) And even less room outside the U.S. Source: Bank for International Settlements. Central bank policy rates 12 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? Phillips curve across OECD countries by decade Inflation and unemployment tradeoff more muted Source: Jorda and Nechio (2019). Be humble about where full employment lies Sources: FOMC Summary of Economic Projections, Haver Analytics. SEP Longer Run Unemployment Rate Labor force participation rates And what a good economy can do Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Haver Analytics. 16 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? 17 • Forward guidance & QE were valuable tools in the crisis, but more may be needed • Potential makeup strategies include: price level, nominal income, or average inflation targeting • Most importantly, 2% can’t be a ceiling New framework likely required 18 • Less conventional policy space • More room to find full employment • Fighting inflation from below • Boosting potential growth is imperative What does this mean for policy? Labor force participation rates Activating the labor force will be critical Source: OECD. 20 But central banks can’t do it alone – Fiscal authorities will need to help

FINAL 1 “The New Stone Soup” Mary C. Daly, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Iveagh House Lecture Dublin, Ireland February 10, 2020 6:45PM GMT Remarks as prepared for delivery. Introduction Thank you for that kind introduction and warm welcome. It’s a privilege to be back here in Ireland. This is the first country I ever visited outside of the United States, and I still remember how welcoming you were and how much I learned. So it’s truly a privilege to return. It’s also a great honor to be part of such a distinguished lecture series, addressing such a distinguished audience. Now before I begin, let me say that my remarks tonight are my own, and don’t necessarily reflect the views of anyone else within the Federal Reserve System. As you know, I am a policymaker – a monetary policymaker. Many of us in this room are policymakers or people who support policymakers. And even though we come from different countries and have different areas of expertise, we all share something in common. We each want to serve the public. We each want to be remembered for doing our best. We each want to make contributions that stand the test of time. FINAL 2 But times today are challenging. Countries across the globe face slow growth, low real interest rates, and persistent low inflation. This makes our economies less resilient to everyday shocks and less able to offset them with the tools we’ve traditionally relied on. Moreover, our futures are interconnected. Today, a shock to one country can spill over. Said simply, when one of us stumbles, all of us sway. So my question tonight is: in the face of these challenges, what can we do? The environment we face First, let’s talk about how we got here. And I’ll start with the story in the United States. Large structural shifts are reshaping our economy. First among them is population aging. The baby boom generation is retiring. And this is having a profound effect on labor force growth – especially since subsequent birth cohorts are so much smaller. The numbers tell the story. During the 1970s, as the baby boom generation matured and entered the labor market in large numbers, the U.S. labor force grew by just over 2.5 percent per year. Today, labor force growth is closer to 0.5 percent per year. All else being equal, this shaves about 2 percentage points off potential GDP growth in the United States each year.1 This slower economic growth translates directly into lower interest rates. Slower growth decreases investment by reducing the return on capital.2 At the same time, an aging population increases the pool of available savings, 1 Congressional Budget Office (2020), Fernald and Li (2019). 2 Williams (2017). FINAL 3 as older individuals build and preserve their nest eggs. Together, these forces increase the supply of savings relative to the demand for investment, reducing real interest rates.3 These patterns are not unique to the United States. We could just as easily be talking about Ireland, or any country in Europe, or just about any advanced economy around the world.4 And these are not our only challenges. On top of slower growth and lower real interest rates, central banks are finding it more difficult to achieve their inflation goals, even in good times. Fundamental changes in product markets have been putting downward pressure on prices. And since many markets are global, these changes are spreading – creating a strong disinflationary trend and pulling down inflation and inflation expectations in many parts of the world.5 Combined, these factors – lower inflation, lower inflation expectations, and lower real interest rates – add up to one thing: less monetary policy space when the next downturn emerges. But central bankers aren’t the only ones feeling the pressure. Fiscal policymakers are also constrained. Policies enacted to offset the global financial crisis have left many advanced nations with relatively high debt-to- GDP ratios.6 And most face looming obligations to support their aging populations at levels promised when growth was much faster.7 3 Carvalho, Ferrero, and Nechio (2016). 4 Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017), Jordà and Taylor (2019). 5 Mertens and Williams (2019), Amano, Carter, and Leduc (2019). 6 Badia and Dudine (2019). 7 See for example Rouzet et al. (2019). FINAL 4 So this is where we find ourselves. Facing a future where economic shocks are inevitable, and where monetary and fiscal agents have less policy room to combat them. So again I ask: what can we do? Make stone soup When faced with a tough problem, my first instinct is to turn to books, models, and other formal practices. I’m an economist after all – that’s what we do. But wisdom isn’t only found in traditional tools. Sometimes, you have to turn to tales. One of my favorites is the story of stone soup. It's a European folktale I’m sure you've heard. There are many different versions, including one by Ireland’s own William Butler Yeats. But I'd like to share the story as I learned it. One day, a group of strangers came to a village. They were hungry and knocked on doors, asking for food. But the villagers had very little and were hungry themselves. They closed their doors, pulled their shades, and guarded their meager stocks. So the strangers went into the town center and dragged over a large pot. They built a roaring fire underneath. And to the pot, they added a few stones. As the pot began to boil, the villagers looked on, curious. Some came outside. They asked: what are you doing? The strangers, with confidence, said they were making stone soup. Then they began to imagine aloud how much better it would taste with just a few additional ingredients – an onion, a potato, a beef bone… FINAL 5 No one villager had everything. But each villager had something. So they started contributing to the pot. And when they combined it all, everyone had more. Everyone had enough. I learned this story when I was 7 years old. And it has stuck with me all these years. I share it with you today to emphasize this point. It’s tempting to look at our cupboards and say they’re bare. That the problems we’re facing are too big. That the tools we have at our disposal are too limited. That the best strategy – the only strategy – is to close our doors, pull our shades, and guard our meager resources as long as we can. But this is why we need stories. To help show us a different path. So what lessons from stone soup can we apply to our current situation? Look for strangers The first lesson is to seek the perspectives of others. As policymakers, we like to think that our education, experience, and institutional history are a sufficient foundation for good decision-making. We especially want to think this when times are tough and people are counting on us to fix things. But these are the very circumstances when pausing and engaging with those outside of ourselves is most important. Let me give you an example. For much of our history, central bankers have used the natural tension between unemployment and inflation to evaluate the stance of monetary policy – whether we’ve got it right or not. But over the past decade, this natural tension has been harder to see. Unemployment has fallen dramatically while inflation has remained relatively muted. The question is, what should we make of this? FINAL 6 As a labor economist and policymaker, I’ve thought a lot about this. But I actually found the answer by listening to those less familiar with the tradeoff. Last year, the Federal Reserve conducted a series of listening events as part of our monetary policy framework review. We talked to academics, policymakers, and – most importantly – business and community leaders.8 Here’s what we learned. A historically low unemployment rate does not mean that the labor market is historically tight. And letting the economy run past what we thought was possible has tremendous benefits, especially for disadvantaged groups. Eleven years into the expansion, many more workers have entered the labor force and found jobs than anyone thought possible. By finding full employment experientially, we have improved the lives of countless Americans.9 Importantly, few models would have predicted this. Little history would have told us this was possible. Our traditional approach would have said to curb this growth, eliminate the possibility of unwanted inflation, and be satisfied with bringing unemployment back to its historical average. If we had stayed within this mindset, we might very well have cut the expansion short. In other words, if we hadn’t talked to others – the proverbial strangers – we wouldn’t have seen all that was possible. 8 See the discussion of the “Fed Listens” initiative on the Federal Reserve Board of Governors web site: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of- monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm. 9 See for example Aaronson et al. (2019), Petrosky-Nadeau and Valletta (2019). FINAL 7 We have more than we think Here’s the second lesson from stone soup. The bravest thing the villagers did was to contribute to the soup without fully knowing what would come of it. In other words, they had to act despite considerable uncertainty about the outcome. As policymakers, we face a similar challenge. There is no doubt that we are collectively more constrained than in the past, and that we face greater uncertainty about the impact of our tools and their ability to achieve our goals. Still, we have to act like the villagers. After more than 40 years of fighting to bring inflation down to target, the new economic environment requires that monetary policymakers push inflation up to target.10 And while this will not be easy, we have the tools we need. Options like average inflation targeting, nominal income targeting, and boosting the inflation target are already being researched and widely debated. But having the tools and actually being willing to use them are two very different things. And with very limited experience using these tools in this way, we feel uncertain. We’ve exercised the muscle of pushing inflation down for so long that changing direction feels unnatural. But that is exactly what we will need to do. We need to embrace the mindset that inflation a bit above target is far better than inflation a bit below target in today’s economic environment.11 A similar mindset shift will be necessary for fiscal policymakers. With monetary policy facing its own limits, fiscal policy will need to play a larger 10 Jordà and Nechio (2018). 11 Mertens and Williams (2019). FINAL 8 role in smoothing through economic shocks. But in a world of fiscal discipline, it’s hard to commit to the idea of more. But more is exactly what we need. Expanding the array of automatic stabilizers that form part of the social safety net can help mitigate the depth and duration of economic downturns.12 Think of unemployment insurance, which kicks in automatically when things are bad, helping individuals smooth through a tough time while limiting the amplification of their loss throughout the economy. Although more work is needed, recent research suggests that these types of programs will likely be especially powerful in the new economic reality we face.13 Perhaps most importantly, we need to continue investing in our future growth. Countless research studies have shown that spending on things like infrastructure, research and development, and education pays off and actually increases the productive capacity of the economy in the longer run.14 In today’s low interest rate environment, such investments are relatively easy to finance and will pay a high rate of return in the future.15 We should take advantage of the opportunity. A better global legacy Before I conclude, I’d like to leave you with some final thoughts. 12 See, for example, the panel discussion including Janet Yellen and others at the 2020 American Economic Association Annual Meetings: https://www.aeaweb.org/conference/2020/preliminary/1357. 13 McKay and Reis (2016), Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Trabandt (2016), Boushey, Nunn, and Shambaugh (2019). 14 Fernald (1999), Leduc and Wilson (2012), Jones and Williams (1998), Bosler et al. (2018). 15 Elmendorf (2019). FINAL 9 We all look at the world through the lens of our own experiences. We only know what we know. But what stone soup tells us is that it’s possible to widen our lens. The villagers in the story were able to see a new path forward when they engaged with the strangers. Their mindsets changed. And then, they were brave enough to act. As policymakers, we must actively look for perspectives outside of our own. And we need to be courageous enough to take action, even in times of uncertainty. We don’t have the luxury of waiting for strangers to knock on our doors. So let this be our legacy. In the face of challenges, with limited tools and less than clear paths, we chose an abundance mindset over a scarcity mindset. We came together and worked to hand future generations a better world than the one we inherited. As policymakers, I think we can all live with that. Maybe even be proud of it. Thank you. FINAL 10 References Aaronson, Stephanie, Mary C. Daly, William Wascher, and David W. Wilcox. 2019. “Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring), pp. 333–375. https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/okun- revisited-who-benefits-most-from-a-strong-economy/ Amano, Robert, Thomas J. Carter, and Sylvain Leduc. 2019. “Precautionary Pricing: The Disinflationary Effects of ELB Risk.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2019-26. https://doi.org/10.24148/wp2019-26 Badia, Marialuz Moreno, and Paolo Dudine. 2019. “New Data on World Debt: A Dive into Country Numbers.” IMF Blog, December 17. https://blogs.imf.org/2019/12/17/new- data-on-world-debt-a-dive-into-country-numbers/ Bosler, Canyon, Mary C. Daly, John G. Fernald, and Bart Hobijn. 2018. “The Outlook for U.S. Labor-Quality Growth.” Chapter 2 in Education, Skills, and Technical Change: Implications for Future U.S. GDP Growth, NBER Book Series Studies in Income and Wealth, eds. Charles R. Hulten and Valerie A. Ramey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 61–110. Boushey, Heather, Ryan Nunn, and Jay Shambaugh, editors. 2019. Recession Ready: Fiscal Policies to Stabilize the American Economy. Report, The Hamilton Project and Washington Center for Equitable Growth. Washington, DC: Brookings. https://www.brookings.edu/multi-chapter-report/recession-ready-fiscal-policies-to- stabilize-the-american-economy/ Carvalho, Carlos, Andrea Ferrero, and Fernanda Nechio. 2016. “Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism.” European Economic Review 88, pp. 208–226. Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. 2016. “Unemployment and Business Cycles.” Econometrica 84(4, July), pp. 1,523–1,569. Congressional Budget Office. 2020. The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2020 to 2030. January 28. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56020 Elmendorf, Douglas W. 2019. “Getting and Keeping a High-Pressure Economy.” Remarks at Fed Listens, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, September 26. https://www.hks.harvard.edu/more/about/leadership-administration/deans- office/deans-presentations/getting-and-keeping-high Fernald, John G. 1999. “Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and Productivity.” American Economic Review 89(3, June), pp. 619–638. https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.89.3.619 FINAL 11 Fernald, John, and Huiyu Li. 2019. “Is Slow Still the New Normal for GDP Growth?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2019-17 (June 24). https://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2019/june/is-slow-still-new-normal-for-gdp- growth/ Holston, Kathryn, Thomas Laubach, and John C. Williams. 2017. “Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants.” Journal of International Economics 108, supplement 1 (May), pp. S59–S75. Jones, Charles I., and John C. Williams. 1998. “Measuring the Social Return to R&D.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(4, November), pp. 1,119–1,135. Jordà, Òscar, and Fernanda Nechio. 2018. “Inflation Globally.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working paper 2018-15. https://doi.org/10.24148/wp2018-15 Jordà, Òscar, and Alan M. Taylor. 2019. “Riders on the Storm.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2019-20. https://doi.org/10.24148/wp2019-20 Leduc, Sylvain, and Daniel J. Wilson. 2012. “Roads to Prosperity or Bridges to Nowhere? Theory and Evidence on the Impact of Public Infrastructure Investment.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2012, vol. 27(1, May), eds. Jonathan Parker and Michael Woodford. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 89–142. McKay, Alisdair, and Ricardo Reis. 2016. “The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S. Business Cycle.” Econometrica 84(1, January), pp. 141194. Mertens, Thomas M., and John C. Williams. 2019. “Monetary Policy Frameworks and the Effective Lower Bound on Interest Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2019-01 (June). https://doi.org/10.24148/wp2019-01 Petrosky-Nadeau, Nicolas, and Robert G. Valletta. 2019. “Unemployment: Lower for Longer?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2019-21 (August 19). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2019/august/unemployment-lower-for-longer/ Rouzet, Dorothée, Aida Caldera Sánchez, Theodore Renault, and Oliver Roehn. 2019. “Fiscal Challenges and Inclusive Growth in Ageing Societies.” OECD Economic Policy Paper 27, September. https://doi.org/10.1787/c553d8d2-en Williams, John C. “Three Questions on R-Star.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-05 (February 21). https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2017/february/three-questions-on-r-star-natural-rate-of-interest/

1 “3D Public Servants: The Courage to Be Human” Mary C. Daly, President and Chief Executive Officer Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco South by Southwest 2020 Online, pre-recorded presentation For delivery April 16, 2020 12:00PM PT Introduction Hi, I'm Mary Daly, President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. And welcome to the presentation "3D Public Servants: The Courage to Be Human." We had really hoped, planned to do this at South by Southwest 2020, live from Austin, Texas. But coronavirus got in our way, and so we're going to do it today, here in the audio studio where we record so many of our podcasts. We're going to give you a sneak peek behind the scenes using this video. So welcome, and we really hope you enjoy it. 2 Queasy So let me start by getting one thing out there: I'm an economist — by nature as much as training. And for much of my young life, I had a single mantra: emotions, what are they good for? Then I met my wife, Shelly. She's a psychologist. And she told me that whether I realized it or not, my emotions are there. And then she taught me how to find them. She said to ask myself, “What are you feeling, in your body?” Now, all of you know what I'm talking about. For some of us, it's a flushed face, a tight chest. For me, I feel nauseous, slightly queasy. But the really magical thing she taught me is that nauseous isn't dangerous. It's just uncomfortable. And if you think about that, it's freeing because you can move from trying to push the emotions down to trying to ride through them — and even learn from them. So I started practicing. And then I became President of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. And much to my surprise, the organization had a very different view of emotions than my wife. To the institution, my emotions —this being queasy — seemed very, very dangerous. So this is a conflict, a pretty deep conflict. 3 To get a sense of what I mean, I want to play a clip from a podcast called Zip Code Economies. We launched this podcast last year, just six months after I became the president, and I'm the host. And in the opening lines of the opening episode this is what listeners heard. Mary Daly: I'd like you to use one and only one word to describe Firebaugh. From your heart. Cynthia Best: Without crying? Mary Daly: I actually have cried so many times today that if you cry, it will make me feel belonging. Cynthia Best: Well, it makes me think of my dad. Now if you worked for the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco at that moment, you felt nervous. For some, like me, it was the feeling that comes with any new launch: Will people like it? Will they hate it? Will they simply be indifferent? But for many others, it was a really different thing. The piece that scared them, that left them feeling completely unsure, was my admission of crying. That was the exposed part. That was the hard part, the dangerous part. Because after all, Reserve Bank Presidents — leaders — they don't cry. 4 So that put me in a real bind. My wife of nearly 30 years constantly pushes me to turn towards my emotions. And now the Bank is telling me to run from them, and to run fast. And the only way I could resolve this conflict was to go back to being what I truly am, at my core: an economist. I returned to my lifelong question: emotions, what are they good for? The Profile But I'm getting a little ahead of myself. Let me tell you, just a bit, about how I got here in the first place. I started my career at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco back in 1996. I walked in the door with a PhD from Syracuse University and a post- doc from Northwestern. While my new colleagues had credentials from Harvard, Stanford, Yale — and I did feel just a little bit intimidated — my degrees meant I was one of them, that I belonged. Here's what I didn't tell my colleagues, my new colleagues. I grew up in Ballwin, Missouri, I'm the daughter of a postman and a stay-at-home mom. We weren't poor, but we lived really close to the bone, paycheck-to-paycheck. We had many of the challenges that countless Americans face but are so unwilling 5 to talk about. And eventually, when I was 15, those challenges collapsed in on us. My parents got divorced. My siblings moved in with my grandparents. I moved in with friends. I dropped out of high school, and I cobbled together a whole bunch of different jobs. I drove a donut truck. I worked at the deli. I worked at a Target. And that was my plan, to try to turn one of those jobs into a full time thing. But I met someone who changed my trajectory. Betsy was in her mid-30s. She was busy building her own life and career. She happened to know my former high school guidance counselor, and we met. She saw something in me that I couldn't see in myself. So she took me under her wing. I just remember that so clearly. She first encouraged me to get a GED. I decided to try it because I thought I could get a bus driver job, which was good. It was full time, paid union wages, and it had health benefits. But Betsy's a nudger — she still is a nudger. So after I got my GED, she encouraged me to take another step and to try a semester at college. Of course, I couldn't afford a semester of college. But Betsy could. So she paid $216, and I went back to school. 6 That first semester eventually led to a degree in economics and philosophy from the University of Missouri, Kansas City, and then on to a PhD and a post-doc that landed me at The San Francisco Fed. So the question is, why was I reluctant to share this information with my new peers? Well there were really lots of reasons. I was afraid they wouldn't see me in the same way anymore. I was afraid they would pay a lot less attention to what I did and a lot more attention to what they believed might be true. I was just thinking they would typecast me. They would look through their own experiences and notions rather than see my skills and my contributions with clear eyes. But deeper than any of those fears was my very worst fear. I was afraid that I wouldn't be able to tolerate all of the emotions. My own emotions. Because just behind my degrees and my accomplishments stood this thick wall of fear, pain, and insecurity that I worried would derail me. So I pushed it all away. I just focused on the things that were positive, forward-looking, and above all else, apparently useful, beneficial, some would say likable. For many years, this strategy worked brilliantly. I had a great career and a great life doing this simple self-division, separating the “good Mary,” the “shiny Mary,” from the “bad Mary,” not the one I wanted to show. I got 7 promoted every two or three years. I published articles. My span of influence and responsibility increased. I was getting more and more attention. And then I got a call from a Bloomberg reporter, Jeanna Smialek. And she asked if she could do a profile on me. And like anyone would, I said yes, without really thinking about what that meant. I quickly learned that a profile had a very important component to it that I was not prepared for. The first 30 minutes of the interview were filled with questions about my family, my background, what I'd been through as a kid. All of the things I had tidily sealed up in a box and ignored for most of my life. And if I wasn't so Midwestern, I might have obfuscated — which is really just a fancy word of saying I might have hidden the truth. But I didn't want to disappoint. I didn't want to do a bad interview, so I told her what she asked. And eventually — thankfully — we moved on to talking about my work and I felt relieved. I felt I was back to safety. I could take a deep breath. And then Jeanna asked me one final question. She said, "Mary, how do you think your past has influenced your research?" And without a breath, without a single pause, I said, "Not at all." Now it's really hard to believe that those exact words came out of my mouth. I'd spent most of my career, up until that point researching things like 8 income inequality, unemployment, the role of the social safety net. And at that moment, without hesitation, I said that my past had not influenced me at all. But sometimes absurdity is our best teacher. And what was clear in that moment is that we were getting very, very close to that wall. That wall of my fear, my insecurity, my pain that was just right behind me. Where I was deeply afraid. But what could I do? I'm in an interview, it's going on, it's right there in front of me. So I said, "Well now that you point it out, "I guess influenced me quite a lot," and we finished. And then I fell into what, I realized only much later, people call a vulnerability hangover. I felt exposed. I was highly anxious. I literally dreaded the interview being published, and I barely got anything done in the weeks leading up to its release. On the day it finally came out, I made Shelly read it. I couldn't even look. And as she read it, she started to tear up. She just got those glassy eyes at first, and then these teeny small tears. And when I pressed her, she said, "Mary." I didn't even press her, I just asked her. And she said, "Mary, the article is about the whole you." The economist data-driven Mary that I loved, and the human emotional Mary that she loved. 9 But here's the really surprising part that fundamentally changed me. Shelly was not unique, it wasn't just her bias as my wife or a psychologist. I got cards and letters and handwritten notes applauding my openness, admiring my resiliency, vowing to follow my example. And that's when it hit me. In my effort to hide the parts I didn't want to see or have any one else look at, I had hidden everything personal — all my humanness. I'd spent my entire career only bringing half of myself to work. And probably half of myself to life. I was bringing the part of myself that I felt proud of, that I thought others would like. And I was ignoring the other half, the part that I felt unsure about, the part that I still feel some shame over. The part that made me queasy. So I replaced one hangover with another. It's a kind of addiction once you do it. I moved on from being vulnerable in the interview to regularly experimenting with sharing more of myself, being more open. And of course it did open me up to pain, to insecurity, to fear that I hid behind that wall for so long. But it also allowed me so see resiliency, the fortitude, the sense that tomorrow can be better than today — my internal hopefulness — that now I count among my greatest strengths. Like so many psychologists have told you, those are the antidotes to shame. 10 And my career took off. I started climbing the leadership ranks within the Bank. I started making a bigger name for myself in the profession of economics. And I started to see the impact that my openness had on people, all kinds of people, in the bank, in the Federal Reserve System, and so important to me, in the communities that we serve. And so when the job of President opened up, I applied. And when I got it, I boldly offered that we, the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, will be more open, will be more vulnerable, will be our whole selves, and that at the same time, we will be strong, we will be capable, and above all else, we will be leaders. But for many of the 1700 people who work for the San Francisco Fed, and the 20,000 who work for the Federal Reserve System as a whole, the idea that we were going to collectively pledge to feel queasy left them nervous. And that led me to wonder: why? The Crown I found the answer in an unexpected place. I've been watching a lot of The Crown lately. And there's this great scene where Princess Margaret says 11 to the Queen, "If you show a single crack, we'll see it isn't a crack, but a chasm. And we'll all fall in." It's funny how fictional stories sometimes end up shedding light on our very real lives. Research tells us that when we hear a story, we put ourselves in the position of the character. In fact, images of brain activity show that when someone tells a story, the exact same areas of the brain light up for the story teller and the story listener. It's like we're there. The story allows us to fully engage in another experience as if it's our own. And so I learned from The Crown. And what I heard Princess Margaret say in that episode was this. The role is its own being. It's comforting, and it's safe to people. It makes them feel reassured. If they're allowed to peek behind the curtains to see innocuous things — the goings on of the royal family, the weddings, the trips — it's exciting. But if they peek behind the curtains and see the doubts, the fears, the uncertainty — it's scary. Especially when it's happening in real time and we don't yet know the ending. That's actually not exciting at all. That's a chasm, an abyss and we all fall through. 12 But do we really? My Netflix guilty pleasure is actually based on a very real person — Queen Elizabeth II. And from all accounts of what we know about the Queen, she took the advice of the fictionalized Princess Margaret. We hear a lot about the Queen's style, her jewelry, her dogs, her hats… but very little about herself, her politics, her opinions, her heart. In fact, just last week, in the face of the coronavirus, the Queen gave only her fifth public address of her long reign. And so we live for the drama of The Crown. For the complexity, the intrigue, the humanity on display. We wonder what it would be like to be her. And we talk about what we might have done if we had been in her place. But what I wonder is whether we ever really needed her to be so distant. Would we have benefited from her being more open, more giving, more vulnerable? What if she'd been able to be fully 3D in real time, real life, rather than just in fiction? What have we been missing all of these years? What if we'd seen 10,000 speeches instead of five? Uncertainty When we talk about allowing a leader to be 3D in real time, in real life, it's more complicated than it seems. It's pretty easy to embrace the story of a 13 queen, or a jedi, or any leader, when we know the final outcome and that outcome is good. Then the flaws and the imperfections, they just feel reassuring. The challenges are conquered, everything turns out okay, and we all love that story. I'm a perfect example. Nearly everyone can rally around my past. Love that I struggled, that I overcame challenges and that I still became a leader. As one of my friends and colleagues put it, it's confirmation that the world is surmountable, that good guys can win. But the operative word in that sentence is “win.” The story is over, at least a chapter. The results are clear, I'm the President. It's quite a different thing to experience the challenges in real time, as the story unfolds and the outcome is less certain. So it's understandable that everyone in my organization feels afraid when I ask them to leap off this cliff with me. To be vulnerable, to be open, to be authentic. After all, we don't even know where we will land. So the real question is: what about uncertainty — about the uncertainty of an ending — makes us so uncomfortable? Makes us so nervous? Well, psychology tells us that when the future is unknown, we worry. And we solve for that worry by projecting out the worst-case scenario. This 14 allows us to brace for the impact of that scenario and not be disappointed — or even worse, hurt, harmed. Of course, we're built to do this. You could trace it all the way back to our hunter-gatherer days. The world is full of stimuli, risks and rewards — they're everywhere, and we need to make very quick decisions if we're going to keep ourselves safe. So we sort: Friend or foe? Safe or dangerous? Good or bad? This sorting aided our survival. But what happens when we apply the same sorting to people? Well, put simply, nothing good. But let me explain. I have this great colleague, a friend really, who is, like me, a leader. And we come from very different backgrounds — his is more typical, on the surface easier, some would say privileged. But we mostly see eye-to-eye. And we definitely share the same core values. So we went to this event together some years back and he was much more practiced in that arena than I was, and I thought he might give me a hand. And in a minimum, since we were all swimming towards the same goals, I believed we would be a team. 15 It didn't play out that way. He ended up talking mostly about himself. I found it hard to get a word in edgewise without aggressively interrupting. And when it was over, he just waved at me and moved on to his next thing as if everything had gone as expected. I was incensed. I actually felt duped. I was deeply disappointed. I ranted on about it for at least 15 minutes to anyone who would listen. And then I thought about it for the rest of the day. So the next day, I called my coach, and I recounted what happened. I actually did one of those dramatic retellings, I think you know the kind, when you act out every phrase and every scene so that the listener is right there with you feeling your pain. “He said this… and then he said that… and then he said this other thing… and I'm finished.” And I expected with this dramatic retelling that my coach would validate me. He'd say, "Oh yes, I completely see what's happened." But I got something very different. After listening to the whole play, my whole dramatic retelling, my coach said, "I didn't realize you were so judgmental." Now, judgmental is a loaded word — at least for me — and I was not too happy. I felt he, the coach, was being pejorative, telling me I was bad, or that I had some kind of a character flaw. But what he was really saying was that I 16 was looking at the situation through one lens. And I was making a determination, a judgment, that might not hold up to a broader perspective. I was sorting my colleague, moving him quickly from friend to foe as if I was hunting a million years ago. I felt at risk, I felt in danger, and I resolved the conflict, the uncertainty by making a judgment and then abandoning the story. He was a jerk and I needed to get away from him. Stereovision So you must be wondering right now, what happened? Did I nix him, did I talk to him, did I just let it die? What? Well the first thing I did, at the prompting of my coach, was to try and practice something he called radical empathy — being empathic about my colleague and friend, and curious about his behavior, despite my feelings. That's the radical part. That is no easy thing. And I had to make myself a talisman, an empathy coin. On one side, I'm holding it now, is a beautiful souvenir ball marker from the Pebble Beach Golf Course, and my wife gave it to me. On the other side, I glued a rusted metal washer I found on the street in my neighborhood. And this coin, this empathy coin, it reminds me that no matter what I see on the 17 surface, the beautiful wood, it's hard to know what's underneath, what's really going on with someone. It helps me pause, short-circuit my frustration, and hunt for the positive rather than focusing on the negative. It helps me stay in the story. But I strongly dislike having to rely solely on my talisman. I want to understand, why do I sort when I know it's judgmental and limiting,and it's not my values? So like any good researcher, I turned to Google. I started searching for ways to teach myself how to stay in the story in real time. And I found the answer in a really unlikely place. I stumbled onto this concept of stereovision, which is the mechanics of how our eyes work to create a 3D image in our environment. Simply described, each of our eyes is programmed to take a picture of what we see in front of us — they just do it from slightly different angles. Then these two different pictures get simultaneously sent to our brain, which instantly processes them into a single 3D image. A classic example of how this works — you can find it on the internet — is a picture of two rows of Lifesavers: one red, one green, and both are narrowing down to a point on the page where they almost meet. 18 And if you focus long enough on that area where the green and the red Lifesaver line should cross, or meet, you can see a single Lifesaver coming off the page towards you, even though it's not there. Almost all of us are physically able to do this. But for many of us — and me included — it's a challenge. We don't do it automatically. It takes effort to merge those two Lifesavers into one 3D image. You have to practice. Well it takes even more effort and more practice when you're talking about people. My colleague, my friend was never all good or all bad. He was always both. He shares my values, does good work, and can also be insecure, anxious about his performance, and in those moments, blind to those around him. All of those things are true. But holding them simultaneously, seeing them merged into a single 3D person takes work. And it's emotionally heavy work. It's hard. It can be draining. Because after all, we are built to sort, to avoid worry, to avoid disappointment, and most of all to resolve uncertainty. Now I'm sure, as you listen to that story, that you all have had something that sounds familiar with a colleague or a friend. We've all had experiences like these, probably many of them. And we've all had moments 19 where we've had to come to terms with the fact that our closest friends and our family aren't perfect. But with those individuals, close friends and family, we make the effort to see them in stereovision, to merge the green and the red, to see the full three dimensional person, in the hopes that they'll do the same for us. They'll merge our green and red. This 3D vision that we use or we practice for our friends and family isn't emotionally free, but it's worth the cost for those closest to us. Because ultimately we don't want to lose the relationship. But why should we be willing to pay the cost to see our leaders? Why should we want to stay in their story, riding out their bumps, merging their bad and their good when there is so much possibility for discomfort, for disappointment? And they aren't even our friends or family. It's simple. If we're only willing to see two-dimensional leaders, that's all we'll get: two-dimensional leaders. And two-dimensional leaders can't solve the problems of a 3D world. East Palo Alto I played a clip earlier from Zip Code Economies, but I didn't tell you why I decided to make it. 20 As I mentioned, I'm from Ballwin, Missouri, a town outside of St. Louis. But for the past more than 20 years I've been living in Oakland, California and working in San Francisco. I've always felt comfortable in both environments, and I can understand the views and aspirations of both communities — those in St. Louis in Missouri and those here in the Bay Area in California. Then the 2016 election happened. And every day after the election, when I looked at my Facebook feed I could see a divide, a chasm, playing out on my timeline. Half of the people I knew thought the results of the election were the best news of the year. The other half was convinced that the end of days were upon us. And each half viewed the other half as a threat, an enemy, maybe The Enemy. So I decided to make Zip Code Economies. In my heart, I know that most people want the same things: They want to raise families. They want to have careers. They want to make contributions. And wherever we live these days, our communities face so many of the challenges that easily divide our country. But at the zip code level, people find a way to work it out. And thus, by definition, the stories of zip codes are stories of hope. I could say without reservation, without any hesitation that Zip Code Economies is the single best project of my career. It transformed me. It 21 imprinted upon me. It moved me. Because it demonstrated time and again, in every community we visited, that people can overcome anything when they work together. It confirmed for me that hope is alive and that hope is essential for change. One of the places we visited is East Palo Alto, California. It's a 2.64 — 2.64 it's hard to even imagine — square mile community about 30 miles south of the San Francisco Federal Reserve. It was incorporated back in the 1960s in an effort to fight pervasive red-lining to give minorities a place to have homes and have a community. Throughout its history, EPA has been in a fight for its life. And today is no exception. It remains a mostly minority community where the median income is $55,000 a year. EPA is surrounded on all sides by the staggering wealth of Silicon Valley — think Facebook, think Google. And EPA is constantly working to maintain a sense of community when it feels like they could be swallowed up at any moment. Because they're an island sitting in a sea of wealth. So as part of our zip code filming, taping, I talked to some high school students about what it's like to grow up there. They told me that they loved their community, but they also told me about their trips to downtown Palo Alto — a place just two miles from their front doors where they're treated like 22 the other. Because, remember, East Palo Alto and Palo Alto are not the same place. They told me that in Palo Alto, people cross the street when they see them coming. The restaurant servers treat them like they're second class citizens, because they worry, the restaurant owners, that the kids might not pay. The kids feel like they don't belong. When you look at their faces as they tell you these stories, you can see the pain even though they don't tell you the exact words. You hear the resignation or the acceptance in their voices. So then, you might ask me, “So how, Mary, do they still have hope?” How do I still have hope? Because I met them at a place, these students, I met them at a place called East Palo Alto Academy. And there I met their principal, Amika Guillaume. When I say principal, you probably have ideas in your mind about what she does. I know did before I met her. I thought she managed day to day operations, created policies, made budgets, talked with parents. And Amika does do all of those things. But that's actually not her primary job. You notice this, you see this, right when you walk into her office. There's this huge sign on the wall that says, "The Bulldog Way." At first glance, it seems like a school mascot but it's not. It's a school refrain. It's the terms of 23 their contract. The contract between students and teachers, both of them, the shared contract. And the first item on the list is “Bulldog Love.” Bulldog Love is Amika's North Star. She recognizes that before you can educate the mind, you have to help students feel safe. Before they can learn, they have to feel like they belong. They have to feel like they are loved. But let her tell you in her own words: “I talk about love in this building and give this campus a hundred times more than I do at home. And frankly, my kids here need it in a way that my kids at home don't need it. And that's our obligation, is to make sure they feel loved and safe. And it's not that their parents don't love them, that's not the case at all. It's, does society love them?” Amika is the definition of a 3D public servant. You know it the second you meet her. She vibrates with it — it comes right off of her, the passion, the frustration, optimism, pragmatism, vulnerability, all at the same time. She's fully human, including imperfect. She has good days, and she has bad days. A conversation with her can feel like walking on a high-wire. When one of her kids succeeds and she describes it you feel all of the joy with her — the pride, the hope for the future. You're right there. 24 But she doesn't always have successes. And you know it. And sometimes you feel it. When Amika came to our launch event here at the San Francisco Fed, the launch event for the show, she was up on a stage with other people from Zip Code Economies. I could tell immediately that she was a little off. And then she told us about a meeting that she had just had with one of her former students. He had left East Palo Alto Academy ready to enter college, and now he was at Stanford. But he wasn't there to learn. He was mopping floors with his dad. He had somehow fallen through the cracks after graduation. Amika was swaying. And when we heard her story, we were all swaying with her. You quickly realize when you sit with someone like Amika, that staying with her story will be hard. If you open your heart to the love, the joy, the possibilities she creates at East Palo Alto Academy, you also have to open your heart to the heartbreak you feel when a student or a family falls through the cracks. It feels like a chasm. But here's the deal. There are people in those cracks. And they need Amika. And Amika needs us. And staying in her story is staying in their story. And this will not break us. We will not fall through. 25 Stay in the Story I carry Amika, and the other people I met making Zip Code Economies, with me always. They're the standard I try to hold myself to every day. I try to be as courageous as they are to stay in the game, to stay in the story, even when the ending looks bleak or is simply uncertain. To be 3D myself, and to let others be 3D, as well. I don't always succeed, but I always try. So I will end here with the same ask for you that I have for the 1700 people who work at the San Francisco Fed, and the 20,000 who work for the Federal Reserve System. Join the story. Stay in the story. The ending might not be certain, but the challenges definitely are. And we don't have time to wait for perfect heroes. We must all have the courage to be 3D. We must all have the courage to see in 3D. We must all have the courage to be human. Thank you.
