1 Presentation to UC San Diego Economic Roundtable San Diego, California By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on October 3, 2013 Will Unconventional Monetary Policy Be the New Normal?1 Thank you. It’s a real pleasure to be here in San Diego and I would like to thank the Economic Roundtable for inviting me. The subject of my talk today is the unconventional monetary policies pursued by the Federal Reserve over the past several years and how I see our resulting experiences shaping what will likely be the new normal for monetary policy in the future. I should stress that my remarks represent my own views and do not necessarily reflect the views of others in the Federal Reserve System. Why Unconventional Policy? I’ll begin by describing why the Federal Reserve turned to so-called unconventional policies in the first place. As you will remember all too well, in late 2008 our country was facing the worst financial crisis and recession since the Great Depression. Congress has tasked the Federal Reserve with maintaining maximum employment and price stability. Therefore, in response to the sharp decline in employment and inflation, the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy body, the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, cut the federal funds rate close to zero. The federal funds rate is the short-term interest rate that is our main conventional monetary policy tool. Given the severity of the downturn, the FOMC would have liked to cut rates even further to provide support for the economy and avoid a damaging sustained period of price deflation. 1 I would like to thank Eric Swanson for his assistance in preparing these remarks. 2 However, cutting rates further wasn’t feasible. That’s because nominal interest rates cannot fall much below zero. After all, people can hold cash, which of course pays no interest, rather than lend money out at a negative rate of return. Because of this zero lower bound on the federal funds rate, the Federal Reserve introduced alternative ways to ease financial conditions and thereby stimulate economic growth and job creation. In my talk, I’ll focus specifically on two types of unconventional monetary policy that the Fed and other central banks put in place in recent years. The first is large-scale asset purchases, referred to by most people outside the Federal Reserve as quantitative easing, or QE. The second is forward policy guidance; that is, communicating likely future Fed policy actions. Large-Scale Asset Purchases I’ll start by talking about our large-scale asset purchases, or what we at the Fed affectionately call LSAPs. The Federal Reserve has bought large quantities of longer-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities that are guaranteed by the government. Currently, the Fed is buying $45 billion of Treasury securities and $40 billion of agency mortgage-backed securities each month. The Federal Reserve now owns an astounding $3.5 trillion of these assets in total (Figure 1). What do these asset purchases accomplish? Well, no surprise here, theoretical economists are of two minds on this issue. In a textbook world of perfect-functioning financial markets, LSAPs would have essentially no effect, positive or negative. According to this theory, the price of an asset depends solely on its expected future returns, adjusted for risk. Investors bid prices up and down so that risk-adjusted returns of different kinds of assets are equal. If the price of a specific asset deviated from this level, arbitrageurs would swoop in to take advantage of the discrepancy, knowing that the price would inevitably return to its proper level. So, under 3 these assumptions, since asset purchases by the Fed don’t fundamentally change the risk- adjusted returns to assets, they wouldn’t do anything to asset prices or the economy more broadly. In reality, financial markets don’t work nearly so seamlessly, which creates a potential role for asset purchases to have meaningful effects on the economy. Long ago, future Nobel laureates James Tobin and Franco Modigliani argued that certain financial markets are segmented. Some investors, such as pension funds, have strong preferences or even legal restrictions on where they put their money. Such “preferred habitats” for certain types of investments can interfere with the equalization of risk-adjusted returns to different assets. For example, a pension fund might prefer to hold longer-term fixed income securities like bonds to hedge its longer-term liabilities, even if other investments offer better risk-adjusted returns. The supply and demand of assets in these habitats can affect prices because that pension fund is not going to start buying short-term securities just because the prices of longer-term securities rise. Now, if the Fed buys significant quantities of longer-term Treasury or mortgage-backed securities, then the supply of those securities available to the public declines. As supply falls, the prices of those securities rise, and the yields on these assets decline. The effects extend to yields on other longer-term securities. Mortgage rates and corporate bond yields fall as investors who sold securities to the Fed invest that money elsewhere. Hence, our asset purchases drive down a broad range of longer-term borrowing rates. And those lower long-term interest rates stimulate the auto market, the housing market, business investment, and other types of economic activity. Before the Federal Reserve introduced our first asset purchase program back at the end of 2008, it was hard to know which theory was right and what the effects of these purchases would be. We had no first-hand experience with such policies, and the evidence we did have was based on foreign experiences or case studies of changes in the demand or supply of Treasury 4 securities.2 That void was filled once we and other central banks introduced asset purchase programs and economists were able to carefully study their effects. The evidence to date provides support for the view that financial markets are segmented and that asset purchase programs affect interest rates and other asset prices. There have been numerous studies of the effects of our asset purchases on longer-term interest rates.3 This analysis suggests that each $100 billion of asset purchases lowers the yield on 10-year Treasury notes by around 3 to 4 basis points, that is between 0.03 to 0.04 percentage point. That might not sound like much. But consider the Fed’s so-called QE2 program in 2010-11 that totaled $600 billion of purchases. According to estimates, that program lowered 10-year yields by about 20 basis points. That’s about the same amount that the 10-year Treasury yield typically falls in response to a cut in the federal funds rate of ¾ to 1 percentage point, which is a big change.4 Applying the same logic to the current, much larger, asset purchase program, the implied reduction in longer-term interest rates is roughly 40 to 50 basis points. We just saw a case study of how changes in expectations of the Fed’s asset purchases affect longer-term interest rates and financial conditions more broadly. The FOMC’s announcement on September 18 that it would not change the pace of asset purchases appeared to cause financial market participants to expect that the Fed would purchase more assets in the future than they had previously believed. As a result, in the minutes following the announcement, the yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell by 18 basis points. The effects didn’t stop there. The stock market rose about 1¼ percent and the value of the dollar against the euro fell by around 1 percent. 2 Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack (2004). 3 See, e.g., Williams (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), Swanson (2011), Gagnon et al. (2011), Li and Wei (2013), and Chen, Cúrdia, and Ferrero (2011). 4 See Chung et al (2012), Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005, Table 5). 5 Estimating the effects of LSAPs on the economy—as opposed to financial markets—is inherently harder to do and subject to greater uncertainty. The effects of lower interest rates take place over the course of many months and even years, and over those longer horizons it’s hard to know how much of the change in economic activity was due to the effects of monetary policy or other factors. In some of my own research with colleagues at the Federal Reserve Board, we used the Board’s large-scale macroeconomic model to try to separate the effects of LSAPs from other factors.5 We estimated that the Fed’s $600 billion QE2 program lowered the unemployment rate by about ¼ percentage point compared with what it would have been without the program. We also found that, for asset purchases to have such sizable effects, it’s critical that short- term interest rates remain low for a significant period of time.6 That is, asset purchases are most effective at stimulating the economy when they work in concert with expectations of sustained easy conventional monetary policy. This brings me to the topic of forward guidance. Forward Policy Guidance The second main way the Fed has affected longer-term interest rates and the economy is through forward policy guidance. With the federal funds rate close to zero, we can’t ease policy by moving the funds rate lower. Instead, we have looked for ways to communicate our expectation that interest rates will remain low for quite some time, through our policy statements, meeting minutes, FOMC forecasts, press conferences, and speeches. After each monetary policy meeting, the FOMC releases a statement describing the current state of the economy, monetary policy, and the outlook for both. By varying the forward-looking language in this statement, the FOMC can alter business and investor views 5 See Chung et al. (2012). 6 See Chen, Cúrdia, and Ferrero (2012), and Chung et al. (2012). 6 about where monetary policy, and in particular, the federal funds rate, is likely headed. This in turn affects longer-term interest rates, as investors adjust their views of what they will earn on short-term securities in the future. Thus, the Federal Reserve’s forward policy guidance can affect longer-term interest rates by changing people’s expectations about the future path of monetary policy. Here’s a real-world example that illustrates the power of forward guidance. In the summer of 2011, many private-sector economists thought that the FOMC would start raising the federal funds rate in the next year. The FOMC, however, viewed liftoff from zero as likely to occur further in the future. The Fed was able to shift expectations of future policy and bring it in closer alignment with its own views by changing the forward-looking language in its August 2011 statement. Specifically, the FOMC said that economic conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.” The statement communicated that the FOMC would probably keep the federal funds rate near zero for at least two more years, much longer than many had been expecting. As a result, longer-term interest rates fell by 10 to 20 basis points, similar in size to the response to the QE2 program I mentioned earlier.7 Since August 2011, the FOMC has extended and modified its forward guidance a number of times. Last December, we introduced a new form of forward guidance that explicitly tied our future policy decisions to specific economic events. That is, instead of describing our forward guidance in terms of dates on the calendar, we began to describe the future path of monetary policy in terms of economic variables such as the unemployment rate. Specifically, the FOMC said that it “currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent…” 7 See Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005) and Chung et al. (2012). 7 Note that this 6½ percent threshold for the unemployment rate is not an automatic trigger. The FOMC statement says “at least as long as” the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent. Once unemployment falls below that threshold, we will evaluate how the recovery is progressing and decide on the appropriate course for the federal funds rate then. In my own projection, even though I expect the unemployment rate to fall below 6½ percent early in 2015, I don’t currently expect that it will be appropriate to raise the federal funds rate until well after that, sometime in the second half of 2015. A second form of forward guidance is the FOMC’s projections of the federal funds rate for the next few years. Four times a year, the FOMC participants submit their views on the appropriate future path for the federal funds rate, along with the associated projections for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation. The FOMC projections for the federal funds rate from our September meeting are shown in Figure 2. A large majority of FOMC participants—14 out of 17—expect the first federal funds rate hike to take place in 2015 or later. And after the first rate hike, most FOMC participants expect the funds rate to increase only gradually, with the median projection showing it rising to just 2 percent by the end of 2016. The FOMC policy projections help the public see what the Fed is thinking in concrete numbers. This serves two purposes. First, it can help the public better understand and predict the Fed’s policy intentions and plans. In the parlance of economics, it can help the public understand the Fed’s reaction function; that is, how policy changes as economic conditions evolve.8 This can reduce uncertainty and confusion from public misperceptions of Federal Reserve monetary policy. Second, the fact that there is a range of projections illustrates the fact that the future path of policy is uncertain and depends on how the economy progresses. In other words, policy is not locked on a pre-set course. 8 Rudebusch and Williams (2008). 8 Although I see many benefits to greater transparency and the use of forward guidance, it is important to recognize both the limitations and some potential drawbacks of forward policy guidance. First, for it to be effective, it must be viewed as credible. In severe downturns such as we have just experienced, appropriate forward guidance may stretch years into the future. The public may not give much credence to statements about distant events, especially when the decision-makers may be different than today. Second, clearly communicating monetary policy and the associated data dependence is simply hard to do well. Swings in asset prices in response to Fed communications over the past several months demonstrate how hard it is to convey the FOMC’s policy plans in an evolving economic environment. Just as good communication can reduce confusion and enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy, poor communication can do the opposite. Relatedly, there is the danger that Fed communication takes on too great a role in the public’s thinking about monetary policy. We want to avoid people spending too much time trying to divine Fed utterances and not enough thinking for themselves. The Future of Unconventional Monetary Policy So far, I’ve talked about the types of unconventional policies the Fed has followed since the federal funds rate was brought close to zero and presented evidence that shows how those policies have helped ease financial conditions and supported the economic recovery. Let me now turn to what I see as the lessons we’ve learned that can inform the use of unconventional policies in the future. But before I do that, it’s important to emphasize that unconventional policies will continue to play an important role in providing needed stimulus to the economy for the next few years. The U.S. economy has been gradually improving for over four years now. The unemployment rate, which hit a high of 10 percent back in 2009, has fallen to 7.3 percent. This 9 is considerable progress, but still significantly above the long-term natural rate of unemployment, which I estimate to be about 5½ percent. Thus, despite the improvement in the economy these past four years, we are still falling short of our mandate for maximum employment. In addition, the rate of inflation has been running well below the Fed’s preferred 2 percent goal for some time. We are therefore in a situation where U.S. unemployment is still too high and inflation is too low. The appropriate stance of monetary policy is very accommodative and that will continue to be the case for quite some time. As the U.S. economy continues to improve, it will be appropriate for the Fed to start trimming its asset purchases and eventually stop them altogether. And as the economy further strengthens, and unemployment and inflation get closer to levels in line with the Fed’s mandate, the stance of monetary policy will need to be normalized. When this eventually happens, what will become of our unconventional monetary policies? Are asset purchases and forward guidance here to stay? Or were these policies only appropriate in the exceptional circumstances that ran us up against the zero lower bound? Looking to what will constitute the new normal for future monetary policy, one must weigh the costs and benefits of conventional and unconventional policy tools in different circumstances. The experience of the past several years has taught us that unconventional policies can play a vital role in complementing conventional monetary policy, especially when short-term interest rates are near zero. But it has also revealed some limitations and drawbacks. One important consideration in choosing the appropriate mix of policy tools in the future is the degree of uncertainty associated with their effects on the economy. A basic principle of optimal policy articulated by William Brainard over 40 years ago is: the more uncertain you are about the effects of a policy tool, the more cautiously you should use 10 it, relying more on other instruments in which you have greater confidence.9 We have decades of experience using the short-term interest rate as the main conventional tool of monetary policy and have a reasonably good understanding of how it affects the economy. Given this understanding and the predictability of the effects of conventional policy actions, the short-term interest rate remains the best primary tool for future monetary policy. I also see a continuing role for some aspects of forward guidance. The FOMC policy projections that I discussed earlier represent a shift toward greater transparency by the Fed about the likely future path of the federal funds rate. This should in turn reduce households’ and businesses’ uncertainty about where the economy and monetary policy are heading. More clarity should help households and firms make better borrowing and investment decisions and help make monetary policy more effective. The FOMC’s emphasis on providing an economic basis for forward guidance can also improve transparency. It can help the public understand what we’re doing and why. It’s important for the public to recognize that monetary policy is not set on some fixed schedule, but rather is data-dependent. If the unemployment rate or the outlook for the labor market evolve in a certain way, then monetary policy should respond appropriately. Helping the public to understand this should help make monetary policy more transparent and effective. That said, I expect that the explicit link between future policy actions and specific numerical thresholds, as in the recent FOMC statements, will not be a regular aspect of forward guidance, at least when the federal funds rate is not constrained by the zero lower bound. This guidance has proven to be a powerful tool in current circumstances, when conventional policy stimulus has been limited by the zero lower bound. But such communication is difficult to get right and comes with the risk of oversimplifying and confusing rather than adding clarity. Therefore, in normal times, a more nuanced approach to policy communication will likely be 9 See Brainard (1967). 11 warranted. I see forward guidance typically being of a more qualitative nature, highlighting the key economic factors that affect future policy actions. Of course, if we again find ourselves in a situation where conventional policy has been fully utilized, then we will have the ability to return to more explicit forward policy guidance to provide additional monetary stimulus. We should, however, only resort to asset purchases as a policy tool in special circumstances, such as when the federal funds rate is near zero and we have fully utilized forward policy guidance. Despite all that we’ve learned, the effects of asset purchases are much less well understood and are much more uncertain and harder to predict than for conventional monetary policy. Indeed, the recent outsize movements in bond rates in response to Fed communications about our current asset purchase program illustrate the difficulty in gauging the effects of asset purchases. Moreover, given our limited experience, we can’t be sure of all their consequences, which may play out over many years. When the federal funds rate was at zero and we were still facing a severe recession, it was the right call to turn to asset purchases. But, once the federal funds rate is back to a more normal level, we should relegate asset purchases to a backup role, employing it only when conventional policy and forward guidance fall short. Conclusion Let me offer a final thought. Before the financial crisis and recession, unconventional monetary policies were still mostly theoretical concepts on the drawing board, untested on the battlefield. In practice, they have given central banks such as the Federal Reserve much-needed tools when the traditional policy interest rate is near zero. We have learned a great deal over the past few years about their effectiveness, but also about some of their limitations. As I have discussed, in normal times, certain types of unconventional policies are best mothballed and kept in reserve in case needed. But, more importantly, the experience with these policies means that 12 if another situation arises where we need to call on these tools, we are ready and prepared to do so. Thank you very much. 13 Federal Reserve Assets Figure 1 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000 Source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors. $ billions Treasury securities Short-term liquidity programs GSE securities Other assets 9/25/13 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 FOMC Interest Rate Projections Figure 2 Appropriate pace of policy firming Percent Target federal funds rate at year-end 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 2013 2014 2015 2016 Longer run Source: Federal Reserve Board of Governors (2013). 14 References Bernanke, Ben S., Vincent R. Reinhart, and Brian P. Sack. 2004. “Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2004(2, Fall), pp. 1–78. Brainard, William. 1967. “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy.” American Economic Review 57, pp. 411–425. Chen, Han, Vasco Cúrdia, and Andrea Ferrero. 2012. “The Macroeconomic Effects of Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes.” The Economic Journal 122(564), pp. F289–F315. Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John Williams. 2012. “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44, pp. 47–82. Federal Reserve Board of Governors. 2013. “Federal Open Market Committee: Projections Materials.” September 17–18 meeting, Figure 2. http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcprojtabl20130918.pdf Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack. 2011. “The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases.” International Journal of Central Banking 7, pp. 3–43. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb11q1a1.htm Gürkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson. 2005. “Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements,” International Journal of Central Banking 1, pp. 55–93. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb05q2a2.htm Hamilton, James, and Jing Cynthia Wu. 2012. “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44, pp. 3–46. Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 43(2), pp. 215–287. Li, Canlin, and Min Wei. 2013. “Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(1), pp. 3-39. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q1a1.htm Rudebusch, Glenn D., and John C. Williams. 2008. “Revealing the Secrets of the Temple: The Value of Publishing Central Bank Interest Rate Projections.” In Asset Prices and Monetary Policy, ed. J.Y. Campbell. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 247–284. Swanson, Eric. 2011. “Let’s Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Operation Twist and Its Implications for QE2.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 42(1), pp. 151–207. Williams, John C. 2011. “Unconventional Monetary Policy: Lessons from the Past Three Years.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-31 (October 3). http://www.frbsf.org/economic- research/publications/economic-letter/2011/october/unconventional-monetary-policy-lessons/

1 Presentation to Boise Business and Community Leaders’ Luncheon Boise, Idaho By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on October 10, 2013 Monetary Policy and the Recovery Good afternoon, it’s a pleasure to be back in Idaho. Yesterday, we toured the Simplot potato processing plant out in Caldwell, which is one of the most technologically advanced of its kind. This visit was an apt reminder of the importance of both agriculture and high-tech—not just to this state but to the country as a whole. There’s been increased discussion of monetary policy lately and why the Fed has taken the actions we have. So I’d like to talk to you today about just that—what the goals of monetary policy are, how we got to this point in economic history, and where we’re going. Before I start, I need to give the usual Fed disclaimer that my remarks represent my own views and do not necessarily reflect the views of others in the Federal Reserve System. Now that’s out of the way, let me begin. The goals of monetary policy The aims of the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy are full employment and price stability. These goals are set down in law by Congress. In plain English, that means that there 2 should be enough jobs for everyone and your paycheck should hold its value. These are laudable goals that I think everyone can support. But there’s a lot of noise around monetary policy and our intent can get lost in the ruckus. And when we don’t explain what we’re doing and why, I’m afraid the “MSU principle” can take over. That is, people will just “make stuff up.” So we at the Fed have been making a concerted effort to bring greater clarity and transparency to the discussion. Over the past several years, the Fed has undertaken unconventional monetary policies to achieve our goals.1 In particular, we’ve engaged in large-scale asset purchases, which most people refer to as quantitative easing, or QE. In addition, we’ve increasingly used forward guidance, which seeks to bring more transparency and clarity about our views of the economy and intentions regarding future policy. Combined with near-zero short-term interest rates, these form the basis of our plan to get people back to work and keep inflation low and stable. We took these steps after the country suffered the worst financial crisis and recession since the Great Depression. The Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC—the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy body—cut the federal funds rate to close to zero. That’s the short- term interest rate that acts as our main conventional policy tool. We would’ve liked to have cut rates even further, but nominal interest rates can’t fall much below zero. So, having reached the 1 See Williams (2012, 2013). 3 limit of what we could do with the short-term interest rate, the Fed introduced alternative ways to ease financial conditions to stimulate economic growth and job creation. The correlation between what the Fed is doing and how it achieves those ends isn’t always clear. And we don’t always make it easy, either. I got asked a great question at a talk I gave a while ago. He said, “Look, I understand that the Fed is lowering interest rates, and I understand that that may get some people to buy a car when they might otherwise wait. But why does that create jobs? And why does that reduce unemployment?” I realized then that people don’t always make the connection that if we’re buying more cars, we’re creating more jobs for car manufacturers. And if we’re buying more cars, those companies need to compete for our business… so they don’t just hire people to make the cars, they hire people to market and sell the cars. And with more employees on the assembly line and in the marketing and sales departments, they need more people in HR; they need more people in accounting; they need more people running the offices. So now all those newly-employed autoworkers and marketing managers and accountants have more money in their pockets. They’re doing things they couldn’t do before, like going out to restaurants—which have to hire more waitstaff to serve more customers, and order more stock from Simplot to feed them—or going to the movies or even, yes, buying more cars. It’s the multiplier effect—or cause and effect and effect and effect. 4 So those are the goals of monetary policy—full employment and price stability. But questions remain about why we still need such aggressive monetary stimulus, and for that we have to turn to the circumstances that brought us here. Where we were—the financial crisis This whole question of how we follow the line of cause and effect is important for thinking about where we are in the economic recovery and why. Because part of the reason the recovery hasn’t been as strong as we’d like is the multiple factors that caused the financial crisis – and the events that have affected the recovery. The fifth anniversary of Lehman Brothers’ failing led to a lot of commentary and reflection on the crisis. Which was good, because time and distance can dull the memory of pain or let people oversimplify its causes. It’s easy to forget how bad it was, and just how many elements came together in a perfect storm. It all started in the early 2000s, as we were recovering from the dot-com crash. The housing market started to take off, which was great—it provided a much-needed boost to the economy. As house prices rose, people felt wealthier and started to spend more. Again, great. Buyers flooded into the market and everyone was sure that prices would continue to rise, which was not so great. It meant lenders felt comfortable taking risks. People who didn’t actually have the income to make monthly payments could get a mortgage. But it didn’t matter, because prices 5 kept rising. All of a sudden, people who put little or no money down were sitting on five- and six-digit figures of home equity…which was easily converted into cash to buy SUVs or home entertainment systems or any number of things that had once been luxuries but now seemed within reach. At the same time, financial instruments had gotten more and more complicated and lax regulation meant little or no oversight. Higher returns meant the people creating those instruments cared less about the exposure to risk, or the effects it could have down the line, and more about short-term gain. As mortgages became far more generous and easier to get, the risks increased. But that risk was chopped up, repackaged, and sold on…and on and on…to investors spanning the globe. It reached the point that people who owned the risk often had no clue what they had. Then the bottom fell out. People fell behind on mortgage payments, housing values plummeted, and credit dried up. Financial institutions stopped lending—including to one another—choking off funds they depended on to finance day-to-day operations. Think back to 2008: Fannie and Freddie insolvent; Lehman failed; WaMu; AIG. No one knew how big the problem was or how it would end. It seemed very possible that the financial system as we knew it would collapse entirely. The resulting fear and panic could easily have ushered in a major depression. 6 I want to stress that: as bad as it was, it could have been much, much worse. We could have fallen into the abyss. Historically, that’s what has happened when widespread financial panics cut off the flow of credit. But we didn’t. And that’s in part because the Federal Reserve did what it’s supposed to do: it moved quickly and decisively to safeguard the financial system. I would give the Fed a high grade for the actions we took. But I would probably give us a lower grade for explaining and building support for our emergency programs. When millions of Americans were losing their jobs and their homes, it may have seemed to many as if the Fed was more focused on saving financial institutions than on saving jobs. But a collapsed financial system would’ve taken the finances of average Americans along with it. It would have resulted in a blow to jobs and the economy of cataclysmic proportions, on par with the Great Depression. However, that message got drowned out. And that meant not only confusion but misinformation. Among other things, some people thought we’d launched secret programs that put taxpayer money at significant risk and gave financial institutions below- market interest rates. To be clear, that was simply not the case. Our lending programs were publicly announced and regularly reported on. The lending was backed by good collateral and nearly every penny has been repaid, with interest. In fact, Federal Reserve emergency lending programs generated some $20 billion in interest income. That income, like virtually all net income the Fed generates after expenses, went to the U.S. Treasury. And borrowers did not get 7 below-market interest rates. In fact, many of our programs charged penalty rates—we wanted borrowers to go back to the private markets as soon as they opened up again. That brings us to the recovery. It’s a legitimate question to ask why we aren’t further along in getting everyone back to work. Just as the crisis involved multiple factors that made its impact so devastating, a lot has come together to hinder the recovery. The financial crisis destroyed trillions of dollars of household wealth. It left the housing market in a deep depression. It made credit hard to get. In addition, the federal government’s austerity is exerting a huge drag on economic growth. And all of these factors have converged to create tremendous uncertainty. Let me take those in order. First, the collapse in housing prices caused a $6.5 trillion decline in U.S. household wealth. The stock market plummeted. People got scared, they scaled way back on their purchasing, and consumer spending virtually froze. Second, there’s the fact that past recoveries have generally gotten a push from home construction and spending on household goods. But this recession was caused in part by a burst housing bubble, which meant the usual source of a jump-start was still mired in brutal conditions. Those two factors are tied to the third: tight credit. Unless they had perfect credit, almost no one could get a loan. Small businesses were particularly hard-hit. For one, real estate became 8 less viable as collateral with lenders. For another, many banks they might otherwise rely on were too weak to extend much credit. The fourth factor restraining growth today is federal fiscal policy. This year, income tax rates were raised on upper-income Americans, and the Social Security payroll tax cut was allowed to expire—eating into disposable income that could otherwise go towards consumer spending. On top of that, we have budget austerity and sequestration. While one can debate the longer-run costs and benefits of the resulting deficit reduction, the direct near-term result is a negative contribution by the government sector to GDP growth. This year, it’s estimated that federal fiscal policy is subtracting 1½ percentage points from economic growth.2 While we can formulate monetary policy to chip away at some of these factors, we are less able to control the fifth, which is uncertainty. Business leaders are nervous about tax and regulatory policies. Households are worried about jobs and future income. And everyone is uncertain about Washington’s ability to overcome gridlock, including many in Washington. None of this is bolstering anyone’s confidence. Where we are—the economy today However, in spite of these multiple hurdles, the past four years have seen the U.S economy slowly but surely making progress. Job growth has been fairly steady and positive. 2 See Lucking and Wilson (2013) and Congressional Budget Office (2013). 9 Over the 12-month period through August, the U.S. economy added 2.2 million jobs. I would like to report the jobs data through September, but the federal government shutdown means that data hasn’t been released. One puzzling issue we’ve seen with the labor market is that while job openings are increasing, we aren’t seeing a similar increase in the number of people being hired. There’s been speculation that this might be due to skills mismatch. That is, you can’t hire a mortgage broker to work at Micron. But recent studies show that this isn’t likely to be the main cause for the increase in openings.3 It’s more likely that it’s still an employers’ market—there’s no real sense of urgency to fill an opening unless the rare perfect candidate emerges. I should add that this hesitance in the jobs market has a lot to do with that uncertainty I mentioned. Researchers at the San Francisco Fed find that uncertainty may have added as much as 1¼ percentage points to the unemployment rate by late 2012.4 I expect to see continued steady gains in jobs, with the unemployment rate edging down gradually over time. Turning to inflation, both headline and core measures have stayed low and stable. Let me repeat that. Inflation is low and stable. That may seem surprising to those who have heard that the Fed’s easy monetary policy is leading us to high inflation. In fact, since the start of the 3 See Daly et al. (2012). 4 See Leduc and Liu (2013). 10 recession in December 2007, the inflation rate has averaged 1.5 percent, which is below our 2 percent longer-run goal. Now, that doesn’t mean that individual prices of goods and services never change. The price of gasoline, for instance, fluctuates depending on the price of oil. Oil is a global commodity; its price is influenced by myriad market factors beyond our control. But while prices of some goods are rising, prices of other goods might be falling. Therefore we look at inflation across a broad range of goods and services. Where do I see inflation going in the near future? Over the past year, the Fed’s preferred measure of consumer prices rose 1.2 percent. As the economy continues to improve and unemployment returns to more normal levels, I expect inflation to gradually rise over the next few years, closing in on our 2 percent longer-run inflation goal. Where we’re headed—the outlook Putting all of this together, with monetary policy continuing to provide needed stimulus, I expect economic growth to pick up somewhat next year. As the economy continues to get better, the highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will need to be gradually adjusted back to normal. The first step will be to slow the pace of asset purchases over time, eventually ending them altogether. This won’t be a slamming on the brakes, it will be an easing off the gas. And it will not be a fixed date on the calendar. Instead, it will be in response to economic developments 11 and the progress we have made towards our dual goals of maximum employment and price stability. Looking further ahead, the time will eventually come to raise short-term rates again and normalize the stance of monetary policy. Last December, we introduced a new form of forward guidance that explicitly tied the timing of the liftoff of the federal funds rate to economic events. Specifically, the FOMC said that it “currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range for the federal funds rate will be appropriate at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent….” This threshold for the unemployment rate is not an automatic trigger. The statement says “at least as long as.” Once unemployment falls below that threshold, we’ll evaluate how the recovery is progressing and decide on the appropriate course for the federal funds rate then. In my own projection, even though I expect the unemployment rate to fall below 6½ percent early in 2015, I don’t currently expect that it will be appropriate to raise the federal funds rate until well after that, sometime in the second half of 2015. Conclusion So that’s where we were, where we are, and where we’re headed, and why the Federal Reserve has pursued the monetary policies we have. I hope I’ve addressed some of your questions and concerns about monetary policy and what the Fed’s intentions are. I’m happy to 12 answer any specific ones now, but first want to thank everyone for coming out today. As I said, it’s always a pleasure to be in Boise. References Congressional Budget Office. 2013. “Automatic Reductions in Government Spending – aka Sequestration.” (February) http://www.cbo.gov/publication/43961 Daly, Mary C., Bart Hobijn, Ayşegül Şahin, and Robert G. Valletta. 2012. “A Search and Matching Approach to Labor Markets: Did the Natural Rate of Unemployment Rise?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 26(3), pp. 3–26. Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu. 2013. “Uncertainty and the Slow Labor Market Recovery.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-21 (July 22). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2013/july/us-labor-market-uncertainty-slow-recovery/ Lucking, Brian, and Daniel Wilson. 2013. “Fiscal Headwinds: Is the Other Shoe About to Drop?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-16 (June 3). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2013/june/fiscal-headwinds-federal-budget-policy/ Williams, John C. 2012. “The Federal Reserve’s Unconventional Policies.” FRBSF Economic Letter 2012-34 (November 13). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2012/november/federal-reserve-unconventional-policies/ Williams, John C. 2013. “Will Unconventional Policy Be the New Normal?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-29 (October 7). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2013/october/federal-reserve-unconventional-monetary-policy-large-scale-asset-purchases- forward-guidance/

1 Panel discussion at the NBER Conference By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on October 18, 2013 Lessons from the Financial Crisis for Unconventional Monetary Policy Good afternoon and thank you. It’s a pleasure to be on this panel. The main theme of my remarks is the critical importance of research in designing and implementing unconventional monetary policies since the financial crisis. I hope this isn’t a controversial thesis. Nonetheless, I should note that, as always, my remarks represent my own views and do not necessarily reflect the views of others in the Federal Reserve System. In response to the financial crisis, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the federal funds rate to essentially zero in December 2008 and has kept it there ever since. The FOMC then turned to several “unconventional” monetary policies, such as large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) and forward guidance. In my remarks today, I’d like to focus on the lessons we’ve learned about these unconventional policies and their prospective role going forward. Before the financial crisis, almost everything we knew about unconventional monetary policy came from studies of the Japanese “lost decade” and a few scattered episodes in the U.S., such as Operation Twist in the 1960s. The conventional wisdom at the time seemed to be that longer-term bond purchases didn’t have much effect on longer-term yields. As the financial crisis unfolded, however, central banks became willing to give large-scale bond purchases a try. In late 2008, the Federal Reserve announced it would purchase a large quantity of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, and the announcement of this program had a striking effect on longer-term yields and mortgage rates. In January 2009, the Bank of England followed suit and announced its own asset purchase program, which similarly had sizable effects. 2 One of the early key lessons from the financial crisis is that asset purchases can be a very useful monetary policy tool at the zero lower bound. The success of these announcements led to a flurry of research on the efficacy of asset purchases at the Federal Reserve, at other central banks, and in academia. Table 1 summarizes the results from a number of research papers. Although individual estimates differ, this analysis typically suggests that $600 billion of Fed asset purchases lowers the yield on 10-year Treasury notes by around 15 to 25 basis points.1 To put that in perspective, that’s roughly the same size move in longer-term yields one would expect from a cut in the federal funds rate of ¾ to 1 percentage point. Nevertheless, I don’t see LSAPs as being part of the FOMC’s toolkit once we leave the zero bound behind us. We’re still much less certain about their effects than we are about the effects of changes in the federal funds rate. According to Brainard’s classic analysis, the more uncertain you are about the effects of a policy tool, the more cautiously you should use it. Instead, you should rely more on other instruments in which you have greater confidence.2 We have decades of experience using the federal funds rate as the main tool of monetary policy and we have a reasonably good understanding of how it affects the economy. Given this understanding and the predictability of the effects of conventional policy, the short-term interest rate remains the best primary tool for future monetary policy. Let me turn to our second main unconventional monetary policy tool: forward guidance. Before the crisis, we knew that a large majority of the effects of FOMC announcements could be attributed directly to FOMC statements, rather than to changes in the federal funds rate.3 In 2003 and 2004, the FOMC experimented with forward guidance in the FOMC statement, using phrases such as, “The Committee believes that policy accommodation can be maintained for a 1 See, for example, Gagnon et al. (2011), Joyce et al. (2011), Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011, 2012), Vayanos and Vila (2009), Hamilton and Wu (2011), Christensen and Rudebusch (201 2), Swanson (2011), Li and Wei (2013), and D’Amico and King (2013). 2 See Brainard (1967). 3 See Gürkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2005). 3 considerable period.” In December 2008, this qualitative forward guidance was dusted off and used again, when the FOMC stated that it expected to keep the funds rate low “for some time.” Despite this qualitative forward guidance, however, financial market participants’ policy expectations were consistently much tighter than the FOMC’s own outlook. From 2009 to mid- 2011, expectations from financial markets and surveys such as Blue Chip consistently showed the fed funds rate lifting off from the zero bound within just a few quarters, as can be seen in Figure 1. This bias persisted despite the efforts of many FOMC members to communicate the severity of the downturn and the resulting need for highly accommodative monetary policy for quite some time. To push back against these excessively tight expectations, the FOMC made its forward guidance more explicit. In August 2011, we announced that economic conditions were “likely to warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.” As can be seen in Table 2 and Figure 1, this announcement had a dramatic effect on financial market expectations. It caused an immediate 20 basis point drop in longer-term yields and a jump in the number of quarters the public expected the funds rate to remain at the zero bound. This quantitative forward guidance was extended further in January 2012 to “late 2014” and again in September 2012 to “mid-2015,” also with significant effects (Table 2). This leads me to a second lesson from the financial crisis for monetary policy, which is the importance of clear communication. To add transparency and clarity to our communication of the likely future path of policy, the FOMC also began reporting participants’ projections of the “appropriate path” of the federal funds rate, as well as their projections for output, unemployment, and inflation. These projections are released four times a year. These projections should make it easier for the public to understand both the likely future path of policy and the underlying factors driving our decisions. 4 This past December, the FOMC took another step toward greater transparency by clearly tying its forward guidance to the state of the economy. We said we were likely to keep the funds rate near zero “at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6½ percent,” and as long as inflation is not expected to exceed 2½ percent over the next year or two and inflation expectations remain anchored. This should help the public understand that monetary policy depends primarily on the performance of macroeconomic variables such as unemployment and inflation, rather than on some preset course. This “state-based” forward guidance is still a relatively new experiment in FOMC transparency, but it has already proven to be an effective communication tool, focusing public attention on economic milestones in contemplating future policy decisions. That said, I expect that the explicit link between future policy actions and specific numerical thresholds, as in the recent FOMC statements, will not be a regular aspect of forward guidance, at least when the federal funds rate is not constrained by the zero lower bound. This guidance has proven to be a powerful tool in current circumstances, when conventional policy stimulus has been limited by the zero lower bound. But such communication is difficult to get right and comes with the risk of oversimplifying and confusing rather than adding clarity. Therefore, in normal times, a more nuanced approach to policy communication will likely be warranted. I see forward guidance typically being of a more qualitative nature, highlighting the key economic factors that will affect future policy actions. Of course, if we again find ourselves in a situation where conventional policy has reached its limits, then we will have the ability to return to more explicit forward policy guidance to provide additional monetary stimulus. Let me conclude by saying that the experience with unconventional policies illustrates the critical importance of research in guiding the design and implementation of monetary policy. Before the financial crisis and recession, unconventional policies were still mostly theoretical 5 concepts on the drawing board, untested on the battlefield. Once they were deployed, researchers from across the globe mobilized, quickly filling the vacuum regarding what works and what doesn’t work. This knowledge has been essential for central banks in shaping policies to maximize their effectiveness. Thank you. 6 Empirical estimates of LSAP effects Table 1 Study Sample Method Estimated Effect of $600B LSAP (±2 std errors if avail.)a Modigliani-Sutch (1966, 1967) Operation Twist time series 0 bp (±20 bp) Bernanke-Reinhart-Sack (2004) Japan, U.S. event study 400 bp (±370 bp), 40 bp (±60 bp) Greenwood-Vayanos (2008) post-War U.S. (pre-crisis) time series 14 bp (±7 bp) Krishnamurthy-Vissing-Jorgensen (2011, 2012) post-War U.S., QE1, and QE2 time series 15 bp (±5 bp) Gagnon-Raskin-Remache-Sack (2011) QE1 event study, time series 30 bp (±15 bp), 18 bp (±7 bp) D’Amico-King (2013) QE1 Treasury purchases security-specific event study 100 bp (±80 bp) Hamilton-Wu (2011) U.S., 1990 - QE2 affine no-arbitrage model 17 bp Hancock-Passmore (2011) QE1 MBS purchases time series depends, roughly 30 bp Swanson (2011) Operation Twist event study 15 bp (±10 bp) Joyce-Lasaosa-Stevens-Tong (2011) U.K. LSAPs event study, time series 40 bp Neely (2013) effect of U.S. QE1 on foreign bond yields event study 17 bp (±13 bp) Christensen-Rudebusch (2012) QE1, QE2, and U.K. LSAPs event study, affine no-arbitrage model 10 bp D’Amico-English-Lopez-Salido-Nelson (2012) U.S., pre-crisis weekly time series depends, roughly 45 bp Bauer-Rudebusch (2013) QE1, QE2 event study, affine no-arbitrage model 16 bp Li-Wei (2013) U.S., pre-crisis affine no-arbitrage model 26 bp aSources: Modigliani-Sutch (1966, Sections 3-4), Bernanke-Reinhart-Sack (2004, Table 7, Figure 6, and author’s calculations), Greenwood -Vayanos (2008, Table 2), Krishnamurthy-Vissing- Jorgensen (2011, Section 4), Gagnon et al. (2011, Tables 1 -2), D’Amico-King ( 2013, Figure 5), Hamilton-Wu (2011, Figure 11), Hancock -Passmore (2011, Table 5), Swanson (2011, Table 3), Chung et al. (Figure 10), Joyce et al. (2011, Chart 9), Neely ( 2013, Table 2), Bauer-Rudebusch (2013, Table 6), Christensen-Rudebusch (2012, Table 8), D’Amico et al. (2012, Conclusions), Li-Wei (2013, Tables 3, 6). Almost all of these estimates involve author’s calculations to renormalize the effect to a $600 bil lion U.S. LSAP. 7 Blue Chip expectations for fed funds liftoff Figure 1 Note: Number of quarters until federal funds rate expected to rise above 37.5 basis points. Source: Swanson and Williams (2013), from Blue Chip Consensus Survey data. 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 Quarters + FOMC issues "mid-2013" guidance Forward guidance effects on market expectations Table 2 Sources: Gürkaynak, Sack, and Wright (2007) and Federal Reserve Board of Governors. Treasury Yield Maturity 3-month 6-month 1-year 2-year 5-year 10-year FOMC drops "considerable period" language on Jan. 28, 2004 Jan. 27, 2004 0.89 0.96 1.17 1.69 3.08 4.39 Jan. 28, 2004 0.92 0.98 1.30 1.86 3.22 4.49 change (bp) 3.0 2.0 12.5 16.6 13.9 10.3 FOMC projects near-zero funds rate "at least through mid-2013" Aug. 8, 2011 0.05 0.07 0.17 0.27 1.13 2.59 Aug. 9, 2011 0.03 0.06 0.13 0.17 0.93 2.36 change (bp) -2.0 -1.0 -4.3 -9.9 -20.4 -22.8 FOMC projects near-zero funds rate "at least through late 2014" Jan. 24, 2012 0.04 0.07 0.15 0.24 0.95 2.19 Jan. 25, 2012 0.04 0.07 0.14 0.20 0.85 2.11 change (bp) 0.0 0.0 -0.2 -3.8 -9.4 -8.0 FOMC projects near-zero funds rate "at least through mid-2015" Sep. 12, 2012 0.10 0.13 0.20 0.23 0.74 1.82 Sep. 13, 2012 0.10 0.13 0.20 0.22 0.70 1.79 change (bp) 0.0 0.0 -0.2 -0.9 -3.7 -2.9 8 References Bauer, Michael, and Glenn Rudebusch. 2013. “The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases.” International Journal of Central Banking, forthcoming. Bernanke, Ben, Vincent Reinhart, and Brian Sack. 2004. “Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2004-2, pp. 1–78. Brainard, William. 1967. “Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy.” American Economic Review 57, pp. 411–425. Christensen, Jens, and Glenn Rudebusch. 2012. “The Response of Interest Rates to US and UK Quantitative Easing.” Economic Journal 122, pp. F385–F414. Chung, Hess, Jean-Philippe Laforte, David Reifschneider, and John Williams. 2012. “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44, pp. 47–82. D’Amico, Stefania, William English, David López-Salido, and Edward Nelson. 2012. “The Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale And Effects.” Economic Journal 122, pp. F415–F446. D’Amico, Stefania, and Thomas King. 2013. “Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases: Evidence on the Importance of Local Supply.” Journal of Financial Economics 108(2), pp. 425–448. Gagnon, Joseph, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack. 2011. “The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchases.” International Journal of Central Banking 7, pp. 3–43. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb11q1a1.htm Greenwood, Robin, and Dimitri Vayanos. 2008. “Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns.” NBER Working Paper 13806. Gürkaynak, Refet, Brian Sack, and Eric Swanson. 2005. “Do Actions Speak Louder Than Words? The Response of Asset Prices to Monetary Policy Actions and Statements.” International Journal of Central Banking 1, pp. 55–93. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb05q2a2.htm Gürkaynak, Refet S., Brian Sack, and Jonathan H. Wright. 2007. “The U.S. Treasury Yield Curve: 1961 to the Present.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54(8), pp. 2291–2304. Hamilton, James, and Jing Cynthia Wu. 2011. “The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 44, pp. 3–46. Hancock, Diana, and Wayne Passmore. 2011. “Did the Federal Reserve’s MBS Purchase Program Lower Mortgage Rates?” Journal of Monetary Economics 58(5), pp. 498–514. Joyce, Michael, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong. 2011. “The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing.” International Journal of Central Banking 7(3), pp. 113–161. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb11q3a5.htm Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2011. “The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest Rates.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 215–265. 9 Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. 2012. “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt.” Journal of Political Economy 120(2), pp. 233–267. Li, Canlin, and Min Wei. 2013. “Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve’s Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs.” International Journal of Central Banking 9(1), pp. 3–39. http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb13q1a1.htm Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Sutch. 1966. “Innovations in Interest Rate Policy.” American Economic Review 56, pp. 178–197. Modigliani, Franco, and Richard Sutch. 1967. “Debt Management and the Term Structure of Interest Rates: An Empirical Analysis of Recent Experience.” Journal of Political Economy 75, pp. 569–589. Neely, Christopher. 2013. “Unconventional Monetary Policy Had Large International Effects.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Working Paper 2010-018D. http://research.stlouisfed.org/wp/2010/2010- 018.pdf Swanson, Eric. 2011. “Let’s Twist Again: A High-Frequency Event-Study Analysis of Operation Twist and Its Implications for QE2.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp. 151–188. Swanson, Eric, and John C. Williams. 2013. “Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2012-02. http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/wp12-02bk.pdf Vayanos, Dimitri, and Jean-Luc Vila. 2009. “A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates.” NBER Working Paper 15487.

Community Leaders Luncheon Speech Los Angeles, CA By John C. Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco For delivery on November 8, 2013 Rebalancing the Economy: A Tale of Two Countries Thank you so much, Dominic, both for your kind introduction and years of dedicated service to the Federal Reserve. It’s a privilege to speak to such a distinguished group of business and civic leaders. It is often said that when America sneezes, the world catches cold. This adage is a modern adaptation of the 19th century saying—attributed to Prince Klemens von Metternich— that, “When Paris sneezes, Europe catches cold.” Today, economic developments in China have obvious repercussions across borders as well, affecting everyone from small emerging economies to Europe and the United States. We live in a world where our economic fates are increasingly intertwined. Indeed, Metternich’s saying is now often heard with China as the proverbial sneezer. Of course, this audience already knows of the growing influence of China and Asia more broadly. California is at the forefront in terms of business and cultural connections with Asia. Indeed, I often hear from people here that the outlook across the Pacific is more relevant to their businesses and organizations than events in Europe or elsewhere. With that in mind, I’d like to talk to you today about how two countries—alike in some ways, very different in others—need to rebalance their economies over the next decade. Those shifts will be similar in some aspects, divergent in others; but both face the challenge of how to best manage the transition to longer-run rebalancing. Before I go any further, I should say here 1 that the views expressed today are wholly my own and do not necessarily reflect those of others in the Federal Reserve System. It is not surprising that understanding economic and financial issues in Asia more broadly, and China specifically, is fundamental to any discussion of global economics. This is particularly acute at the San Francisco Fed, where fostering expertise on Asian markets is a long- standing focus. Deep knowledge of Asia is essential to formulating monetary policy; to promoting the stability of global financial markets; and to carrying out our responsibilities in banking supervision. Continuing a tradition started many years ago by San Francisco Fed President Bob Parry and carried on by his successor, Janet Yellen, I try to make a fact-finding trip to Asia at least once a year. I’ve now had the pleasure of visiting China and other Asian countries on several occasions. The state of two economies We all know China has been a modern miracle of growth since Deng Xiaoping’s reforms were introduced in 1978. For over 30 years, China’s real GDP growth has averaged about 10 percent annually—a sustained pace of growth that is unrivaled in economic history. 1 To put that in perspective, over the same time period, the rest of the world’s economies experienced an average annual growth rate of real GDP of about 3 percent.2 China’s growth has been driven by an almost unbelievable pace of urbanization, both natural and managed. The share of China’s population living in cities more than doubled between 1980 and 2005, to 44 percent.3 At its 2 1 See Aizenman and Spiegel (2010). 2 See International Monetary Fund (2013). 3 See Woetzel et al. (2009). current pace, we can expect to see one billion people living in cities by 2030. That’s more than the current populations of the United States, Russia, and the entire European Union combined. This accomplishment is breathtaking. However, that exceptional pace cannot be maintained forever, and we’ve seen China’s rate of growth slow in recent years. What China faces now is the same core issue confronting the United States: coming to terms with a new normal for the future. Both countries are looking to create more long-term stability by rebalancing the role that domestic consumption plays in their economies. They are simply coming at it from opposite directions. The United States would like to decrease its reliance on consumption as the engine of growth, relying more on domestic investment and exports. China would like to see more consumer spending at home, and less reliance on domestic investment and exports. The contrast is striking: Chinese household consumption accounted for around 36 percent of GDP in 2011; the comparable figure for the United States is 69 percent. For comparison, in the euro zone, private consumption spending averages around 58 percent of GDP. China’s remarkable growth over the past 30 years has been fostered by an emphasis on investment and exports. As the returns to investment have declined over time, and slower global growth provides diminishing opportunities for exports, this model has become less sustainable. The focus must instead shift—as China’s leaders have indicated they would like—to domestic household consumption. The United States, by contrast, has for decades consumed and invested more than it produced, relying on imports to fill the gap. The question for America is: How long can it sustain this imbalance? With every passing year that we don’t live reasonably within our means, 3 and do not produce the goods to pay for our consumption, our debt to creditors outside the country grows. This reduces our net wealth and makes us more dependent on foreign lenders. Responses to the financial crisis Every country’s economic path is informed by its history. As William Faulkner once wrote, “The past is never dead. It’s not even past.” Likewise, both China’s and America’s present conditions—and their outlooks for the future—are greatly influenced by one of the most significant events of the recent past: the global financial crisis. China responded to the crisis with a large-scale stimulus program, increasing lending by banks to large, state-owned enterprises that totaled 4.4 percent of GDP over three years.4 These loans were used largely to finance infrastructure and housing projects. China’s growth had fallen from a recent high of 14 percent, in 2007, to 9 percent in 2009. With the boost from the government stimulus, growth rebounded to 10 percent in 2010. That is, in the face of the worst global financial crisis in many decades, China’s economic growth actually increased. This was widely viewed as a success, and an indication that China could persevere despite continuing problems abroad. However, the slow recovery in the United States and the sustained downturn in Europe dampened demand for Chinese exports. This has been a powerful reminder—unpleasant though it was for China—that our fortunes are often enmeshed. These external burdens contributed to slowed growth, and the World Bank now expects the Chinese economy to grow just 7.5 percent this year. I say “just”… obviously, most countries would be thrilled with 7.5 percent. 4 4 See Horton and Ivanova (2009). While China’s growth has been greatly affected by forces outside its borders, the U.S. economy has been influenced by many internal conditions. In the United States, the response to the crisis was threefold: federal government fiscal stimulus in the form of tax cuts and increased spending; programs aimed at restoring confidence and strength to the financial system; and, last but not least, a large dose of monetary stimulus. This threefold response helped avoid a complete meltdown of the financial system and cushioned the blow to our economy. Nonetheless, it was not enough to stave off a severe recession or the myriad factors hindering the recovery. The financial crisis dealt a devastating blow to household wealth—a full $6.5 trillion of housing wealth was lost. Combined with a deeply depressed stock market, this sent spending off a cliff. That went for all aspects of spending, including—or, I should say, especially—home construction and household goods. This was a particular problem, because those areas of spending have typically spurred recoveries in the past. The situation was exacerbated by especially tight credit, bringing lending to a virtual standstill. I don’t need to remind anyone here how bad it was. California’s economy was especially hard hit. We experienced one of the biggest housing booms and therefore one of the most severe housing collapses. California was also much more affected by the sharp slowdown in international trade. This was felt particularly here in Southern California, where Los Angeles and Long Beach are two of the nation’s primary global ports. And even the tech industry was dealt a severe blow. While employment overall fell by 3.8 percent nationally in 2009, Southern California saw a 5.6 percent drop. 5 The reversal of federal fiscal policy from stimulus to austerity in the intervening years has added to the factors holding back the economic recovery. On one side, we had income tax increases on upper-income Americans and the expiration of the Social Security payroll tax cut. These took a bite out of disposable income that could otherwise have been directed toward spending. On the other, budget austerity and sequestration have resulted in a drag on spending by the public sector. Overall, it is estimated that federal fiscal policy is subtracting 1½ percentage points from economic growth this year.5 On top of this, the gridlock and brinkmanship in Washington, D.C., adds to uncertainty and saps confidence. This makes households and businesses reluctant to undertake big investments, further slowing the recovery. Again, California stands to feel this pain more severely. The effects of sequestration have been neither fully felt nor fully implemented. Next year, a further $20 billion of federal defense cuts will take effect, which will impact a state with both a large defense contracting sector and numerous military bases. Anecdotally, the uncertainty of further government cuts and the threat of continued gridlock in Washington has put the aerospace and defense industries in something of a holding pattern. The effects on these industries will be felt from contractors to construction workers. Challenges Each country has challenges to overcome. China’s tightly-controlled financial sector creates systemic barriers to rebalancing the economy. There are limits on investment abroad, and a repressed financial system at home keeps interest rates low and constrains the kinds of 6 5 See Lucking and Wilson (2013) and Congressional Budget Office (2013). investments people can make. The system also favors state-owned enterprises, hindering small businesses and discouraging entrepreneurship. It has also contributed to the rise in shadow banking. China’s fiscal stimulus program encouraged the state-owned banks to lend even further to large, state-owned enterprises. The government was rightly worried about investment expanding too quickly—after all, over- investment and the resulting bubble in the U.S. housing sector offered a cautionary tale. So China sought to restrict wider borrowing. Local governments and smaller enterprises, however, were eager for capital to invest in their own areas, and financial institutions, unsurprisingly, found ways around government constraints. This created a surge in China’s shadow banking sector, which increased its informal and private lending to small businesses and wealthy customers, much of it off-balance-sheet. There is inherent risk to any loan. Whether sanctioned by the government or made in the shadow banking sector, there is always a possibility it will turn bad. Considering that the heavy borrowing by local governments was directed towards infrastructure projects that often yielded little, if any, return in the short term, timely repayment is a very real risk. Therefore, many observers fear that excessive lending and borrowing may be creating a bubble, similar to the one that burst in the United States just seven years ago. China’s corporate and household debt as a share of GDP rose 45 percent in the four years from 2008 to 2012. This is more than twice the increase in US debt during its credit boom between 2002 and 2008, when the debt-to-GDP ratio rose by about 20 percent. Such rapid increases in borrowing have historically raised the risk of crises in other countries. 7 Real estate is another area of concern. On one of my recent visits, a Chinese professor told me that everyone in China has two homes or more, because houses are cheap, interest on savings accounts is low, and there are no property or capital gains taxes. Though he was obviously exaggerating, it does highlight the attractiveness of property, in light of the high household saving rate and limits on alternative investment opportunities. In response to bubble concerns, China’s government has been working since 2010 to bring down real estate prices by setting limits on bank lending and raising down-payment requirements for mortgages. Despite these efforts, recent data show China’s property prices continuing to rise. The resilience of housing prices in the face of concerted policy efforts adds to the worry that a bubble may be forming. This is a fine line to walk: Though a real-estate bubble is a risk, there is also concern that economic growth could weaken too much and too quickly. With the rest of the global economy lacking the steam to pull China’s economy along, it must find some domestic engine for growth. In the United States, the challenges we face are also about striking balance. One of the sharpest lessons of the past five years is the need to keep financial institutions from taking big risks. However, risk-aversion can mean tight credit, and limited access to capital for small businesses and entrepreneurs may be the price of caution. In addition, while we need to rebalance our economy away from consumption over the longer term, in the short run, consumer spending is critical to getting the economy moving again. Addressing the challenges 8 So these are the states of both nations as we move towards change. China faces a balancing act in the near term: Needed economic reforms come at the price of slower growth; but a growth-boosting injection of credit comes at the cost of greater risk to the banking system and the economy down the road. China’s policymakers have ruled out a stimulus package of the size implemented during the crisis. They have also acknowledged that reforms cannot be implemented without a slowdown. In various speeches, China’s leadership has said that it will tolerate some deceleration of growth—though not breaching a floor of 7 percent—in order to shift focus from exports to domestic consumption. As many of you know, we expect to hear the new government’s economic plans at the Third Plenary Session of the 18th Central Committee, which starts tomorrow. As always, China’s policy making will be consensus-driven and won’t happen overnight. China’s leadership has reason to be guarded in approaching far-reaching reforms. It is perhaps the safer option to loan money to a state-owned enterprise than to risk it on a consumer who may not pay back a home mortgage—the memories of America’s recent past are all too fresh. As Cicero counseled, “Advice is judged by results, not intentions.” And to encourage more consumer spending is to encourage a certain amount of debt. That debt is, however, manageable, and ultimately necessary if China wants to hasten an economic rebalancing. 9 On our side of the Pacific, the issues and discussion are much messier. In the near term, we are still facing a slow recovery and high unemployment. However, the cure for what ails us here and now is in some respects at odds with the longer-term rebalancing we need to achieve. Which leads me to the rebalancing of economies. Unsurprisingly, economists can’t agree about the primary reason China’s domestic consumption is so low and what should be done about it. One possibility is the population’s focus on saving—in large part to cover the cost of health care, education, and preparation for old age. This is exacerbated by China’s massive and rapid urbanization; as it currently stands, most social services, such as education and health care, are administered in one’s home city. This means that much of the migrant workforce can’t access these services in their new cities, and is forced to save to cover those expenses. While local authorities may balk at paying more for social services, there is a trade-off: addressing such structural barriers would free up workers’ income that could be spent locally, stimulating host cities’ economies. Another issue is increasing income inequality—something we in the United States can relate to. What money is flowing to households is concentrated largely in the expanding class of wealthy citizens, rather than in rural and middle-class families. The final and perhaps most important factor is that, while corporate profits have risen, a comparable rise in individual income has not followed. Again, something that has happened in the United States as well. Low borrowing costs for state-supported firms, combined with low wages for many workers, have helped business profits at the expense of households. 10 If China is to rebalance the economy away from exports and towards domestic consumption, there must be an increase in household incomes. That means higher wages and dividend payments from firms. Further liberalization of the financial system will also help, as higher deposit rates and more investment options would boost spending power. Furthermore, China’s citizens must feel a sense of stability and certainty regarding their future. When we’re worried about the future, the natural response is to want to save more. So, even if these steps were to be taken, the question remains whether China’s middle- and rural-class citizens are willing to become bigger spenders anytime soon. Turning to the United States, over the longer run we need to increase investment in education, physical capital, technology, and infrastructure. We will also need to put federal fiscal policy on a sustainable path, which involves making some tough decisions about taxes and spending. Importantly, spending less on current consumption will free up resources for investment areas that foster greater production and will increase the size of the economy over the long term. However, to succeed at these longer-run goals, we first need to get our economy working at its full potential. That’s where the Federal Reserve and monetary policy come in. Since the early days of the crisis and recession, the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy body, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), has been taking strong actions to foster economic recovery and get people back to work. We lowered short-term interest rates to near zero almost five years ago. The goal was simple: With very low interest rates, households and businesses are more willing to spend. This increase in demand for goods and services leads businesses to hire more workers. 11 It is a testament to the stubborn weakness of the recovery that even with short-term interest rates near zero, it wasn’t enough to get the economy back on track. We turned to unconventional monetary policies to get longer-term interest rates and mortgage rates down. These included large-scale asset purchases—referred to as “quantitative easing” or QE by people outside the Fed and LSAPs by people inside the Fed—and forward guidance—which is economist-ese for communicating more clearly what we think will happen with interest rates over the longer term. By combining these tools with our conventional policy—the short-term interest rate—we are looking to get more money flowing into the economy to increase demand for goods and services and spur hiring. Although the pace of the recovery in the United States has been frustratingly slow, we have made a lot of progress, and I expect that to continue for the foreseeable future. We’ve added nearly 6.4 million jobs over the past three years, with 2.2 million of those in the past year alone. Although the unemployment rate is still high at 7.2 percent, it has been steadily falling. A lot of the growth has been in interest-sensitive sectors such as autos, durable goods, and housing. This is evidence that our monetary policy medicine is working. Looking ahead, with continued support from accommodative monetary policy, I expect the economy to continue to expand and add a significant number of jobs, resulting in declining unemployment next year and in 2015. I also expect inflation, which has been quite low over the past year, to gradually move back to the Fed’s preferred rate of 2 percent. Conclusion 12 China and the United States are both facing challenges in rebalancing their economies for the future. There are parallels and contrasts, but both face the difficult challenge of maintaining growth today while moving toward a new normal of longer-run economic health for tomorrow. Thank you very much. 13 References Aizenman, Joshua, and Mark M. Spiegel. 2010. “Takeoffs.” Review of Development Economics 14(2), pp. 177–196. Congressional Budget Office. 2013. “Automatic Reductions in Government Spending—aka Sequestration.” February. http://www.cbo.gov/publication/43961 Horton, Mark, and Anna Ivanova. 2009. “The Size of the Fiscal Expansion: An Analysis for the Largest Countries.” International Monetary Fund, February. http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/ 2009/020109.pdf International Monetary Fund. 2013. “World Economic Outlook Databases.” http://www.imf.org/external/ ns/cs.aspx?id=28 Lucking, Brian, and Daniel Wilson. 2013. “Fiscal Headwinds: Is the Other Shoe About to Drop?” FRBSF Economic Letter 2013-16 (June 3). http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic- letter/2013/june/fiscal-headwinds-federal-budget-policy/ Woetzel, Jonathan, et al. 2009. “Preparing for China’s Urban Billion.” McKinsey Global Institute Report, March. http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/urbanization/preparing_for_urban_billion_in_china 14
