Remarks at the CPMI’s 25th Anniversary Conference - FEDERAL RESERVE BANK of NEW YORK Speech Remarks at the CPMI’s 25th Anniversary Conference June 30, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure’s 25th Anniversary Conference, Bank for International Settlements, Basel, Switzerland As prepared for delivery We have three distinguished panelists in this opening session—Claudio Borio, the head of the Monetary and Economic Department at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), William Coen, the Secretary General of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and Masa Kono, who is currently the Vice-Minister of International Affairs at the Japan Financial Services Agency and who earlier chaired the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) during the development of the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI). They will offer their thoughts on how the role of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure (CPMI) has changed and is likely to continue to evolve in its task of setting and helping implement global financial, operational and risk standards for the world’s key financial market infrastructures (FMI). Before I turn to our panelists, let me offer some brief comments on the evolution of the CPMI. As I see it, there have been three broad complementary trends that have been important in influencing the evolution of the CPMI and have contributed to its increased importance over time. As always, what I have to say represents my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 The first trend has been the development of a global financial system. This has increased financial system interdependencies and, hence, the importance of harmonizing standards across national regulatory regimes. It also has made it more important to avoid regulatory arbitrage and race to the bottom types of behavior that could weaken the resiliency and robustness of the global financial market infrastructure. The second trend is the increasing importance of FMIs within the financial system. As trading across a more complex array of instruments and products proliferates, and as more trades are centrally cleared, well-managed FMIs play an increasingly important role within the financial system. The third trend stems directly from the first two. With the global financial system becoming more prominent and FMIs playing a bigger role within this global financial system, it has become ever more essential that major FMIs operate safely. When run well, they mitigate risk. But, run poorly, they could be a source of contagion and risk propagation throughout the global financial system. This means that the CPMI’s work has become much more critical in ensuring a safe and sound global financial system. The growing influence of the CPMI can be seen in its success in staying ahead of these trends. It was the CPMI’s analysis and standard-setting that led to the adoption of payment systems that provide “real-time gross settlement with intraday finality,” securities settlement systems that ensure “delivery versus payment,” and foreign exchange settlement systems that ensure “payment versus payment.” This fundamental evolution of systemically important payment and settlement systems was instrumental in mitigating significant sources of systemic risk and laying a solid foundation to support the increasingly global financial system. In parallel, it was the CPMI that first defined the concept and processes of "central bank oversight of payment and settlement systems" and implemented the associated principles for "central bank cooperation." This also supported many central banks and securities regulators in their efforts to gain explicit legal responsibility and power to apply standards aimed at promoting broader "financial stability" and containing "systemic risk.” Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act in the United States is a good example of this. This means that many authorities now have greater capacity and responsibility to apply and enforce the PFMI as requirements, where previously a number of regulators were constrained to treating earlier standards merely as "recommendations." Taken together, we have made considerable progress in terms of the global regulatory regime to reflect the growing importance of FMIs and central counterparties (CCPs) within the financial system. Let me briefly list a few of the accomplishments of the PFMI: They are now being globally adopted and implemented as mandatory, and the specific requirements themselves have been raised substantially. For example, there is a new, explicit liquidity standard to ensure that payments are made on time and in the right currency, and the cover 2 requirement for complex CCPs is much tougher than what came before it. They also provide greater detail and scope, including more detailed guidance with respect to CCPs and trade repositories (TRs). They are underpinned by a detailed disclosure framework, an agreed assessment methodology and a rigorous monitoring program to both promote consistency in how authorities have adopted and implemented the PFMI as well as, importantly, to promote consistency in outcomes. They provide greater harmonization to avoid regulatory arbitrage and race to the bottom behaviors. They include requirements and guidance for FMIs to implement their own viable recovery and orderly wind-down plans. As I see it, great progress has been made, but there is more work to do in a number of areas: Greater harmonization and better cross-border mutual recognition practices; CCP recovery and resilience as well as coordination with other authorities to ensure incentives are aligned; Appropriate incentives for CCPs so that the profit motive does not conflict with having a safe system that can absorb large shocks without destabilizing the financial system; and Availability of data in TRs on a cross-border basis to facilitate the development of a more complete picture of market activities and emerging risks. I am very fortunate to have had the opportunity to chair the Committee during the period in which the PFMI were created. I recognize that this was just an initial step in the process, but it was an essential first step. Subsequent CPMI committees, under the leadership of Paul Tucker and Benoit Coeure, have been working with the other Basel Committees, the Financial Stability Board (FSB), IOSCO and individual country regulators to continue to take this effort forward. We have placed a lot of financial stability eggs in the FMI basket. It is important that we monitor and oversee that basket carefully. I would now like to turn the floor over to our first panelist, Claudio Borio. Claudio, the floor is yours, you have 10 minutes. 1 Shari Bower, Caren Cox, Alex Merle-Huet, John Rutigliano, Johanna Schwab, Larry Sweet and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

August 12, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks before the Rochester Business Alliance, Rochester, New York As prepared for delivery Good morning. I am very pleased to be in Rochester and to have the opportunity to speak here today. I would like to give a special thanks to the Rochester Business Alliance for their part in making this event possible. My meeting with you today is part of our continuing efforts to understand what is going on at the grassroots level of our economy. During these trips I meet with a variety of stakeholders, which helps me develop a comprehensive view of local conditions and a fuller understanding of any major issues and concerns. This is my third visit to Rochester in the past five years. In my remarks, I will provide an overview of the regional economy and discuss the importance of workforce development, both for Rochester and the broader economy. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve System. 1 Reinvention in the Rochester Economy Like Upstate New York more generally, the Rochester economy has lagged behind the nation for a number of decades. During this time, Rochester has been going through a prolonged period of economic transformation and reinvention. While this process has been a painful one in many respects, I believe that it is well-advanced and the area is well-positioned for the years ahead. Rochester possesses a unique set of assets that are key to a successful economic reinvention, including a highly skilled workforce, world class higher education institutions, a diverse economic base, and a forward-looking cooperative engagement between the public and private sector. There is strong evidence that Rochester is already tapping into these assets to great success. To prove my point, I would note that my colleague, Narayana Kocherlakota, is leaving the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis at the end of the year to become a professor at the University of Rochester. Our loss is your gain! Consider how we got to where we are today. Early in the 20th century, with the explosive growth of the "Big 3"—Kodak, Xerox and Bausch & Lomb—came a great demand for innovative and skilled workers, especially engineers, who helped make these companies highly successful. At their peak, these three companies alone employed roughly 20 percent of the Rochester workforce. These workers developed innovative new products and processes, which often resulted in patents that remain valuable to this day. In many ways, Rochester, and its skilled workforce, was ahead of its time. These companies, though, came under pressure in the 1980s as a result of rapid technological changes and increased global competition. As their employment began to decline, some workers left the area while others remained. Indeed the legacy of the "Big 3" lies not in what was lost, but in what remains in the skills and entrepreneurial spirit of the many talented people that are here today. Some of these talented people started their own companies, while others found different ways to contribute their unique talents to the local economy. As a result, Rochester continues to reinvent itself, and is now much more diverse, with an employment base that is no longer concentrated among a few large manufacturers. The top employers in the region, like the University of Rochester and Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), Wegmans, the Rochester General Health System and Paychex, just to name a few, perform a variety of activities, from health care and education to consumer and business services. The process of reinvention and economic diversification, in part, allowed the region to better weather the storm of the Great Recession compared to past economic recessions. For Rochester, the downturn was both shorter and less severe in terms of job loss than for the nation as a whole—a situation quite different from what had occurred before. Though it still lags the nation, the Rochester area has continued to grow at a solid pace through the recovery. This is no small feat, and it certainly is not true for all of Upstate New York. For example, the recovery has been much more sluggish in Syracuse and Utica, and Binghamton has yet to see any meaningful recovery. Despite Rochester's relatively favorable economic performance in recent years, the region's job base is actually slightly lower today than it was at the start of this century. While at first blush it may seem that such a statistic indicates a stagnant economy, that couldn't be further from the truth. When you look deeper, you see an economy that has been very active and dynamic in a number of respects. While some parts of the economy have declined, other areas have grown to fill in the gaps. The most familiar part of this story is the swift and severe loss of the region's manufacturing jobs. Ongoing technological change has increased worker productivity and has reduced the demand for many "middle-skill" workers, while globalization shifted many manufacturing jobs to other parts of the world. These forces have reduced manufacturing employment nationwide, but the effects on Rochester have been particularly potent. Between 2000 and 2010, the number of manufacturing jobs in Rochester declined by over 40 percent. That's a huge loss to incur in just a single decade. Moreover, the loss was on top of the previous significant decline in manufacturing that the region experienced throughout the 1980s and 1990s. However, what's impressive is that in the midst of this decline, Rochester's manufacturing sector has been very dynamic. While once focused on the "Big 3," the region is now producing a much more diverse set of products, such as foods, computers and electronics. And, the manufacturing companies that remained are leaner and have an even higher-skilled workforce than in the past. Fortunately, Rochester has also experienced significant job growth outside of the manufacturing sector. The regional economy added over 44,000 non-manufacturing jobs since 2000, keeping its overall employment fairly steady. The vast majority of these jobs are in the education and health sectors, which together have grown by more than 40 percent over the past 15 years in Rochester. Many of the jobs added in these sectors are high-paying jobs. And, importantly, these sectors tend to be less susceptible to cyclical downturns than other parts of the economy, which helps make the region more stable. There has also been solid growth in business services, leisure and hospitality and even construction. The Importance of Workforce Development With today's economy going through such enormous change, what people do in the workplace and how they do it is also changing significantly. It is no longer the case that people can easily find good-paying, career-oriented jobs with a high school diploma. The jobs of today typically require more knowledge, skill and flexibility. Often, this means that today's workers must invest more in education and training than earlier generations. In addition, the depreciation rate for many skills is much higher now than in the past. This requires workers to continuously reinvest in skill development. Broadly speaking, workers who can build skills and remain nimble can do very well in today's economy, while those who can't are much more likely to fall into lower-paying jobs and get stuck there. A skilled workforce that is matched to the needs of employers is also necessary for the economy to grow and prosper. By pursuing its mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability, monetary policy can help labor markets recover by providing incentives for firms to invest and grow. However, monetary policy cannot by itself solve skill mismatches that may exist in the economy. These frictions must be addressed in other ways, such as by workforce development policies. That is, monetary policy can complement workforce development policies, but is not a substitute for these policies. That is why I believe workforce development is so important for the long-term health of the economy. We need to help workers build the skills necessary to adapt to change. This makes workforce development a top priority for everyone involved: workers, their employers, their communities and the public sector, as well as education and job training institutions. We all need to share in the responsibility of helping people increase and maintain their skills. Successful workforce development needs to include what I call the 3 P's: Partnerships, Programs and Placement. Partnerships entail the cooperative endeavors between local employers and educational institutions to determine the best strategies to help workers develop the skills that employers need. Programs must be tailored to the current skills required by local employers. Placement needs to be a priority, and should be considered even before people are accepted into these programs. Workers need to know that a job will be waiting for them after they go through the effort of building their specific skills. There are several examples from Rochester and other parts of the region that illustrate the potential for this approach to workforce development. In fact, Rochester has a long history of involvement in workforce development. In 1885, a group of Rochester businessmen founded the Mechanics Institute. The Institute's mission was to establish free evening schools in the city for instruction in mechanical drawing and other technical skills important for industrial firms. Funding was provided by contributions from Rochester residents. The first class drew more than 400 students. This endeavor evolved over time into RIT. Strong partnerships between Rochester's higher education institutions and local businesses continue to this day. For example, RIT's Center for Bioscience Education and Training provides local businesses and associations with workforce training tailor-made to specific organizational needs. And at RIT's newly created Knorr-Bremse Mechatronics Laboratory, the university works with the companies that employ its graduates to make sure they have the technical skills they need to be successful. At the University of Rochester, the Center for Emerging & Innovative Sciences as well as the Center for Medical Technology partner with local companies to leverage the cutting edge research being done by the university's faculty and students. Forward-looking partnerships such as these create "win-win" opportunities for everyone involved, and help the local economy grow and prosper. Monroe Community College (MCC) also stands out with its significant workforce development initiatives. In fact, earlier this year Vice President Joe Biden—who was back in Rochester recently to announce the creation of a new manufacturing photonics hub—presented the college as a model for developing meaningful collaborations with employers to create job-training programs that align with current employment opportunities. MCC has taken a uniquely data driven approach to the development of tools and programs that work to address the most pressing workforce development needs in the greater Rochester area, and to provide diverse learners with clear paths to sustaining meaningful careers. For instance, the MCC Corporate College program has designed and delivered more than 100 new noncredit courses and provided education and training to more than 2,000 individuals. Additionally, the college has partnered with 128 employers, including CooperVision and Thermo Fisher Scientific, to deliver customized training to their employees. The Corporate College takes an innovative approach in providing workforce learning and development solutions informed by current labor market data and expert analysis. There is increased awareness, both locally and nationally, of a growing skills gap within industries. Supporting middle-skill occupations has become a critical theme for many in the business community and within the workforce development community. In response to this issue, MCC announced a new collaboration with JPMorgan Chase called the Middle-Skills Bridge Program. This program targets the disadvantaged and underrepresented populations within Rochester's urban center to provide access to skill-based careers. Participants receive intensive developmental education to improve their literacy and math skills before transitioning into one of MCC's accelerated certificate programs. There are many other good examples of cooperative workforce development programs in the New York Fed's District. In Buffalo, the Overhead Electric Line Worker training program at Erie Community College (ECC) was created in conjunction with National Grid to address the critical shortage of overhead line workers and technicians. To date, the program has graduated 132 students, including 42 who are currently employed at National Grid. Another example is OnForce Solar, which sells and installs solar energy packages for commercial and residential customers. In 2010, OnForce Solar CEO Charles Feit moved his rapidly growing company to a then unoccupied building in the Port Morris area of the Bronx. After struggling to find skilled workers, OnForce Solar partnered with Bronx Community College to create a $7 million technology hub which will be paid for by the company. The partnership was made possible by the Governor's Start-Up NY Program, which was launched in 2013 to spur job growth in distressed areas by designating tax-free zones at various colleges and universities. OnForce Solar also developed and taught a newly designed technology course at Bronx Community College. Another example is Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, New Jersey. When I visited Stevens in April, I learned how they are preparing their students to meet local workforce needs. During discussions with university leaders, I heard about their exciting new partnership with NBC Universal. By working together, a new Media/Broadcast minor was created to provide the necessary coursework to prepare students for employment at NBC Universal and similar companies. To better understand the extent to which local workforce development programs are addressing skills gaps throughout Upstate New York, the New York Fed has engaged with community leaders from across the region. Our first meeting took place here in Rochester in March 2014. An important issue raised by many participants was the lack of information about available well-paying middle-skills career opportunities. To help address this concern, the New York Fed partnered with the Rochester Community Foundation, MCC, Finger Lakes Community College and Genesee Community College to launch a pilot video contest. The purpose of the contest was to increase awareness about specific middle-skill occupations identified as in demand by analysis conducted by the Finger Lakes Economic Regional Council. The contest challenged college students to create a 30-second video that identifies the skills required, expected wages and job demands for an occupational group within a targeted set of industries. At an awards ceremony held in The Little Theatre here in downtown Rochester a panel of judges selected the winning video " Not Just a Geek ," submitted by students from Finger Lakes Community College. The video focuses on the field of computer science. Local Rochester movie theaters will air the winning video for two weeks in September, and we will explore additional outlets for this video throughout the region as a public service announcement. These success stories that I've highlighted today illustrate the potential for workforce development to help cities such as Rochester continue to reinvent themselves for today's economy. We need to be vigilant in our focus on those in danger of being left behind. Too many individuals, especially in our urban centers, lack a high school diploma. For example, the Rochester City School District has a dropout rate of 25 percent, and an alarmingly low graduation rate of just 50 percent. Without a high school diploma, people are in danger of being left behind without the skills they will need to truly participate in the economy. Succeeding in the international competition for jobs with a 50 percent graduation rate is like trying to win a boxing match with one hand tied behind your back. We must do better. While there are no easy answers, for the regional economy to thrive everyone needs to be an active participant. We need to figure out ways to re-engage those who have become detached from the workforce, or who feel like they don't have the skills to compete in today's challenging economic environment. In closing, Rochester is a metropolitan area in the midst of a process of transformation and reinvention. While this process is not easy, Rochester possesses a unique set of assets that will help it succeed, and in many ways is on the cutting edge of adapting to these changes. Rochester is, in fact, becoming a leader in workforce development. Reinvention like reform can be difficult, and requires a degree of boldness. This sentiment was expressed by Rochester's social reformer, Susan B. Anthony, who said that "Cautious, careful people, always casting about to preserve their reputation and social standing, can never bring about a reform." Rochester is doing Susan B. Anthony proud, showing spirit and determination. Thank you for your attention, I would be happy to take a few questions. __________________________________________________________ 1 Jaison Abel, Chelsea Cruz, Tony Davis, Richard Deitz, Eric Pajonk and Joseph Tracy assisted in preparing these remarks. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map

August 26, 2015 William C. Dudley , President and Chief Executive Officer Remarks at the Economic Press Briefing on the Regional Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City Good morning and welcome to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Economic Press Briefing. I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak with you today about economic conditions in our District. As always, what I have to say reflects my own views and not those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. Tracking economic conditions in our region is an important part of our work here at the New York Fed. We need to understand how the diverse economies in our District are performing—from the metropolis of New York City and its surrounding areas, to rural communities in upstate New York and the tropical island of Puerto Rico. I take all of this to the table when the FOMC discusses business and economic conditions and trends. In addition, we provide our regional analysis to the public so that everyone can benefit from our work. At today's briefing, we will share some of this work with you. As president of the New York Fed, I believe it is essential to listen firsthand to a broad set of businesses and people in the communities we serve to get as comprehensive a picture as possible of how our region is doing. To accomplish this, we have a team dedicated to going out into the region to gather economic intelligence and to help our communities develop programs to support local economic development. Let me speak a little further about our work analyzing local economic conditions and how we use this work to help our stakeholders. We have developed a number of analytical tools to track the regional economy. To get the most up-to-date read on economic conditions in our District as possible, we conduct two monthly business surveys. Our Empire State Manufacturing Survey gives a real-time read on manufacturing conditions in New York State, while our Business Leaders Survey allows us to track economic activity across the tri-state region in the broader services sector. We also conduct regular polls of small businesses in our area to better understand their evolving situation and needs. In addition, we publish monthly indexes of economic activity for New York State, New York City and New Jersey. We also monitor the financial health of households through our quarterly Household Debt and Credit Report and track the state of school finances in our region. But economic data can only tell you so much. It is also imperative that we engage with people in our region to see the broader picture behind the facts and figures. To this end, I regularly travel to various parts of our District to hear firsthand about local economic conditions and to get a sense of the issues and concerns facing businesses and residents. Just two weeks ago I visited Rochester and Buffalo. One thing I tend to focus on in my meetings, more generally, is what hurdles businesses and households are facing that might be holding back growth. When we identify issues of concern, we factor those in to our decision-making and explore what we can do proactively to address these issues. This might include providing data and information that can assist others in tackling the underlying problems, or in convening stakeholders to discuss potential solutions and the best way forward. Recently, two themes have emerged from our community visits that warrant special attention. The first is in the arena of workforce development. Employers often have difficulty finding potential employees with the specific skills they need, and workers often lack the specific skills employers are looking for. Workforce development aims to bridge this gap. Good jobs increasingly require higher levels of skill and education, and a skilled workforce that is matched to the needs of employers is also necessary for an economy to grow and prosper. That is why I believe workforce development is so important for the long-term health of the economy. Our outreach group regularly engages with community leaders to help them take action to address workforce development needs and skill gaps. In fact, in Rochester, our team is partnering with several educational and community organizations to promote local workforce development programs. As in many places around the region, employers in Rochester are having difficulty finding workers to fill a number of middle-skill jobs, like nurses, automotive technicians and computer-controlled machine operators. Out of this partnership, we launched a pilot project challenging college students to create a short video profiling middle-skill jobs that are available in the area in order to drum up interest in opportunities many people may not even know exist. Access to credit for small businesses is another important issue we've focused on in recent years. Our outreach group conducts a bi-annual poll of small businesses in our region to better understand their credit needs and access to credit. The results consistently show that gaining access to credit is one of the top growth challenges for small businesses. In my visits across the District, I have heard small business owners voice similar concerns. In response, we've helped bring small businesses together with lenders to help smooth access to credit. Over the past year we have conducted ten access-to-credit events—workshops, clinics and conferences—for companies interested in learning about traditional and alternative sources of financing. We partnered with local and national government agencies, small business development centers and local nonprofit organizations to hold these events throughout the District. One such workshop was held recently in Queens. The Queens Economic Development Corporation and the Queens Chamber of Commerce, with support from the New York Fed's Asian Professional Network Alliance, co-sponsored a resource clinic for small businesses. The clinic offered an opportunity for attendees to receive one-on-one advice from several non-profit organizations on a wide range of topics, including which types of financing are most appropriate for their needs, what lenders look for in potential borrowers, alternatives to traditional bank loans and tips on improving their chances for success. These are just a few examples of the activities that reflect the Bank's commitment to the region. Let me turn now to the subject matter of today's briefing: the economic outlook for the regional economy. There is a lot of good news to share. Many parts of the region have bounced back quite well from the Great Recession, and now have more jobs than before the downturn. New York City really stands out in this regard. While the Great Recession was the deepest and longest recession in modern history for the nation as a whole, New York City bucked that trend to a surprising degree, and did it with little help from Wall Street. As we will discuss later in the briefing, one of New York City's strongest sectors has been technology. In this recovery, employment in the city's tech sector has added nearly 50,000 jobs, many of which pay well. The growth of the so-called Silicon Alley has not only helped the city bounce back from the recession, but, I believe, is a key for the city moving forward. When I visited Brooklyn late last year, I saw firsthand how technology is spurring economic activity, directly and indirectly. For example, Etsy, the popular e-commerce website, which in many ways resembles a retail company, relies on technology to underpin its business model. But it's not just New York City that is growing nicely. Employment levels on Long Island and in parts of upstate New York—most notably the Albany, Buffalo and Rochester metro areas—have also climbed and are at or near record highs. During my recent trip to upstate New York, I saw first-hand some of the positive developments in Rochester and Buffalo. After undergoing a prolonged period of economic transformation and reinvention, Rochester's economy is now more diverse and dynamic than ever before. Meanwhile, the growth in Buffalo was striking. The numbers show a dramatic uptick in construction employment, and the visual evidence of development was widespread. I was especially impressed with the downtown and waterfront areas, as well as the new SolarCity factory—all of which looked dramatically different than when I visited the area less than two years ago. Both of these places are well positioned for future success. On the other hand, the employment recovery has been slow to take hold in both Northern New Jersey and the Lower Hudson Valley, where jobs are still not back to their pre-recession peak despite employment growing steadily. For Northern New Jersey, this lag is due, in part, to a stall in the growth of jobs in professional and business services. But the education and health sectors continue to add jobs, and construction employment is seeing a rebound. I also saw a number of bright spots on my visit to the area a few months ago. One was Jersey City, which is leveraging its proximity to New York City to attract residents and jobs. Another was Newark, where I saw signs of downtown development, including Teacher's Village, a mixed-use community of teachers with new schools, housing and retail businesses. But pockets of weakness remain. For example, in upstate New York, Binghamton has had no meaningful rebound in employment. Although the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico remain in a deep economic slump, employment appears to have steadied in both places in recent months. However, Puerto Rico's weak economy coupled with a fiscal crisis means its economic outlook remains uncertain as it struggles to address its unique set of problems. Now, I'd like to turn things over to one of our regional economists, Jim Orr, who will provide a more detailed presentation of economic conditions across our region. By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Statement . You can learn more about how we use cookies by reviewing our Privacy Statement . Request a Speaker International Seminars & Training Governance & Culture Reform Data Visualization Economic Research Tracker Markets Data APIs Podcast Contact Us Terms of Use Privacy Site Map
