Chairman Jerome H. Powell At The Economic Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois Share Watch Live For more than 90 years, the Economic Club of Chicago has provided a valued forum for current and future leaders to discuss issues of vital interest to this city and our nation. I am honored to have the opportunity to speak to you here today. At the Federal Reserve, we seek to foster a strong economy for the benefit of individuals, families, and businesses throughout our country. In pursuit of that overarching objective, the Congress has assigned us the goals of achieving maximum employment and stable prices, known as the dual mandate. Today I will review recent economic developments, focusing on the labor market and inflation, and then touch briefly on longer-term growth prospects. I will finish with a discussion of monetary policy. Recent Developments and the State of the Economy After what at times has been a slow recovery from the financial crisis and the Great Recession, growth has picked up. Unemployment has fallen from 10 percent at its peak in October 2009 to 4.1 percent, the lowest level in nearly two decades ( figure 1 ). Seventeen million jobs have been created in this expansion, and the monthly pace of job growth remains more than sufficient to employ new entrants to the labor force ( figure 2 ). The labor market has been strong, and my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) expect it to remain strong. Inflation has continued to run below the FOMC's 2 percent objective but we expect it to move up in coming months and to stabilize around 2 percent over the medium term. Beyond the labor market, there are other signs of economic strength. Steady income gains, rising household wealth, and elevated consumer confidence continue to support consumer spending, which accounts for about two thirds of economic output. Business investment improved markedly last year following two subpar years, and both business surveys and profit expectations point to further gains ahead. Fiscal stimulus and continued accommodative financial conditions are supporting both household spending and business investment, while strong global growth has boosted U.S. exports. As many of you know, each quarter FOMC participants--the members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the Reserve Banks--submit their individual projections for growth, unemployment, and inflation, as well as their forecasts of the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, which the Committee uses as the primary tool of monetary policy. These individual projections are compiled and published in the Summary of Economic Projections, or SEP. FOMC participants submitted their most recent forecasts three weeks ago, and those forecasts show a strengthening in the medium-term economic outlook ( table 1 ). As you can see, participants generally raised their forecasts for growth in inflation-adjusted gross domestic product (GDP) and lowered their forecasts for unemployment. In addition, many participants expressed increased confidence that inflation would move up toward our 2 percent target. The FOMC sees the risks to the economic outlook as roughly balanced. The State of the Labor Market As I mentioned, the headline unemployment rate has declined to levels not seen since 2000. The median projection in the March SEP calls for unemployment to fall well below 4 percent for a sustained period, something that has not happened since the late 1960s. This strong labor market forecast has important implications for the fulfillment of both sides of the dual mandate, and thus for the path of monetary policy. So I will spend a few minutes exploring the state of the job market in some detail. A good place to begin is with the term "maximum employment," which the Committee takes to mean the highest utilization of labor resources that is sustainable over time. In the long run, the level of maximum employment is not determined by monetary policy, but rather by factors affecting the structure and dynamics of the labor market. 1 Also, the level of maximum employment is not directly measureable, and it changes over time. Real-time estimates of maximum employment are highly uncertain. 2 Recognizing this uncertainty, the FOMC does not set a fixed goal for maximum employment. Instead, we look at a wide range of indicators to assess how close the economy is to maximum employment. The headline unemployment rate is arguably the best single indicator of labor market conditions. In addition, it is widely known and updated each month. As I noted, the unemployment rate is currently at 4.1 percent, which is a bit below the FOMC's median estimate of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment. However, the unemployment rate does not paint a complete picture. For example, to be counted in the official measure as unemployed, a person must have actively looked for a job in the past four weeks. 3 People who have not looked for work as recently are counted not as unemployed, but as out of the labor force, even though some of them actually want a job and are available to work. Others working part time may want a full-time job. And still others who say that they do not want a job right now might be pulled into the job market if the right opportunity came along. So, in judging tightness in the labor market, we also look at a range of other statistics, including alternative measures of unemployment, as well as measures of vacancies and job flows, surveys of households' and businesses' perceptions of the job market, and, of course, data on wages and prices. Figure 3 shows the headline unemployment rate and two broader measures of unemployment, known as U-5 and U-6. 4 U-5 includes the unemployed plus people who say they want a job and have looked for one in the past year (though not in the past four weeks). U-6 includes all those counted in U-5 plus people who are working part time but would like full-time work. Like the headline unemployment rate, both U-5 and U-6 have declined significantly in recent years. They are now at levels seen before the financial crisis, though not quite as low as they were in 1999 to 2000, a period of very tight job market conditions. The left panel of the next chart shows that employers are having about as much difficulty now attracting qualified workers as they did 20 years ago ( figure 4 ). Likewise, the job vacancy rate, shown on the right, is close to its all-time high, as is the average number of weeks it takes to fill a job opening. 5 Households also are increasingly reporting that jobs are plentiful ( figure 5 ), which is consistent with the high level of job postings reported by firms. In addition, the proportion of workers quitting their jobs is high, suggesting that workers are being hired away from their current employers and that others are confident enough about their prospects to leave jobs voluntarily--even before they have landed their next job. While the data I have discussed thus far do point to a tight labor market, other data are less definitive. The labor force participation rate, which measures the percentage of working age individuals who are either working or actively looking for a job, has remained steady for about four years ( figure 6 ). This flat performance is actually a sign of improvement, since increased retirements as our population ages have been putting downward pressure on participation and will continue to do so. However, the participation rate of prime-age workers (those between the ages of 25 and 54) has not recovered fully to its pre-recession level, suggesting that there might still be room to pull more people into the labor force ( figure 7 ). Indeed, the strong job market does appear to be drawing back some people who have been out of the labor force for a significant time. For example, the percentage of adults returning to the labor force after previously reporting that they were not working because of a disability has increased over the past couple of years, and anecdotal reports indicate that employers are increasingly willing to take on and train workers they would not have considered in the past. 6 Wage growth has also remained moderate, though it has picked up compared with its pace in the early part of this recovery ( figure 8 ). Weak productivity growth is an important reason why we have not seen larger wage gains in recent years. At the same time, the absence of a sharper acceleration in wages suggests that the labor market is not excessively tight. I will be looking for an additional pickup in wage growth as the labor market strengthens further. Taking all of these measures of labor utilization on board, what can we say about the state of the labor market relative to our statutory goal of maximum employment? While uncertainty around the long run level of these indicators is substantial, many of them suggest a labor market that is in the neighborhood of maximum employment. A few other measures continue to suggest some remaining slack. Assessments of the maximum level of employment are uncertain, however, and subject to revision. As we seek the highest sustainable utilization of labor resources, the Committee will be guided by incoming data across all of these measures. Inflation That brings me to inflation--the other leg of our dual mandate. The substantial improvement in the labor market has been accompanied by low inflation. Indeed, inflation has continued to run below our 2 percent longer-run objective ( figure 9 ). Consumer prices, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, increased 1.8 percent over the 12 months ending in February. The core price index, which excludes the prices of energy and food and is typically a better indicator of future inflation, rose 1.6 percent over the same period. In fact, both of these indexes have been below 2 percent consistently for the past half-dozen years. This persistent shortfall in inflation from our target has led some to question the traditional relationship between inflation and the unemployment rate, also known as the Phillips curve. Given how low the unemployment rate is, why aren't we seeing higher inflation now? As those of you who carefully read the minutes of each FOMC meeting are aware--and I know there are some of you out there--we had a thorough discussion of inflation dynamics at our January meeting. Almost all of the participants in that discussion thought that the Phillips curve remained a useful basis for understanding inflation. They also acknowledged, however, that the link between labor market tightness and changes in inflation has become weaker and more difficult to estimate, reflecting in part the extended period of low and stable inflation in the United States and in other advanced economies. Participants also noted that other factors, including inflation expectations and transitory changes in energy and import prices, can affect inflation. My view is that the data continue to show a relationship between the overall state of the labor market and the change in inflation over time. That connection has weakened over the past couple of decades, but it still persists, and I believe it continues to be meaningful for monetary policy. Much of the shortfall in inflation in recent years is well explained by high unemployment during the early years of the recovery and by falling energy prices and the rise in the dollar in 2015 and 2016. But the decline in inflation last year, as labor market conditions improved significantly, was a bit of a surprise. The 2017 shortfall from our 2 percent goal appears to reflect, at least partly, some unusual price declines, such as for mobile phone plans, that occurred nearly a year ago. In fact, monthly inflation readings have been firmer over the past several months, and the 12-month change should move up notably this spring as last spring's soft readings drop out of the 12-month calculation. Consistent with this view, the median of FOMC participants' projections in our March survey shows inflation moving up to 1.9 percent this year and to 2 percent in 2019. Longer-Run Challenges Although job creation is strong and unemployment is low, the U.S. economy continues to face some important longer-run challenges. GDP growth has averaged just over 2 percent per year in the current economic expansion, much slower than in previous expansions. Even the higher growth seen in recent quarters remains below the trend before the crisis. Nonetheless, the unemployment rate has come down 6 percentage points during the current expansion, suggesting that the trend growth necessary to keep the unemployment rate unchanged has shifted down materially. The median of FOMC participants' projections of this longer-run trend growth rate is 1.8 percent. The latest estimate from the Blue-Chip consensus of private forecasters is about 2 percent. 7 To unpack this discussion a little further, we can think of output growth as composed of increases in hours worked and in output per hour, also known as productivity growth. Here, a comparison with the 2001-to-2007 expansion is informative. Output growth in that earlier expansion averaged nearly 3 percent per year, well above the pace in the current expansion. Despite the faster output growth, however, average job growth in the early 2000s was 1/2 percentage point per year weaker than in the current expansion. The difference, of course, is productivity, which grew at more than twice the pace in the early 2000s than it has in recent years. Taking a longer view, the average pace of labor productivity growth since 2010 is the slowest since World War II and about one-fourth of the average postwar rate ( figure 10 ). Moreover, the productivity growth slowdown seems to be global and is evident even in countries that were little affected by the financial crisis ( figure 11 ). This observation suggests that factors specific to the United States are probably not the main drivers. As shown in figure 12 , labor productivity growth can be broken down into the contributions from business investment (or capital deepening), changes in the skills and work experience of the workforce, and a residual component that is attributed to other factors such as technological change and efficiency gains (usually lumped together under the term total factor or multifactor productivity). In the United States and in many other countries, some of the slowdown in labor productivity growth can be traced to weak investment after the crisis. Investment has picked up recently in the United States, however, which suggests that capital deepening may pick up as well. The other big contributor to the slowdown has been in total factor productivity growth. The outlook for this dimension of productivity is considerably more uncertain. Total factor productivity growth is notoriously difficult to predict, and there are sharply different views on where it might be heading. Some argue that the productivity gains from the information technology revolution are largely behind us, and that more-recent technological innovations have less potential to boost productivity. 8 Others argue that a well-documented decline in measures of business dynamism--such as the number of start-ups, the closure of less-productive businesses, and the rates at which workers quit their jobs and move around the country to take a new job--has held back productivity growth, in part by slowing the movement of capital and labor toward their most productive uses. 9 New technological breakthroughs in many areas--robotics, biotech, and artificial intelligence to name just a few--have led others to take a more optimistic view. 10 They point to substantial productivity gains from innovation in areas such as energy production and e-commerce. In addition, the optimists point out that advances in technology often take decades to work their way into the economy before their ultimate effects on productivity are felt. That delay has been observed even for game-changing innovations like the steam engine and electrification, which ultimately produced broad increases in productivity and living standards. In this view, we just need to be patient for new technologies to diffuse through the economy. Only time will tell who has the better view‑‑the record provides little basis to believe that we can accurately forecast the rate of increase in productivity. The other principal contributor to output growth is hours worked. Hours growth, in turn, is largely determined by growth in the labor force, which has averaged just 1/2 percent per year since 2010, well below the average in previous decades ( figure 13 ). One reason for slower growth of the labor force is that baby boomers are aging and retiring, and that trend will continue. But another reason is that labor force participation of people between the ages of 25 and 54--prime-age individuals--declined from 2010 to 2015 and remains low. Indeed, the participation rate for prime-age men has been falling for more than 50 years, while women's participation in this age group rose through the 1990s but then turned downward, and it has fallen for the past 20 years. These trends in participation have been more pronounced in the United States than in other advanced economies. In 1990, the United States had relatively high participation rates for prime-age women relative to other countries and was in the midrange of advanced economies for prime-age men. However, we now stand at the low end of participation for both men and women in this age group--just above Italy, but well below Germany, France, and Spain ( figure 14 ). There is no consensus about the reasons for the long-term decline in prime-age participation rates, and a variety of factors could have played a role. 11 For example, while automation and globalization have contributed positively to overall domestic production and growth, adjustment to these developments has resulted in dislocations of many workers without college degrees and those employed in manufacturing. In addition, factors such as the increase in disability rolls in recent decades and the opioid crisis may have reduced the supply of prime-age workers. Given that the declines have been larger here than in other countries, it seems likely that factors specific to the United States have played an important role. As I noted earlier, the strong economy may continue to pull some prime-age individuals back into the labor force and encourage others not to drop out. Research suggests that structurally-oriented measures--for example, improving education or fighting the opioid crisis--also will help raise labor force participation in this age group. 12 To summarize this discussion, some of the factors weighing on longer-term growth are likely to be persistent, particularly the slowing in growth of the workforce. Others are hard to predict, such as productivity. But as a nation, we are not bystanders. We can put policies in place that will support labor force participation and give us the best chance to achieve broad and sustained increases in productivity, and thus in living standards. These policies are mostly outside the toolkit of the Federal Reserve, such as those that support investment in education and workers' skills, business investment and research and development, and investment in infrastructure. Monetary Policy Let me turn now to monetary policy. In the aftermath of the financial crisis, the FOMC went to extraordinary lengths to promote the recovery, support job growth, and prevent inflation from falling too low. As the recovery advanced, it became appropriate to begin reducing monetary policy support. Since monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, waiting until inflation and employment hit our goals before reducing policy support could have led to a rise in inflation to unwelcome levels. In such circumstances, monetary policy might need to tighten abruptly, which could disrupt the economy or even trigger a recession. As a result, to sustain the expansion, the FOMC adopted a gradual approach to reducing monetary policy support. We began in December 2015 by raising our target for the federal funds rate for the first time in nearly a decade. Since then, with the economy improving but inflation still below target and some slack remaining, the Committee has continued to gradually raise interest rates. This patient approach also reduced the risk that an unforeseen blow to the economy might push the federal funds rate back near zero‑‑its effective lower bound--thus limiting our ability to provide appropriate monetary accommodation. In addition, after careful planning and public communication, last October the FOMC began to gradually and predictably reduce the size of the Fed's balance sheet. Reducing our securities holdings is another way to move the stance of monetary policy toward neutral. The balance sheet reduction process is going smoothly and is expected to contribute over time to a gradual tightening of financial conditions. Over the next few years, the size of our balance sheet is expected to shrink significantly. At our meeting last month, the FOMC raised the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, bringing it to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent. This decision marked another step in the ongoing process of gradually scaling back monetary policy accommodation. The FOMC's patient approach has paid dividends and contributed to the strong economy we have today. Over the next few years, we will continue to aim for 2 percent inflation and for a sustained economic expansion with a strong labor market. As I mentioned, my FOMC colleagues and I believe that, as long as the economy continues broadly on its current path, further gradual increases in the federal funds rate will best promote these goals. It remains the case that raising rates too slowly would make it necessary for monetary policy to tighten abruptly down the road, which could jeopardize the economic expansion. But raising rates too quickly would increase the risk that inflation would remain persistently below our 2 percent objective. Our path of gradual rate increases is intended to balance these two risks. Of course, our views about appropriate monetary policy in the months and years ahead will be informed by incoming economic data and the evolving outlook. If the outlook changes, so too will monetary policy. Our overarching objective will remain the same: fostering a strong economy for all Americans--one that provides plentiful jobs and low and stable inflation. 1. See the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, amended effective January 30, 2018, available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf . Return to text 2. This fundamental uncertainty has been extensively studied, particularly with respect to the most commonly used measure of full employment--the so-called natural rate of unemployment. The authors of one well-regarded study concluded that even when using sophisticated statistical techniques, the natural rate of unemployment could be as much as 1-1/2 percentage points above or below their point estimate. See Douglas Staiger, James H. Stock, and Mark W. Watson (1997), " How Precise Are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment? (PDF) " chapter 5 in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp. 195-246. Return to text 3. Individuals expecting to be recalled from a temporary layoff are also counted as unemployed whether or not they are actively looking for work. Return to text 4. The official unemployment rate is known as U-3. Return to text 5. These data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey, or JOLTS, and start in 2000. Return to text 6. For disability transition rates, see Ernie Tedeschi (2018), "Will Employment Keep Growing? Disabled Workers Offer a Clue," The Upshot, New York Times , March 15. Return to text 7. Wolters Kluwer (2018), Blue Chip Economic Indicators, vol. 43, no. 3 (March 10). Return to text 8. See, for example, Robert J. Gordon (2016), The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press). Return to text 9. See, for example, Ryan A. Decker, John Haltiwanger, Ron S. Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2016), " Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward ," American Economic Review, vol. 106 (May), pp. 203‑07. Return to text 10. See, for example, Erik Brynjolfsson, Daniel Rock, and Chad Syverson (2017), " Artificial Intelligence and the Modern Productivity Paradox: A Clash of Expectations and Statistics ," NBER Working Paper Series 24001 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November). Return to text 11. See, for example, Katharine G. Abraham and Melissa S. Kearney (2018), " Explaining the Decline in the U.S. Employment-to-Population Ratio: A Review of the Evidence ," NBER Working Paper Series 24333 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February). Return to text 12. See Alan B. Krueger (2017), " Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S. Labor Force Participation Rate ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp. 1-87. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: April 06, 2018 Back to Top

Chairman Jerome H. Powell At "Challenges for Monetary Policy and the GFSN in an Evolving Global Economy" Eighth High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System sponsored by the International Monetary Fund and Swiss National Bank, Zurich, Switzerland Share Watch Live Thank you for inviting me to join you today as part of this distinguished panel. Our subject is the relationship between "center country" monetary policy and global financial conditions, and the policy implications of that relationship both for the center country and for other countries affected. This broad topic has been the subject of a great deal of research and discussion in recent years. Today I will focus in particular on the role of U.S. monetary policy in driving global financial conditions and capital flows. To preview my conclusions, I will argue that, while global factors play an important role in influencing domestic financial conditions, the role of U.S. monetary policy is often exaggerated. And while financial globalization does pose some challenges for monetary policy, efforts to build stronger and more transparent policy frameworks and a more resilient financial system can reduce the adverse consequences of external shocks. The well-known Mundell-Fleming "trilemma" states that it is not possible to have all three of the following things: free capital mobility, a fixed exchange rate, and the ability to pursue an independent monetary policy. The trilemma does not say that a flexible exchange rate will always fully insulate domestic economic conditions from external shocks. 1 And, indeed, that is not the case. We have seen that integration of global capital markets can make for difficult tradeoffs for some economies, whether they have fixed or floating exchange rate regimes. Since the Fed is the central bank of the world's largest economy and issuer of the world's most widely used reserve currency, it is to be expected that the Fed's policy actions will spill over to other economies. To illustrate this point, the scatterplot on the left side of figure 1 focuses on movements in interest rates and exchange rates following Federal Reserve policy announcements. As you can see, changes in U.S. interest rates after Fed policy actions (shown on the horizontal axis) lead to corresponding changes in the value of the dollar (shown on the vertical axis). And because of the dollar's widespread use around the world, these changes in the dollar affect financial conditions abroad. Fed policy-related movements in U.S. bond yields also tend to spill over to bond yields abroad, such as the German yields shown in the scatterplot on the right. Such spillovers are to be expected in a world of highly integrated financial markets. 2 As figure 2 shows, bond yields (left) and equity prices (right) around the world typically move together fairly closely. But the influence of U.S. monetary policy on global financial conditions should not be overstated. The Federal Reserve is not the only central bank whose actions affect global financial markets. In fact, the United States is the recipient as well as the originator of monetary policy spillovers. For example, as seen in figure 3 , changes in German yields after European Central Bank policy decisions also pass through to U.S. yields. 3 More broadly, it is notable that although the Fed has raised its target interest rate six times since December 2015 and has begun to shrink its balance sheet, overall U.S. domestic financial conditions have gotten looser, in part due to improving global conditions and central bank policy abroad. Much of the discussion of the spillovers of U.S. monetary policy focuses on their effects on financial conditions in emerging market economies (EMEs). Some observers have attributed the movements in international capital flowing to EMEs since the Global Financial Crisis primarily to monetary stimulus by the Fed and other advanced-economy central banks. 4 The data do not seem to me to fit this narrative particularly well. As illustrated by the blue dashed line in the left panel of figure 4 , capital flows to EMEs were already very strong before the Global Financial Crisis, when the federal funds rate was comparatively high. The subsequent surge in capital flows in 2009, as the crisis was abating, largely reflects a rebound from the capital flow interruption during the crisis itself, though highly accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies doubtless also played a role. Moreover, capital flows to EMEs started to ease after 2011, a period when the Federal Reserve continued to add accommodation and reduce yields through increases in its balance sheet, as shown in the right panel. And, more recently, capital flows to EMEs have picked up again despite the fact that the Fed has been removing accommodation since 2015. If U.S. monetary policy is not the major determinant, what other factors have been driving EME capital flows? One prominent factor has been growth differentials between EMEs and advanced economies. In figure 5 , the left panel shows that capital inflows to EMEs picked up post-crisis, in line with the widening of this growth differential, while the slowdown in inflows after 2011 coincides with its narrowing. Another related determinant has been commodity prices, as shown in the right panel. The pickup in both global growth and commodity prices over the past couple of years explains a good part of the recent recovery of capital flows to EMEs. 5 Monetary stimulus by the Fed and other advanced-economy central banks played a relatively limited role in the surge of capital flows to EMEs in recent years. There is good reason to think that the normalization of monetary policies in advanced economies should continue to prove manageable for EMEs. Fed policy normalization has proceeded without disruption to financial markets, and market participants' expectations for policy (the red symbols in figure 6 ) seem reasonably well aligned with policymakers' expectations in the Summary of Economic Projections (the black dots), suggesting that markets should not be surprised by our actions if the economy evolves in line with expectations. It also bears emphasizing that the EMEs themselves have made considerable progress in reducing vulnerabilities since the crisis-prone 1980s and 1990s. Many EMEs have substantially improved their fiscal and monetary policy frameworks while adopting more flexible exchange rates, a policy that recent research shows provides better insulation from external financial shocks. 6 Corporate debt at risk--the debt of firms with limited debt service capacity--has been rising in EMEs, as shown in figure 7 . 7 But this rise has been relatively limited outside of China and has begun to reverse as stronger global growth has pushed up earnings. All that said, I do not dismiss the prospective risks emanating from global policy normalization. Some investors and institutions may not be well positioned for a rise in interest rates, even one that markets broadly anticipate. And, of course, future economic conditions may surprise us, as they often do. Moreover, the linkages among monetary policy, asset prices, and the mood of global financial markets are not fully understood. Some observers have argued that U.S. monetary policy also influences capital flows through its effects on global risk sentiment, with looser policy leading to more positive sentiment in markets and tighter policy depressing sentiment. 8 While those channels may well operate, research at both the Fed and the IMF suggests that actions by major central banks account for only a relatively small fraction of global financial volatility and capital flow movements. 9 Nevertheless, risk sentiment will bear close watching as normalization proceeds around the world. What can the Federal Reserve do to foster continued financial stability and economic growth as normalization proceeds? We will communicate our policy strategy as clearly and transparently as possible to help align expectations and avoid market disruptions. And we will continue to help build resilience in the financial system and support global efforts to do the same. References Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Stackman, and Erik Vogt (2017). " Global Price of Risk and Stabilization Policies (PDF) ," paper presented at "Eighteenth Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference: The Global Financial Cycle," sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 2-3. Washington: IMF. Ahmed, Shaghil, and Andrei Zlate (2014). "Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World?" Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 48 (November), pp. 221-48. Bems, Rudolfs, Luis Catao, Zsoka Koczan, Weicheng Lian, and Marcos Poplawski-Ribeiro (2016). " Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets ," chapter 2 in World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long. Washington: International Monetary Fund, April, pp. 63-99. Cerutti, Eugenio, Stijn Claessens, and Andrew Rose (2017). " How Important Is the Global Financial Cycle? Evidence from Capital Flows ," IMF Working Paper 17/193. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September. Chari, Anusha, Karlye Dilts Stedman, and Christian Lundblad (2017). " Taper Tantrums: QE, Its Aftermath, and Emerging Market Capital Flows ," NBER Working Paper Series 23474. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, June. Clark, John, Nathan Converse, Brahima Coulibaly, and Steve Kamin (2016). " Emerging Market Capital Flows and U.S. Monetary Policy ," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 18. Curcuru, Stephanie, Michiel De Pooter, and George Eckerd (2018). " Measuring Monetary Policy Spillovers between U.S. and German Bond Yields (PDF) ," International Finance Discussion Papers 1226. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April. Fratzscher, Marcel (2012). "Capital Flows, Push Versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis," Journal of International Economics, vol. 88 (2), pp. 341-56. Ghosh, Atish R., Jun Kim, Mahvash S. Qureshi, and Juan Zalduendo (2012). " Surges (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper WP/12/22. Washington: International Monetary Fund, January. International Monetary Fund (2017). " Are Countries Losing Control of Domestic Financial Conditions? " chapter 3 in Global Financial Stability Report: Getting the Policy Mix Right. Washington: IMF, April, pp. 83-108. -------- (2018). " A Bumpy Road Ahead ," chapter 1 in Global Financial Stability Report: A Bumpy Road Ahead. Washington: IMF, April, pp. 1-55. Koepke, Robin (2015). "What Drives Capital Flows to Emerging Markets? A Survey of the Empirical Literature," IIF Working Paper. Washington: Institute of International Finance, April. Klein, Michael, and Jay Shambaugh (2013). " Is There a Dilemma with the Trilemma? " Centre for Economic Policy Research, Vox, September 27. Londono, Juan M., and Beth Anne Wilson (2018). " Understanding Global Volatility ," IFDP Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 19. Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Helene Rey (2015). " U.S. Monetary Policy and the Global Financial Cycle ," NBER Working Paper Series 21722. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November (revised February 2018). Obstfeld, Maurice (2015). " Trilemmas and Trade-offs: Living with Financial Globalisation (PDF) ," BIS Working Papers 480. Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, January. Obstfeld, Maurice, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Mahvash S. Qureshi (2017). " A Tie That Binds: Revisiting the Trilemma in Emerging Market Economies ," IMF Working Paper WP/17/130. Washington: International Monetary Fund, June. Pomerleano, Michael (1998). " Corporate Finance Lessons from the East Asian Crisis (PDF) ," Viewpoint: Public Policy for the Private Sector, Note 155. Washington: World Bank Group, October. Powell, Jerome H. (2017). " Prospects for Emerging Market Economies in a Normalizing Global Economy ," speech delivered at the 2017 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance, Washington, October 12. Rajan, Raghuram (2014). " Competitive Monetary Easing--Is It Yesterday Once More? " speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, April 10. Rey, Helene (2015). " Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence ," NBER Working Paper Series 21162. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May (revised February 2018). Wheatley, Jonathan, and Peter Garnham (2010). "Brazil in 'Currency War' Alert," Financial Times, September 27. 1. See, for example, Klein and Shambaugh (2013) and Obstfeld (2015). Return to text 2. See, for example, Adrian and others (2017) and the IMF's most recent Global Financial Stability Report (2018) for discussion of the transmission of global risk shocks to domestic macroeconomic conditions. Return to text 3. Curcuru, De Pooter, and Eckerd (2018) find that about half of the movement in German bund yields in a window following ECB monetary policy announcements spills over to U.S. Treasury yields, roughly the same magnitude as the spillover of movements in U.S Treasury yields to German bund yields following Federal Reserve policy announcements. Return to text 4. See, for example, Wheatley and Garnham (2010) and Rajan (2014). Return to text 5. Studies looking at the determinants of EME capital flows include Chari and others (2017), Clark and others (2016), Bems and others (2016), Koepke (2015), Ahmed and Zlate (2014), Fratzscher (2012), and Ghosh and others (2012). These papers generally conclude that many factors, including both "pull" and "push," affect EME capital flows. Return to text 6. See, for example, Obstfeld, Ostry, and Qureshi (2017). The results in IMF (2017) also indicate that while global financial conditions explain a significant portion of countries' domestic financial conditions, domestic monetary policy changes also play an important role in economies with flexible exchange rates. Return to text 7. The interest coverage ratio (ICR) is the ratio of earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and amortization to interest expense. A value of 2 or less is typically associated with an increased likelihood of distress. For example, just before the Asian financial crisis, firms in Korea, Thailand, and Indonesia had an average ICR of 2; see Pomerleano (1998). For more on evolution of EME debt at risk and vulnerabilities, see Powell (2017). Return to text 8. Rey (2015); Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2015). Return to text 9. For example, Londono and Wilson (2018) find that U.S. monetary policy variables account for only roughly 10 percent of the six-month ahead forecast error variance of the VIX. In fact, in their study, non-U.S. global factors (non-U.S industrial production, a global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index, and the expected probability of recessions outside of the United States) explain nearly as much of the VIX forecast error variance as U.S. monetary policy and other U.S. variables combined. In addition, Cerutti, Claessens, and Rose (2017) find that directly observed variables in "center" countries (including VIX), as well as unobserved common dynamic factors extracted from actual capital flows, together rarely explain more than one-fourth of the variation in most types of capital flows. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: May 08, 2018 Back to Top

Chairman Jerome H. Powell At "350 years of Central Banking: The Past, the Present and the Future," A Sveriges Riksbank anniversary conference sponsored by the Riksbank and the Riksdag, Stockholm, Sweden Share Watch Live Thank you for inviting me here to celebrate this important milestone. Today is a special day for all of us, since the founding of the Riksbank 350 years ago marked the beginning of central banking. 1 As we meet to discuss the challenges and opportunities the future may hold, it is worth pausing to note that the three and a half centuries since the Riksbank's founding have seen economic growth and dynamism the breadth and duration of which have been unprecedented in world history. The Swedish innovation we celebrate today, I believe, is a vital part of the financial foundations that support the continuation of rising prosperity. In my comments today, I will explore the road ahead for public transparency and accountability of central banks in a time of intense scrutiny and declining trust in public institutions in many places around the world. As you know, the importance of transparency and accountability to monetary policymaking was recognized and became firmly entrenched in practice over the past few decades. The Riksbank has been a leader in this transparency revolution. Today I will focus on the less-often emphasized but critically important role transparency and accountability play in regulatory and financial stability policies. To preview my conclusions, public transparency and accountability around both financial stability and monetary policy have become all the more important in light of the extraordinary actions taken by central banks in response to the Global Financial Crisis. Financial stability policymaking has evolved from managing individual crises as they arise to establishing a policy framework that emphasizes prevention. This framework now includes measures to increase the resiliency of the financial system; enhanced monitoring of financial institutions and of building risks to the system; and measures, such as resolution planning, that require firms to take steps today to better prepare for future episodes of stress. These innovations have placed special demands on transparency and accountability, and we have worked hard to explain them to the public. The framework is still evolving, and we will need to be open to making changes and to new ways to enhance transparency and accountability. Government, Central Banking, and Independence This is a challenging moment for central banking. Opinion polls show that trust in government and public institutions is at historic lows. 2 In this environment, central banks cannot take our measure of independence for granted. For monetary policy, the case for central bank independence rests on the demonstrated benefits of insulating monetary policy decisions from shorter-term political considerations. But for a quarter century, inflation has been low and inflation expectations anchored. We must not forget the lessons of the past, when a lack of central bank independence led to episodes of runaway inflation and subsequent economic contractions. As for financial stability, the crisis and the severe recession that followed revealed serious flaws at many private and public institutions, including shortcomings in supervision and regulation. The crisis and its aftermath led central banks to take extraordinary actions, actions that challenged the ingenuity of experts in the field and were understandably difficult to explain and justify to a skeptical public. While these actions were authorized by law and on the whole necessary to avert the complete collapse of the financial system's ability to service households and businesses, they may have also contributed to the erosion of public trust. Central banks are assigned narrow but important mandates. For monetary policy, the Fed's mandate is to keep inflation low and stable and to achieve maximum employment. For financial sector supervision and regulation, part of our mandate is to foster the safety and soundness of individual institutions. In addition, we have a responsibility, shared with other government agencies, to promote financial stability. I view this responsibility as being highly complementary to other aspects of our mission: Financial stability promotes sustainable economic growth, and a stable, well-functioning financial system is an effective transmission channel for monetary policy. Indeed, there can be no macroeconomic stability without financial stability. Within our narrow mandates, to safeguard against political interference, central banks are afforded instrument independence‑‑that is, we are given considerable freedom to choose the means to achieve legislatively-assigned goals. While the focus is often on monetary policy independence, research suggests that a degree of independence in regulatory and financial stability matters improves the stability of the banking system and leads to better outcomes. 3 For this reason, governments in many countries, including the United States, have granted some institutional and budgetary independence to their financial regulators. Financial Stability, Transparency and Accountability In a democratic system, any degree of independence brings with it the obligation to provide appropriate transparency. In turn, transparency provides an essential basis for accountability and democratic legitimacy by enabling effective legislative oversight and keeping the public informed. 4 Of course, central banks also need to stick closely to our mandates; the case for independence weakens to the extent that central banks stray into issues that the legislature has not assigned to us. 5 There is also an important policy effectiveness argument in favor of transparency. In the financial stability arena, there is no better example of this than the role that the first round of stress tests played during the crisis in restoring confidence in the U.S. banking system. 6 So in the financial stability realm, the case for enhanced transparency is not just about being accountable; it is also about providing credible information that can help restore and sustain public confidence in the financial system. The post-crisis regulatory system recognizes the importance of enhanced transparency, both about financial institutions themselves and about the processes and expectations of regulators and supervisors. Before the crisis, supervision focused on the safety and soundness of individual institutions and was insufficiently attentive to risk in the financial system as a whole. Supervisory judgments about firms were shared with the public only in rare and exceptional circumstances. Financial stability tools were deployed after the fact, to address specific events that emerged to threaten stability. It is an understatement to say that this approach proved inadequate in the crisis. The post-crisis regime has shifted to implementing preventive policies well in advance of any crisis. 7 Newly established ex ante policies include building the resilience of institutions by requiring more and higher-quality capital and liquidity buffers; a regime of stress tests undertaken by supervisors; and resolution planning, which requires firms to analyze their own potential for distress or failure and create a plan to be used in the event of bankruptcy. These post-crisis policies have benefitted from public solicitation of feedback and in many cases from consideration in open meetings of the Board of Governors. Transparency and incorporation of public feedback in these areas have produced more effective supervision and regulation. For example, transparent and clearly communicated policies make it easier for regulated entities to know what is expected of them and how best to comply. Of course, as with any large-scale, complex undertaking, the standards adopted over the past decade can undoubtedly be improved. At the Fed, we are committed to transparency as we assess the efficacy and efficiency of post-crisis reforms. In a sense, stress testing is itself a step forward in transparency. Pre-crisis, supervisors' views of the risks facing our most systemically important firms--and the firms' ability to understand and survive these risks--were shrouded in secrecy. Post-crisis, as part of our stress-testing regime, these supervisory views and expectations are transparent. We expect that these firms will have capital, liquidity, and risk-management capabilities that are adequate for the firms not only to survive, but to continue to perform their key functions even in the event of truly severe stress, akin to the global financial crisis. We make a great deal of information regarding the stress tests public, including the scenarios we use, portfolio-level projected losses for participating firms, and, of course, the results. We have also proposed for public comment a range of ways to further enhance the transparency of the supervisory stress tests. This detailed disclosure provides the public with a wealth of information on how these institutions would perform under severe stress. And this transparency both enhances public confidence and holds banking regulators accountable for their judgments. At the Federal Reserve we use a variety of additional means to enhance public understanding of our supervisory and financial stability efforts and judgments. The Board's Vice Chairman for Supervision testifies before the Congress twice a year. The Board staff's assessment of financial stability is discussed four times a year at Federal Open Market Committee meetings, and these discussions are summarized in the meeting's published minutes. And, since 2013, the semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress has contained a review of financial stability conditions. The Way Forward The post-crisis framework remains novel and unfamiliar. Some of these new policies, such as stress testing and resolution planning, are inherently complex and challenging for all involved. As a result, transparency and accountability around financial stability tools present particular challenges. We will continue to strive to find better ways to enhance transparency around our approach to preserving financial stability. Efforts to engage with the public‑‑including consumer groups, academics, and the financial sector‑‑are likely to lead to improved policies. Moreover, ongoing dialogue will work to enhance public trust, as well as our ability to adapt to new threats as they emerge. There is every reason to expect that technology and communications will continue to rapidly evolve, and to affect the financial system and financial stability in ways that we cannot fully anticipate. While future innovations may well improve the delivery of financial services and make the system stronger, they may also contain the seeds of potential future systemic vulnerabilities. We will need to keep up with the pace of innovation, which will doubtless require changes to our approach to financial stability. As we consider such changes, it will remain critically important to provide transparency and accountability. By doing so, we strengthen the foundation of democratic legitimacy that enables central banks to serve the needs of our citizens, in the long and proud tradition of the Riksbank. References Bernanke, Ben S. (2013). " Stress Testing Banks: What Have We Learned? " speech delivered at "Maintaining Financial Stability: Holding a Tiger by the Tail," a financial markets conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, held in Stone Mountain, Ga., April 8. -------- (2017). "Monetary Policy in a New Era," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute, Washington, October 2. Bordo, Michael D. (2007). "A Brief History of Central Banks," Economic Commentary. Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, December. Goodhart, Charles, and Rosa Lastra (2018). "Populism and Central Bank Independence," Open Economies Review, vol. 29 (February), pp. 49-68. Hogue, Henry, Marc Labonte, and Baird Webel (2017). Independence of Federal Financial Regulators: Structure, Funding, and Other Issues, Congressional Research Service Report 7-5700. Washington: CRS. Kaufmann, Christine, and Rolf Weber (forthcoming). "Transparency of Central Banks' Policies," in Peter Conti-Brown and Rosa Maria Lastra, eds., Research Handbook on Central Banking . Northampton, Mass.: Edwin Elgar Publishing, pp. 518-34. Pew Research Center (2017). " Public Trust in Government: 1958-2017 ," webpage, Pew Research Center. Tucker, Paul (2017). " What Is Macroprudential Policy for? Making It Safe for Central Bankers (PDF) ," speech delivered at "Financial Systems and the Real Economy," a conference sponsored by Bank Negara Malaysia and the Bank for International Settlements, held in Kuala Lumpur, March 31. 1. See Bordo (2007). Return to text 2. For example, see Pew Research Center (2017). Return to text 3. Technical implementation and oversight are two areas where instrument independence may be especially helpful. See Hogue, Labonte, and Webel (2017) and the references therein. Also, the need for some regulatory independence is not exclusive to the central bank; see Bernanke (2017) for a discussion. Return to text 4. See Kaufmann and Weber (forthcoming). Return to text 5. See Goodhart and Lastra (2017). Return to text 6. See Bernanke (2013). Return to text 7. See Tucker (2017). Return to text Last Update: May 24, 2018 Back to Top
