Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, San Francisco, California Share Vice Chairman Fischer presented identical remarks to the Banque de France and Bank for International Settlements Farewell Symposium for Christian Noyer on January 12, 2016. Thank you. It is a great pleasure to be here today and to participate in this panel together with such a distinguished group. Much has happened in the world of central banking in the past 10 years. The list of challenges we face is long and includes fundamental issues such as lender-of-last-resort policies in the modern financial system, the role of central banks in the supervision of the financial sector, and the appropriate role of forward guidance in monetary policy communications. Those are the topics I will not discuss today. Rather, I will focus primarily on three related issues associated with the zero lower bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates and the nexus between monetary policy and financial stability: first, whether we are moving toward a permanently lower long-run equilibrium real interest rate; second, what steps can be taken to mitigate the constraints imposed by the ZLB on the short-term interest rate; and, third, whether and how central banks should incorporate financial stability considerations in the conduct of monetary policy. 1 Are We Moving Toward a World With a Permanently Lower Long-Run Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? We start with a key question of the day: Are we moving toward a world with a permanently lower long-run equilibrium real interest rate? The equilibrium real interest rate--more conveniently known as r*--is the level of the short-term real rate that is consistent with full utilization of resources. It is often measured as the hypothetical real rate that would prevail in the long-run once all of the shocks affecting the economy die down. 2 In terms of the Federal Reserve's approach to monetary policy, it is the real interest rate at which the economy would settle at full employment and with inflation at 2 percent--provided the economy is not at the ZLB. Recent interest in estimates of r* has been strengthened by the secular stagnation hypothesis, forcefully put forward by Larry Summers in a number of papers, in which the value of r* plays a central role. 3 Research that was motivated in part by attempts that began some time ago to specify the constant term in standard versions of the Taylor rule has shown a declining trend in estimates of r*. That finding has become more firmly established since the start of the Great Recession and the global financial crisis. 4 A variety of models and statistical approaches suggest that the current level of short-run r* may be close to zero. Moreover, the level of short-run r* seems likely to rise only gradually to a longer-run level that is still quite low by historical standards. For example, the median long-run real federal funds rate reported in the Federal Reserve's Summary of Economic Projections prepared in connection with the December 2015 meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee has been revised down about 1/2 percentage point over the past three years to a level of 1-1/2 percent. 5 As shown in the figure , a decline in the value of r* seems consistent with the decline in the level of longer-term real rates observed in the United States and other countries. What determines r*? Fundamentally, the balance of saving and investment demands does so. A very clear systematic exposition of the theory of r* is presented in a 2015 paper from the Council of Economic Advisers. Several trends have been cited as possible factors contributing to a decline in the long-run equilibrium real rate. One a priori likely factor is persistent weakness in aggregate demand. Among the many reasons for that, as Larry Summers has noted, is that the amount of physical capital that the revolutionary IT firms with high stock market valuations have needed is remarkably small. The slowdown of productivity growth, which has been a prominent and deeply concerning feature of the past four years, is another factor reducing r*. 6 Others have pointed to demographic trends resulting in there being a larger share of the population in age cohorts with high saving rates. 7 Some have also pointed to high saving rates in many emerging market countries, coupled with a lack of suitable domestic investment opportunities in those countries, as putting downward pressure on rates in advanced economies--the global savings glut hypothesis advanced by Ben Bernanke and others at the Fed about a decade ago. 8 Whatever the cause, other things being equal, a lower level of the long-run equilibrium real rate suggests that the frequency and duration of future episodes in which monetary policy is constrained by the ZLB will be higher than in the past. Prior to the crisis, some research suggested that such episodes were likely to be relatively infrequent and generally short lived. 9 The past several years certainly require us to reconsider that basic assumption. Moreover, the experience of the past several years in the United States and many other countries has taught us that conducting monetary policy effectively at the ZLB is challenging, to say the least. 10 And while unconventional policy tools such as forward guidance and asset purchases have been extremely helpful, there are many uncertainties associated with the use of such tools. 11 I would note in passing that one possible concern about our unconventional policies has eased recently, as the Federal Reserve's normalization tools proved effective in raising the federal funds rate following our December meeting. Of course, issues may yet arise during normalization that could call for adjustments to our tools, and we stand ready to do that. The answer to the question "Will r* remain at today's low levels permanently?" is that we do not know. Many of the factors that determine r*, particularly productivity growth, are extremely difficult to forecast. At present, it looks likely that r* will remain low for the policy-relevant future, but there have in the past been both long swings and short-term changes in what can be thought of as equilibrium real rates Eventually, history will give the answer. But it is critical to emphasize that history's answer will depend also on future policies, monetary and other, notably including fiscal policy. What Steps Can Be Taken to Mitigate the Constraints Associated with the ZLB? Against that backdrop, a second key question for central banks is, What steps, if any, can be taken to mitigate the constraints associated with the ZLB? Raising the Inflation Target : One step that has been proposed by many, including Olivier Blanchard, is the possibility of raising the target rate of inflation from 2 percent to some higher level. One concern I have raised in the past about such proposals is that high levels of inflation may also be associated with higher inflation variability. The welfare costs of high and variable inflation could be substantial. For example, more variable inflation would make long-run planning more difficult for households and businesses. And higher and more variable inflation would likely also lead to higher levels of indexation in the economy over time that, in turn, would make it more difficult for central banks to achieve their inflation goals. Negative Interest Rates : Another possible step would be to reduce short-term interest rates below zero if needed to provide additional accommodation. Our colleagues in Europe are busy rewriting economics textbooks on this topic as we speak--and also helping us to remember earlier discussions of negative interest rates by Keynes, Irving Fisher, Hicks, and Gesell. 12 To provide further monetary accommodation amid weak inflation prospects, the European Central Bank lowered its deposit rate into negative territory in June 2014 and twice cut it further, most recently to minus 0.30 percent in December. The Riksbank has lowered its key repurchase agreement, or repo, rate to a similar level, while the central banks of Denmark and Switzerland have cut their key policy rates more deeply, to minus 0.75 percent, in large part to offset considerable appreciation pressures on their currencies. In each of these countries, short-term money market rates declined along with policy rates. Moreover, while it is hard to distinguish the effects of the rate cuts from those of concurrent asset purchase expansions, the easing appears to have been transmitted to assets of longer maturity and greater risk. Bond yields and bank lending rates declined, and, in the euro area, the volume of lending to corporations and households picked up notably. In addition, the rate cuts into negative territory have acted as expected through the exchange rate channel. Negative policy rates have generally not been associated with the problems that likely were anticipated. Adverse effects on money market functioning have been limited. Cash holdings have not risen significantly in these countries, in part because of nonnegligible costs of insuring, storing, and transporting physical cash. These favorable outcomes may be partly because significant shares of deposits at central banks in these countries are not subject to negative rates. It is unclear how low policy rates can go before cash holdings rise or other problems intensify, but the European experience has certainly shown that zero is not the effective lower bound in those countries. Could negative interest rates be a policy response that the Federal Reserve could choose to employ in a future crisis? One possible concern with a strategy of this sort in the United States is the potential for destabilizing effects in money markets. For example, various observers have noted that negative rates could lead to scenarios in which money funds "break the buck" or simply shut down, either of which could generate strains in money markets. Another concern is whether the complex and interconnected infrastructure supporting securities transactions in the U.S. financial system could readily adapt to a world of negative interest rates. For example, similar to the types of issues addressed ahead of the year 2000, there could well be automated systems that simply are not coded properly at present to process transactions based on instruments with negative rates. All of these are, of course, transitional problems, but they might be sufficient to make a move to negative rates difficult to implement on short notice. Raising the Equilibrium Real Rate : An even more ambitious approach to ease the constraints posed by the zero lower bound would be to take steps aimed at raising the equilibrium real rate. For example, expansionary fiscal policy would boost the equilibrium real rate. In particular, the need for more modern infrastructure in many parts of the American economy is hard to miss. And we should not forget that additional effective investment in education also adds to the nation's capital. As another example, numerous studies of the effects of the Federal Reserve's asset purchases suggest that these operations have reduced the level of the term premium embedded in long-term interest rates.If aggregate demand depends primarily on the level of long-term interest rates, it might be possible, in principle, to maintain a level of long-term rates consistent with full employment and stable prices by lowering term premiums while at the same time raising the level of short-term rates by a compensating amount. This result could be accomplished, for example, if the Treasury took steps to shorten the average maturity of Treasury debt outstanding or, alternatively, if the Federal Reserve maintained large holdings of long-term assets. Eliminating the ZLB Associated with Physical Currency : While the European experience suggests that interest rates can be pushed somewhat below zero, the existence of physical currency likely still limits how deeply interest rates can be pushed into negative territory. That observation has led some to ask whether it would it be possible for the financial system to operate effectively without physical currency provided by the central bank. This is a theoretical question that has fascinated economists for decades and, with advances in technology, could possibly have practical implications as well. Indeed, the Scandinavian countries have embraced the development of new payments technologies that seem to be reducing the need for physical currency for transactions in those countries. 13 Nonetheless, a transition to a cashless economy in the United States seems very far off; indeed, U.S. currency outstanding has been increasing relative to nominal gross domestic product over recent decades, driven importantly by foreign demands for U.S. bank notes. Moreover, to eliminate the ZLB associated with physical currency by going cashless, countries would need to transition to an economy that did not require widespread use of physical currency, and central banks in those countries would need to cease issuing physical currency on demand (for example, in response to demands spurred by negative rates on so-called inside money). 14 For all of these reasons, as a practical matter at least for the United States, it seems highly unlikely that the constraints associated with the ZLB could be meaningfully addressed by steps to encourage a transition to a cashless economy. None of these options for dealing with the difficulties of the ZLB suggest that it will be easy either to raise the equilibrium real rate or to mitigate the constraints associated with the ZLB. But when the real rate is close to zero, even small effects can make a noticeable difference. And, of course, such issues are clearly worthy of additional research. How Should Central Banks Incorporate Financial Stability Considerations in the Conduct of Monetary Policy? The challenges associated with the ZLB and the potential risks resulting from an environment of extremely low rates for a prolonged period of time bring me to the third question: How should central banks incorporate financial stability considerations in the conduct of monetary policy? Or, put another way, can we conduct monetary policy in a way that reduces the likelihood of financial instability? 15 The first response of policymakers to the question of whether monetary policy--defined as the short-term policy interest rate--should be used to support financial stability is to say that macroprudential tools, rather than adjustments in short-term interest rates, should be the first line of defense. Macroprudential tools are primarily regulatory or supervisory in nature and target specific activities, markets, and financial institutions. In the United States, we now have some experience with such tools. The interagency guidance on leveraged lending issued in 2013 and the annual coordinated stress tests (the Dodd-Frank Act stress test, or DFAST, mandated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010; and the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, or CCAR), focused on the capital adequacy of the largest banking firms, are two examples implemented for a few years now and for which data are available for an assessment of their effectiveness. 16 An important new element of the post-crisis capital regime is the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB), which the Federal Reserve put out for comment on December 21, 2015. 17 The CCyB is designed to be activated when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses in the future and released when the risk of above-normal losses recedes. The higher levels of capital would increase the resilience of the largest banks because they would be better positioned to absorb the losses. Despite the tools that the Fed can use to support financial stability, including the Fed's authority to impose margin requirements on secured financing transactions, the Fed has fewer macroprudential tools at its command than some other central banks, particularly with respect to real estate. Regulators in many countries facing or anticipating problems with rising real estate prices often turn to controls over loan-to-value or debt-to-income ratios. Such measures are potentially important, as the real estate sector is the most common source of the beginnings of financial instability. In the United States, responding to such problems with these tools would require interagency coordination, which could make their use cumbersome at critical moments. It is important to acknowledge that there remain cases in which macroprudential tools are either not available or have not been sufficiently tested in the United States, or they may be in conflict with other objectives such as widespread access to credit. The effective lack of such tools has two important consequences. First, it requires placing greater weight on the ability of financial institutions and the financial system as a whole to withstand financial shocks without the authorities having to use macroprudential instruments--that is to say, on structural reforms to the financial system. Second, in such instances, one could consider using monetary policy--the short term policy interest rate--to lean against the wind of financial stability risks. 18 The use of monetary policy to address financial stability concerns raises two distinct but closely related sets of questions. The first is whether adjustments in the policy rate can indeed enhance financial stability by reducing either the odds of a financial crisis or the severity of such a crisis once it is under way--and, if so, through which channels. 19 Provided that the first question is answered in the affirmative, the second question is how leaning against the wind interacts with the traditional objectives of monetary policy--namely, the employment and inflation mandates in the United States. This tradeoff could be small or even nonexistent when both traditional macro objectives and financial stability objectives call for the same policy action--for example, when the credit cycle is approaching its peak, output is above potential, and inflation pressures appear to be building. In contrast, when different objectives call for different policy actions--for example, when some financial assets appear overvalued but economic growth remains tepid and inflation is subdued--policymakers may find this tradeoff much more difficult to assess and will search for macroprudential tools. Perhaps unsurprisingly, recent contributions in the literature that quantify this tradeoff point to a range of recommendations, with some reporting an optimal monetary policy that leans against the wind and some suggesting otherwise. 20 I would like to conclude on this issue by saying that the issue is a bit more complicated than suggested so far--for, given that financial variables are a critical part of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, when policymakers say the economy is overheating, they may well be considering the behavior of asset prices as a critical part of that phenomenon and part of the reason to tighten monetary policy. Thus, I believe that the real issue of whether adjustments in interest rates should be used to deal with problems of potential financial instability is macroeconomic, and that if asset prices across the economy--that is, taking all financial markets into account--are thought to be excessively high, raising the interest rate may be the appropriate step. Further discussion of this issue will probably bear considerable similarity to the analysis of how to deal with asset bubbles that took place in the United States in the decade starting about two decades ago. Conclusion In closing, let me concede that it is easier to pose these questions than it is to answer them definitively. The issues are both deep and interesting. Along with other monetary policy issues, particularly the role of the lender of last resort in a world of significant uncertainty, they deserve the attention the profession in both academic and governmental institutions is, will be, and should be giving them. References Adrian, Tobias, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang (2014). " Financial Stability Monitoring ," FEDS Notes. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 4. Agarwal, Ruchir, and Miles Kimball (2015). " Breaking through the Zero Lower Bound (PDF) ," IMF Working Paper WP/15/224. Washington: International Monetary Fund, October. Ajello, Andrea, Thomas Laubach, David Lopez-Salido, and Taisuke Nakata (2015). " Financial Stability and Optimal Interest-Rate Policy (PDF) ," working paper. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February. Alderman, Liz (2015). "In Sweden, a Cash-Free Future Nears," New York Times, December 26, www.nytimes.com/2015/12/27/business/international/in-sweden-a-cash-free-future-nears.html. Bernanke, Ben S. (2005). " The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit ," speech delivered at the Homer Jones Lecture, St. Louis, April 14. Blanchard, Olivier, and John Simon (2001). " The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output Volatility (PDF) ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 135-74. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015). " Federal Reserve Board Seeks Public Comment on Proposed Policy Statement Detailing the Framework the Board Would Follow in Setting the Countercyclical Capital Buffer (CCyB) ," press release, December 21. Buiter, Willem H., and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou (2003). "Overcoming the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates with Negative Interest on Currency: Gesell's Solution," Economic Journal, vol. 113 (October), pp. 723-46. Caballero, Ricardo J., Emmanuel Farhi, and Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas (2008). "An Equilibrium Model of 'Global Imbalances' and Low Interest Rates," American Economic Review, vol. 98 (1), pp. 358-93. Carlson, Mark, Burcu Duygan-Bump, Fabio Natalucci, William R. Nelson, Marcelo Ochoa, Jeremy Stein, and Skander Van den Heuvel (forthcoming). "The Demand for Short-Term, Safe Assets and Financial Stability: Some Evidence and Implications for Central Bank Policies," International Journal of Central Banking. Champ, Bruce (2008). " Stamp Scrip: Money People Paid to Use ," Economic Commentary. Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, April. Fisher, Irving (1933). Stamp Scrip. New York: Adelphi Company. Goodfriend, Marvin (2000). "Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 1007-35. Gordon, Robert J. (2014). "The Demise of U.S. Economic Growth: Restatement, Rebuttal, and Reflections," NBER Working Paper Series 19895. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February. -------- (forthcoming). The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil War. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Hall, Robert E. (2014). "Quantifying the Lasting Harm to the U.S. Economy from the Financial Crisis," in Jonathan Parker and Michael Woodford, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2014, vol. 29. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Hamilton, James D., Ethan S. Harris, Jan Hatzius, and Kenneth D. West (2015). "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present and Future," NBER Working Paper Series 21476. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August. Hicks, J.R. (1937). "Mr. Keynes and the 'Classics': A Suggested Interpretation," Econometrica , vol. 5 (April), pp. 147-59. International Monetary Fund (2015). Monetary Policy and Financial Stability (PDF) , IMF staff report. Washington: International Monetary Fund, September. Keynes, John Maynard (1936). The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money . London: Macmillan. Kiley, Michael T. (2015). " What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF) " Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August. Laubach, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2003). " Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest ," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 85 (November), pp. 1063-70. McAndrews, James (2015). " Negative Nominal Central Bank Policy Rates: Where Is the Lower Bound? " speech delivered at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis., May 8. Mendoza, Enrique G., Vincenzo Quadrini, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull (2009). "Financial Integration, Financial Development, and Global Imbalances," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 117 (3), pp. 371-416. Reifschneider, David, and John C. Williams (2000). "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 32 (November), pp. 936-66. Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2009). This Time Is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Rogoff, Kenneth (2014). " Costs and Benefits to Phasing out Paper Currency (PDF) ," paper presented at the NBER Macroeconomics Annual Conference, Cambridge, Mass., April 11. Stein, Jeremy C. (2013). " Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses ," speech delivered at "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter," a research symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2003). "Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?" NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2002 , vol. 17 (January). Summers, Lawrence H. (2014). "U.S. Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound," Business Economics, vol. 49 (2), pp. 65-73. -------- (2015). "Low Real Rates, Secular Stagnation & the Future of Stabilization Policy," remarks delivered at the Bank of Chile Research Conference, November 20, http://larrysummers.com/2015/11/20/low-real-rates-secular-stagnation-the-future-of-stabilization-policy. Svensson, Lars E.O. (2015). " Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning Against the Wind: Are Costs Always Larger than Benefits, and Even More So with a Less Effective Macroprudential Policy? (PDF) " unpublished paper, September. U.S. Executive Office of the President, Council of Economic Advisers (2015). Long-Term Interest Rates: A Survey (PDF) . Washington: EOP. Williams, John C. (2013). " A Defense of Moderation in Monetary Policy (PDF) ," Working Paper Series 2013-15. San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, July. Woodford, Michael (2012). "Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability," NBER Working Paper Series 17967. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April. 1. I am grateful to James Clouse, William English, Thomas Laubach, Nellie Liang, David Lopez-Salido, Jeff Marquardt, David Mills, Fabio Natalucci, David Reifschneider, Stacey Tevlin, David Wilcox, and Paul Wood for their assistance. I have benefited also from discussions with John Williams. My comments today reflect my own views and are not an official position of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Laubach and Williams (2003). Return to text 3. See Summers (2014, 2015). Return to text 4. This research includes recent work by Kiley (2015) and others that uses extensions of the original Laubach and Williams (2003) framework. An international perspective on medium-to-long-run real interest rates is provided by U.S. Executive Office of the President (2015). Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) and Hall (2014) discuss the long-lived effects of financial crises on economic performance. See also Hamilton and others (2015). Return to text 5. The projections materials associated with the Federal Open Market Committee's December 2015 meeting are available on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm . Return to text 6. It is also a major factor explaining the phenomenon of the economy's impressive performance on the jobs front during a period of historically slow growth. Return to text 7. See, for instance, Gordon (2014, forthcoming). Return to text 8. See Bernanke (2005). See also the recent work by Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2008) and Mendoza, Quadrini, and Rios-Rull (2009). Return to text 9. See, for instance, Reifschneider and Williams (2000), Blanchard and Simon (2001), and Stock and Watson (2003). Return to text 10. For a discussion of various issues reviewed by the Federal Open Market Committee in late 2008 and 2009 regarding the complications of unconventional monetary policy at the ZLB, see the set of staff memos on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/foia/fomc/readingrooms.htm . Return to text 11. See Williams (2013). Return to text 12. The Europeans have long been intrigued by the possibility of negative rates, beginning with Gesell's stamp scrip proposal in 1906 and some apparently successful experiments with stamp scrip in Austria in the 1930s. See Keynes (1936), Fisher (1933), and Hicks (1937). For an extensive discussion of Gesell's work, see Keynes (1936), chap. 23, pp. 353-58. Return to text 13. See Alderman (2015). Return to text 14. As an alternative to eliminating currency, a number of authors--including Goodfriend (2000), Buiter (2003), Agarwal and Kimball (2015), McAndrews (2015), and Rogoff (2014)--have discussed various mechanisms that could effectively implement a Gesell tax on physical currency. Return to text 15. See International Monetary Fund (2015) for a broad discussion of many issues in this area. Return to text 16. More information about DFAST and CCAR is available on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/stress-tests-capital-planning.htm . Return to text 17. See Board of Governors (2015). Return to text 18. See, for instance, Stein (2013) and Carlson and others (forthcoming) for a discussion on the possible use of monetary policy tools to foster financial stability objectives. Return to text 19. Implicit in this discussion is some degree of confidence that the central bank could identify a buildup of financial stability risks. Adrian, Covitz, and Liang (2014) offer some views on effective financial stability monitoring. Return to text 20. This variability is in part due to different model set-ups, such as how financial instability builds up and how it affects economic outcomes. For example, Woodford (2012) finds that leaning against the wind does not change the basis for traditional stabilization objectives in a standard New Keynesian model, whereas the cost-benefit analysis in Svensson (2015) finds little basis for the "leaning against the wind" strategy. Ajello and others (2015) find that optimal adjustment of the policy rate, when the possibility of a crisis is taken into account, is small unless the policymaker is assumed to be quite uncertain about the likelihood and severity of the crisis. Return to text View speech charts and figures Accessible Version Last Update: January 03, 2016 Back to Top

decisions. 1 As you all know, at our December meeting my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, to 1/4 to 1/2 percent. 2 This increase came after seven years during which we kept the federal funds rate at what we call the ELB--the effective lower bound. This ultra-low rate was in keeping with our congressional mandate to pursue a monetary policy that fosters maximum employment and price stability, which we define as 2 percent inflation. Our decision in December was based on the substantial improvement in the labor market and the Committee's confidence that inflation would return to our 2 percent goal over the medium term. Employment growth last year averaged a solid 220,000 per month, and the unemployment rate declined from 5.6 percent to 5.0 percent over the course of 2015. Inflation ran well below our target last year, held down by the transitory effects of declines in crude oil prices and also in the prices of non-oil imports. Prices for these goods have fallen further and for longer than expected. Once these oil and import prices stop falling and level out, their effects on inflation will dissipate, which is why we expect that inflation will rise to 2 percent over the medium term, supported by a further strengthening in labor market conditions. I would note that our monetary policy remains accommodative after the small increase in the federal funds rate adopted in December. And my colleagues and I anticipate that economic conditions will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate, and that the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below the levels that we expect to prevail in the longer run. Given the large size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, the FOMC is employing new tools to implement monetary policy. In particular, to raise the federal funds rate we increased the interest rate we pay on reserve balances that depository institutions hold at the Federal Reserve. We also employed an overnight reverse repurchase facility, through which we interact with a broad range of firms to help provide a soft floor for the federal funds rate consistent with our target range. 3 These new tools have worked well, and the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates have increased slightly, as expected. We will continue to monitor financial market developments closely, and we can make adjustments to our tools if necessary to maintain control over money market rates. At our meeting last week, we left our target for the federal funds rate unchanged. Economic data over the intermeeting period suggested that improvement in labor market conditions continued even as economic growth slowed late last year. But further declines in oil prices and increases in the foreign exchange value of the dollar suggested that inflation would likely remain low for somewhat longer than had been previously expected before moving back to 2 percent. In addition, increased concern about the global outlook, particularly the ongoing structural adjustments in China and the effects of the declines in the prices of oil and other commodities on commodity exporting nations, appeared early this year to have triggered volatility in global asset markets. At this point, it is difficult to judge the likely implications of this volatility. If these developments lead to a persistent tightening of financial conditions, they could signal a slowing in the global economy that could affect growth and inflation in the United States. But we have seen similar periods of volatility in recent years that have left little permanent imprint on the economy. As the FOMC said in its statement last week, we are closely monitoring global economic and financial developments and assessing their implications for the labor market and inflation, and for the balance of risks to the outlook. 4 Now, I expect that in a few minutes one of you will ask not about what we did at our last meeting, but rather what we are going to do at the next one. I can't answer that question because, as I have emphasized in the past, we simply do not know. The world is an uncertain place, and all monetary policymakers can really be sure of is that what will happen is often different from what we currently expect. That is why the Committee has indicated that its policy decisions will be data dependent. That is, we will adjust policy appropriately in light of economic and financial events to best foster conditions consistent with the attainment of our employment and inflation objectives. As you know, in making our policy decisions, my FOMC colleagues and I spend considerable time assessing the incoming economic and financial information and its implications for the economic outlook. But we also must consider some other issues, two of which I would like to mention briefly today. First, should we be concerned about the possibility of the unemployment rate falling somewhat below its longer-run normal level, as the most recent FOMC projections suggest? In my view, a modest overshoot of this sort would be appropriate in current circumstances for two reasons. First, other measures of labor market conditions--such as the fraction of workers with part-time employment who would prefer to work full time and the number of people out of the labor force who would like to work--indicate that more slack may remain in labor market than the unemployment rate alone would suggest. Second, with inflation currently well below 2 percent, a modest overshoot actually could be helpful in moving inflation back to 2 percent more rapidly. Nonetheless, a persistent large overshoot of our employment mandate would risk an undesirable rise in inflation that might require a relatively abrupt policy tightening, which could inadvertently push the economy into recession. Monetary policy should aim to avoid such risks and keep the expansion on a sustainable track. In this context, I would point out that at our January meeting, we reaffirmed our Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy with an adjustment to clarify that our inflation goal is symmetric. 5 That is, the Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below our objective. In my view, even if inflation was expected to return to 2 percent over time, persistent deviations from our goal in either direction could cause economic harm and could ultimately unmoor longer-term inflation expectations. Of course, whether the Committee would take action to address a persistent deviation from its inflation objective would depend on the circumstances--and, in particular, on the outlook for employment and inflation and an assessment of the likely lags in the effects of monetary policy. My second topic is how best to integrate balance sheet policy with interest rate policy. The Committee has indicated that the Federal Reserve will, in the longer run, hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. But that statement leaves open the question of when we should begin to reduce the size of our balance sheet. Because the tools I mentioned earlier--the payment of interest on reserve balances and the overnight reverse repurchase facility--can be used to raise the federal funds rate independent of the size of the balance sheet, we have the flexibility to adjust the size of our balance sheet at the appropriate time. With the federal funds rate still quite low and expected to rise only gradually, I think there is some benefit to maintaining a larger balance sheet for a time. Doing so should help support accommodative financial conditions and so reduce the downside risks to the economic outlook in the event of a future adverse shock to the economy. Consistent with this view, the Committee has decided to continue to reinvest principal payments from its securities portfolio until normalization of the federal funds rate is well under way. The decision about when to cease or begin phasing out reinvestment will depend on how economic and financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve. 6 Thank you. I would be happy to respond to some questions, starting with those from our moderator today, Tom Keene. 1. I am grateful to William English for his assistance. My comments today reflect my own views and are not an official position of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 16, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20151216a.htm . Return to text 3. The Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans are available at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm . Return to text 4. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2016), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 27, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20160127a.htm . Return to text 5. The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, amended effective January 26, 2016, is available on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals_20160126.pdf . Return to text 6. See the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans (see note 1) as well as the discussion under the heading "System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy" in the minutes of the September 2015 Committee meeting ( www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20150917.htm ). Return to text Last Update: February 01, 2016 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At "The Lender of Last Resort: An International Perspective," a conference sponsored by the Committee on Capital Markets Regulation, Washington, D.C. Share I would like to thank Hal Scott for inviting me to address this conference. 1 The financial system is built on trust, which, history shows, from time to time breaks down as a financial panic develops. Fortunately, major panics are relatively rare, but as we all know following the Great Financial Crisis, when they do occur they can be extremely destructive of economic activity. During the Great Financial Crisis, the Federal Reserve System worked together with the Treasury and other parts of the U.S. government to limit the damage caused by the crisis. Although the financial crisis inflicted massive damage on the economy and on the public, the damage would have been far greater had the Fed not deployed its lender of last resort powers to deal with the incipient breakdown of the functioning of the U.S. monetary and credit systems. Changes in Regulation and Supervision In the wake of the crisis, acting within the framework of the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve and the other supervisory agencies have taken a number of steps that reduce the likelihood that lender-of-last-resort loans will be needed. First and foremost, banks and bank holding companies are much better capitalized. Regulatory requirements have been made more stringent, global systemically important banks are subject to substantial additional capital requirements, and capital planning and supervisory stress testing make capital regulation more forward looking--and the importance of the stress tests bears emphasis. Largely as a result of these measures, the common equity capital ratios of the largest U.S. bank holding companies have more than doubled since the crisis. In addition, banking organizations are, for the first time, subject to a numerical liquidity requirement. The requirement ensures that large banking organizations maintain buffers of high-quality liquid assets sufficient to meet cash outflows during a 30-day episode of systemic and idiosyncratic liquidity stress. In addition, the Financial Stability Oversight Council has designated four key nonbanking institutions as "systemically important financial institutions," and these firms are also subject to supervision and regulation by the Federal Reserve. These changes in supervision and regulation, along with the enhancement of resolution mechanisms for financial institutions, have made the financial system more resilient and lessened the probability that a lender of last resort will be needed to deal with financial stresses in the future. Because the regulated firms are much better capitalized, doubts about their financial condition are less likely to arise, making them in turn less likely to lose access to funding in the marketplace. Moreover, their substantial stockpiles of liquid assets should allow them to weather temporary periods of illiquidity without assistance or, if necessary, provide time for the authorities to implement an orderly resolution. While we have likely reduced the probability that lender of last resort loans will be needed in the future, we have not reduced that probability to zero. We could, presumably, require financial institutions to fund illiquid assets entirely with longer-term debt and equity or, equivalently, allow them to use short-term liabilities to fund only safe and highly liquid assets. However, such an approach would be costly in terms of reduced lending to American businesses and households. Moreover, as yields on credit products rise and yields on cash-like instruments decline, lending would become increasingly profitable and would likely move outside the regulated sector, probably leading to a need to widen the regulatory perimeter of the financial system. Lending to Insured Depository Institutions Although attention following the passage of Dodd-Frank Act has focused on the limitations it places on lender-of-last-resort lending, it must be noted that, if necessary and appropriate, the Federal Reserve has the authority to act as lender of last resort in several ways. Most importantly, the Fed retains the power to extend discount window loans to insured depository institutions--including commercial banks, thrift institutions, credit unions, or U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks. Such loans can be to individual institutions facing funding pressures, or they can be to banks more generally to address broader financial stresses. 2 Since the Great Depression, the Fed's actions as lender of last resort were undertaken using its authority to provide discount window funding to insured depository institutions. Such was the case in the Federal Reserve's reaction to the Penn Central default of 1970, the stock market crash of 1987, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, and the initial stages of the recent financial crisis in August 2007. Discount window loans have to be collateralized to the satisfaction of the lending Reserve Bank, and it is noteworthy that all of the Federal Reserve System's lending during the Great Financial Crisis was collateralized and that all the loans have been repaid in full, on time, and with interest. Although the Dodd-Frank Act did not change the Fed's authority to lend to insured depository institutions, it has changed, among other things, the reporting requirements for such loans. The act requires the Fed to publish information on any discount window loan, including the identity of the borrowers, with a two-year lag. This change is consequential, because an important challenge for the Federal Reserve over the years has been the stigma associated with borrowing from the discount window. 3 Discount window access cannot serve as an effective means to backstop insured depository institutions' liquidity if banks fear that borrowing from the discount window will signal to the public, their competitors, or their counterparties that the bank is in trouble. Prior to Dodd-Frank, the Federal Reserve only published information on discount window borrowing in aggregate, but stigma was nonetheless an issue. And I suspect that the stigma associated with the discount window is even higher, given the public's incorrect association of ordinary discount window borrowing with "bailouts." While the two-year lag should help limit the increase in stigma associated with the increased reporting requirement, the fact that the Fed will no longer be able to assert unequivocally that discount window borrowing is strictly confidential will likely add to the challenge of reducing stigma. That aside, the Fed's ability to act as lender of last resort to insured depository institutions was not significantly impeded by the Dodd-Frank Act. The Shadow Banking System During a crisis, liquidity pressures can materialize in the shadow banking sector--that is, the set of nonbanks that use a range of markets and instruments to provide financing to borrowers. At the time of their initial difficulties, both Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers were in the shadow banking system. To help improve the resiliency of this sector, a few new regulations have been introduced, including the final rule on risk retention in securitization issued jointly by the Federal Reserve and five other agencies in October 2014 and the new money market fund rules issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) in July 2014. Other provisions implemented since the crisis that should help address risks in the nonbank segment of the credit system include the central clearing requirement for standardized over-the-counter derivatives and margin requirements for uncleared swaps, as well as disclosure requirements that provide investors with standardized loan-level information for securitizations backed by certain assets, including residential and commercial mortgages. 4 More recently, the SEC has also proposed rules to modernize data reporting by investment companies and advisers, as well as to enhance liquidity risk management and disclosure by open-end mutual funds, including exchange-traded funds. In addition, the Federal Reserve can, if needed in an emergency, and with the approval of the Secretary of the Treasury, lend through a broad-based facility, including to nonbanks, to provide liquidity to financial markets. Indeed, during the financial crisis--which can be thought of as an old-fashioned bank run, but on the shadow banks--the Fed's credit facilities were used in an effort to stop the run in the shadow banking system. Such broad-based facilities were instrumental in ensuring that money market mutual funds were able to liquefy their assets and so meet investor withdrawals, that the markets for critical short-term funding remained open, and that funding remained available for securitizations that were, in turn, funding loans to students, car buyers, small businesses, and others. The facilities were many and varied, and developed as needed, because the U.S. financial system is complex and, as the crisis unfolded, the nature of the next phase was largely unforeseeable. In several of these interventions, the Fed was lending to increase the liquidity of, or activity in, securities markets, in order to maintain the flow of essential credit to businesses and to households. 5 Had that flow of credit ceased, the financial crisis, the severe recession that resulted, and the consequences for the U.S. economy, and thus every American, would have been far more serious. In November of last year, in a revision to its regulations reflecting the changes to the Federal Reserve's emergency lending authority included in the Dodd-Frank Act, the Board spelled out how the Federal Reserve would design and operate such broad-based emergency lending facilities in the future. Among other things, an emergency facility would be designed to provide liquidity to a market or sector of the financial system and not be for the purpose of assisting a specific firm, or group of firms, in avoiding bankruptcy. "Broad based" is defined to mean that there are at least five potential participants; further, even if many more than five firms were eligible for the facility, it could not be considered "broad based" if its purpose was to assist failing firms avoid bankruptcy or resolution, or to lend to insolvent borrowers. In addition, the interest rates on the loans would be at penalty rates above those on similar forms of credit in normal times, and the loans would be backed by collateral that was sufficient to protect the taxpayer from losses. All of these criteria are consistent with how the Federal Reserve operated its broad-based facilities in the crisis. Lending to Individual Nonbank Institutions During the crisis, the Federal Reserve also lent to individual nonbank institutions whose default would have been extremely damaging for the financial system and the state of the economy. 6 The Dodd-Frank Act removed the Federal Reserve's authority to lend to an individual troubled institution. 7 Instead, the act required large banks and systemically important nonbanks to submit plans under which they could be resolved under bankruptcy in a rapid and orderly manner if they suffered material financial distress. In addition, it established expanded authority for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to resolve a troubled systemic institution in an orderly manner that would not disrupt the rest of the financial system. This expanded power includes the authority to convert some existing creditor claims into equity in a new bridge institution. If liquidity problems arose at the new bridge institution, the FDIC could guarantee the institution's short-term liabilities, or it could act as a lender of last resort using funds provided by the Treasury and ultimately repaid by the institution and, if necessary, the banking industry through assessments. Deciding what authority should be given to a potential lender of last resort requires weighing the costs and benefits including, importantly, moral hazard. Moral hazard costs may be substantial, especially when the potential borrower got itself into trouble by taking on excessive risk, and especially if the loan is seen as expanding the safety net. But the costs of a disorderly default of a large interconnected firm may also be substantial, especially when the financial system is in a fragile state--as was the case in the default of Lehman Brothers. The best way to deal with those types of situations is to prevent them from occurring. Such prevention requires appropriately tight supervision and regulation, consistent with the changes to supervision and regulation introduced in the past five years in the United States. Further, strengthening resolution procedures to the point where they can be used to resolve an insolvent institution without causing runs and exacerbating a potential crisis is an essential component of the reform strategy underlying the Dodd-Frank Act. 8 Concluding Comments Overall, the U.S. financial agencies collectively have substantial lender-of-last-resort authorities to meet future contingencies. The Federal Reserve maintains the ability to provide liquidity to markets during times of unusual financial stress, including the authority to lend to insured depository institutions. Indeed, for the 70 years between the Great Depression and the recent financial crisis, the Fed executed its lender-of-last-resort responsibility exclusively through such loans. Moreover, broad-based facilities of the sort that the Fed operated during the financial crisis generally could still be introduced under our new regulations if they were needed to limit the effect of a future crisis on financial markets and the economy. And while the Federal Reserve no longer can lend to individually troubled nonbanks, the FDIC's expanded resolution authorities should allow it to address troubles at such institutions with sufficiently low risk of cascading disruptions to the rest of the financial system and thus the economy. Handling such situations through resolution has the advantage of ensuring that any costs are primarily incurred by the existing owners and creditors of the troubled firm, but such an approach is currently untried. It is important that the government have the ability to execute the resolution seamlessly and with little or no warning--for example, Bear Stearns informed the Fed on a Thursday that it would default on Friday. 9 There are nonetheless three major sources of concern about potential weaknesses in the new framework for financial crisis management that has been introduced since the Great Financial Crisis. The first is its failure to resolve the problem of stigma--that is, the stigma of borrowing from the central bank at a time when the financial markets are on guard, looking for signs of weakness in individual financial institutions at a time of overall financial stress. 10 Indeed, some of the Dodd-Frank Act reporting requirements may worsen the stigma problem. 11 The second is a concern that arises from the nature of financial and other crises. It is essential that we build strong frameworks to deal with potential crisis situations, and Dodd-Frank has done that. But these plans need to ensure that the authorities retain the capacity to deal with unanticipated events, for unanticipated events are inevitable. Retaining the needed flexibility may conflict with the desire to reduce moral hazard to a minimum. But, in simple language: Strengthening fire prevention regulations does not imply that the fire brigade should be disbanded. 12 Third, this concern is heightened by a related problem: The new system has not undergone its own stress test. That is, in one sense, fortunate, for the financial system will undergo its fundamental stress test only when we have to deal with the next potential financial crisis. That day will likely come later than it would have without Dodd-Frank and the excellent work done by regulators in the United States and around the world in strengthening financial institutions and the financial system. But it will come, and when it comes, we will need the flexibility required to deal with it. 1. My comments today reflect my own views and are not an official position of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful to William Nelson, Scott Alvarez, Rochelle Edge, William English, Michael Gibson, and Mark van der Weide of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance. Return to text 2. The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA) imposes costs and a reporting requirement on the Federal Reserve Board in some cases if Federal Reserve lending to a weak depository institution that ultimately fails raises the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's costs of resolving the institution. Return to text 3. The President's Working Group on Financial Markets and the Financial Stability Forum (since renamed the Financial Stability Board) identified the stigma associated with borrowing from the Federal Reserve's discount window as a significant threat to financial stability. See the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), " Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments " (Washington: President's Working Group, March), p. 9; FSF Working Group on Market and Institutional Resilience (2008), Interim Report to the G-7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors (Basel: Financial Stability Forum, April), p. 8; and FSF Working Group on Market and Institutional Resilience (2008), Report of the Financial Stability Forum on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience (Basel: FSF, October), p. 47. Return to text 4. The SEC's rule on disclosure requirements for certain securitizations was adopted by the SEC in August 2014. The intent of these rules is to make it easier for investors to review and access the information they need to make informed investment decisions, including independently conducting due diligence so as to better assess the credit risk of asset-backed securities. Return to text 5. For example, on October 7, 2008, the Federal Reserve established the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF). Under the CPFF, the Federal Reserve lent to a special purpose vehicle that in turn purchased top-rated three-month commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. And on November 25, 2008, the Federal Reserve and Treasury announced the creation of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). Under the TALF, the Federal Reserve extended loans to investors in certain triple-A-rated asset-backed securities (ABS) to promote renewed issuance of ABS, thereby increasing the availability of credit to households and small businesses. See Dietrich Domanski, Richhild Moessner, and William Nelson (2014), " Central Banks as Lenders of Last Resort: Experiences during the 2007-2010 Crisis and Lessons for the Future (PDF) ," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-110 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May). Return to text 6. The Federal Reserve used its authority to lend to individual nonbank institutions two times during the crisis: It lent to Bear Stearns and AIG (American International Group, Inc.). Working with the Treasury and the FDIC, it agreed to lend, but did not in fact extend credit, as part of ring-fence arrangements established for two additional firms, Bank of America and Citigroup. See Domanski, Moessner, and Nelson, "Central Banks as Lenders of Last Resort," in note 5. Return to text 7. The Federal Reserve's authority to lend to depository institutions cannot be used as a backchannel for lending to nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding companies. Return to text 8. C.A.E. Goodhart (1999), "Myths about Lender of Last Resort," International Finance, vol. 2 (November), pp. 339-60. See also a forthcoming paper by Goodhart titled "Balancing Lender-of-Last-Resort Assistance with Avoidance of Moral Hazard." Return to text 9. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), " Report Pursuant to Section 129 of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008: Loan to Facilitate the Acquisition of the Bear Stearns Companies, Inc. by JPMorgan Chase & Co. (PDF) " (Washington: Board of Governors). Return to text 10. This concern is emphasized in Ben Bernanke's blog post, " Fed Emergency Lending ," Brookings Institution, December 3, 2015. Return to text 11. In particular, as I suggested earlier, the additional reporting requirements under the Dodd-Frank Act could increase potential borrowers' concerns that the public, their creditors, or their counterparties could learn about their borrowing and conclude that the bank is in trouble. Return to text 12. I think it would be a serious mistake, as some have suggested, to go beyond the limitations on the Federal Reserve's emergency lending authority that are set out in the Dodd-Frank Act. Return to text Last Update: February 10, 2016 Back to Top

Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer At the "Energy Transition: Strategies for a New World," 35th Annual IHS CERAWeek, Houston, Texas Share I would like to thank Daniel Yergin for his kind invitation to speak this evening at the CERAWeek conference. The energy industry--more precisely, the price of oil--is on the minds of almost everyone these days, and this conference is addressing many important issues. I am a macroeconomist, and do not plan on focusing tonight on developments in the energy sector. But from time to time the price of oil becomes a macroeconomic issue, and this is one of those times. So I have been listening intently to the many experts who have already spoken here today, and look forward to the discussion that will follow this speech, in the belief that I will emerge with a better understanding of recent and future developments in the industry. To get things started, I thought I could provide some background on recent monetary policy decisions. 1 As you all know, at our December meeting the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to raise the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, to 1/4 to 1/2 percent. 2 At our meeting in January, we decided to maintain that range. The increase in December came after seven years during which the FOMC had kept the federal funds rate between 0 and 25 basis points. This ultra-low rate was in keeping with our congressional mandate to pursue a monetary policy that fosters maximum employment and price stability, which we define as 2 percent inflation. Our decision in December was based on the substantial improvement in the labor market and the Committee's confidence that inflation would return to our 2 percent goal over the medium term. Employment growth last year averaged a solid 230,000 per month, and the unemployment rate declined from 5.6 percent to 5.0 percent over the course of 2015--and declined further to 4.9 percent last month. This is close to the unemployment rate generally regarded as the full employment rate of unemployment. Inflation ran well below our target last year, held down by the transitory effects of declines in crude oil prices and also in the prices of non-oil imports. Prices for these goods have fallen further and as you all know, for longer than expected. Once these oil and import prices stop falling and level out, their effects on inflation will dissipate, which is the main reason we expect that inflation will rise to 2 percent over the medium term, supported by a further strengthening in labor market conditions. Of course, with the federal funds target now at between 25 and 50 basis points, and the effective federal funds rate currently almost at the center of that target range, our monetary policy remains accommodative. And, at the time of our January decision, my colleagues and I anticipated that economic conditions would evolve in a manner warranting only gradual increases in the federal funds rate, and that the federal funds rate would likely remain, for some time, below the levels that we expect to prevail in the longer run. I should emphasize, however, that that was an expectation, not a decision, and our future policy actions are by no means predetermined. During the years in which we held the federal funds rate near zero, the Federal Reserve also engaged in large-scale asset purchases to further ease financial conditions and promote economic recovery. Consequently, the Federal Reserve's balance sheet grew from less than $1 trillion in mid-2008 to $4.5 trillion by late 2014. As a result of the size of our balance sheet, the FOMC is employing new tools to implement monetary policy. In particular, to raise the federal funds rate we increased the interest rate we pay on reserve balances that depository institutions hold at the Federal Reserve. We also employed an overnight reverse repurchase facility, through which we interact with a broad range of firms to help provide a soft floor for the federal funds rate consistent with our target range. 3 These new tools have worked well, and the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates have increased as expected. We will continue to monitor these markets closely, and we can make adjustments to our tools if necessary to maintain control over money market rates. The economic data that have come in since our December interest rate decision suggest that the labor market has continued to improve. Although job gains slowed some last month, over the most recent three months payrolls have increased 230,000 jobs per month on average, as the unemployment rate declined. Moreover, the spending indicators that we have in hand for January point to a pickup in economic growth this quarter. Further, the 12-month change in average hourly earnings has moved up in recent months and stood at 2‑1/2 percent in January. In addition, the rate of core consumer price index inflation over the past 12 months exceeded 2 percent, though this was not true of the core price index of personal consumption expenditures that the Fed monitors closely. However--and there is frequently a "however" in our business--further declines in oil prices suggest that total inflation will likely remain low for somewhat longer than had been previously expected before moving back to 2 percent. In addition, global financial markets have been unusually volatile since the turn of the year. For instance, the S&P 500 volatility index (VIX) rose markedly in early January, though it remains below the levels it reached in August of last year and in 2011, and it last week declined below its average value since the start of the year. The large movements in asset prices likely reflect increased concern about the global outlook, particularly ongoing developments in China and the effects of the declines in the prices of oil and other commodities on commodity-exporting nations. Asset price declines may also reflect a reassessment of the prospects for growth in Europe and Japan, and perhaps also a recognition that U.S. gross domestic product and productivity growth have remained stubbornly low. If the recent financial market developments lead to a sustained tightening of financial conditions, they could signal a slowing in the global economy that could affect growth and inflation in the United States. But we have seen similar periods of volatility in recent years--including in the second half of 2011--that have left little visible imprint on the economy, and it is still early to judge the ramifications of the increased market volatility of the first seven weeks of 2016. As Chair Yellen said in her testimony to the Congress two weeks ago, while "global financial developments could produce a slowing in the economy, I think we want to be careful not to jump to a premature conclusion about what is in store for the U.S. economy." Of course, the FOMC is closely monitoring global economic and financial developments and assessing their implications for the labor market and inflation and the balance of risks to the outlook. Now, with our next FOMC meeting just three weeks away, I expect most of you are less interested in what we did at our previous meetings, and more interested in what we are going to do at the next one. I can't answer that question because, as I have emphasized in the past, we simply do not know. The world is an uncertain place--sometimes more uncertain than at other times--and all monetary policymakers can really be sure of is that what will happen is often different from what we currently expect. That is why the Committee has indicated that its policy decisions will be data dependent, which is to say that we will adjust policy appropriately in light of economic and financial events to best foster conditions consistent with the attainment of our employment and inflation objectives. As you know, in making our policy decisions, my FOMC colleagues and I spend considerable time assessing the incoming economic and financial information and its implications for the economic outlook. But we must also consider some other issues, two of which I would like to mention briefly today. First, most estimates of the full employment rate of unemployment are close to 5 percent. The actual rate of unemployment is now slightly below 5 percent, and the median view of the members of the FOMC is that it will decline further, perhaps even to the vicinity of 4.7 percent. The question is, should we be concerned about that possibility? In my view, a modest overshoot of this sort would be appropriate in current circumstances for two reasons. The first reason is that other measures of labor market conditions--such as the fraction of workers with part-time employment who would prefer to work full time and the number of people not actively looking for work who would like to work--indicate that more slack may remain in the labor market than the unemployment rate alone would suggest. And the second reason is that with inflation currently well below 2 percent, a modest overshoot could actually be helpful in moving inflation back to 2 percent more rapidly. Nonetheless, a persistent large overshoot of our employment mandate would risk an undesirable rise in inflation that might require a relatively abrupt policy tightening, which could inadvertently push the economy into recession. Monetary policy should aim to avoid such risks and keep the expansion on a sustainable track. The second issue is how best to integrate balance sheet policy with interest rate policy. The FOMC has indicated that the Federal Reserve will, in the longer run, hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively--which will require us to reduce the size of our balance sheet substantially. But that statement leaves open the question of when we should begin that process. Because the tools I mentioned earlier--the payment of interest on reserve balances and the overnight reverse repurchase facility--can be used to raise the federal funds rate independent of the size of the balance sheet, we have the flexibility to adjust the size of our balance sheet at the appropriate time. With the federal funds rate still quite low and expected to rise only gradually, there is some benefit to maintaining a larger balance sheet for a time. Doing so should help support accommodative financial conditions and so reduce the risks to the economy in the event of an adverse shock. Consistent with this view, the Committee has decided to continue to reinvest principal payments from its securities portfolio until normalization of the federal funds rate is well under way. The decision about when to cease or begin phasing out reinvestment will depend on how economic and financial conditions and the economic outlook evolve. 4 With that background, I thank you for listening, and look forward to continuing the discussion, initially with Dan Yergin. 1. I am grateful to William English, Trevor Reeve, and Stacey Tevlin for their assistance. My comments today reflect my own views and are not an official position of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. Return to text 2. See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 16, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20151216a.htm . Return to text 3. The Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans are available at www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/press/monetary/20140917c.htm . Return to text 4. See the Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans (see note 3) as well as the discussion under the heading "System Open Market Account Reinvestment Policy" in the minutes of the September 2015 Committee meeting ( www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20150917.htm ). Return to text Last Update: February 23, 2016 Back to Top
