Current Economic Conditions and the Implications for Monetary Policy By Eric S. Rosengren January 9, 2017 Hartford, CT Economic Summit & Outlook Connecticut Business & Industry Association and the MetroHartford Alliance Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) more share share share share Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said the economy has shown "remarkable progress" given where it was, and is approaching employment and inflation levels consistent with the Fed's mandate for maximum sustainable employment and price stability. He was speaking in Hartford, to the Connecticut Business & Industry Association. Rosengren said that the unemployment rate is at his own estimate of what is likely to be sustainable in the long run, and inflation measures are approaching the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target. "Without further gradual increases in interest rates, one might be concerned that the unemployment rate could drift below its long‐run sustainable level – and as a result, inflation could eventually exceed the Fed's 2 percent target," Rosengren said. So in his view "a still gradual but somewhat more regular increase in the federal funds rate will be warranted." Slow normalization of monetary policy has been appropriate, Rosengren said, given the significant loss of jobs during the Great Recession and the fact that inflation rates both here and abroad that have remained well below the inflation targets set by central banks. Rosengren acknowledged he has been a "strong advocate" for exceptionally accommodative monetary policy to combat the severity of the recession and the slow recovery. But he called it consistent to see the stance of monetary policy as now needing to adjust, to prevent the economy from dramatically overshooting, "which would place the economic recovery at risk." "I firmly believe that the aggressive policy actions taken by the Fed during the financial crisis and recession made a huge difference," Rosengren said. "Our economy would not be as healthy as it is and we would thus not be near a tightening cycle now if we hadn't been so aggressive then." Rosengren noted that the U.S. is closer to achieving its goals for monetary policy than are most other developed countries. Exploring labor market data, Rosengren showed that conditions "are continuing to tighten." Wages have been increasing, consistent with strong labor market demand. Regarding inflation, Rosengren's own forecast is that both total and core PCE inflation rates will reach the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target for total PCE inflation by the end of 2017. "Looking ahead, I see the Federal Reserve as likely to continue to gradually normalize U.S. monetary policy." collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf)

Monetary Policy as the Economy Approaches the Fed’s Dual Mandate By Eric S. Rosengren February 15, 2017 New York, NY New York Association for Business Economics Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Speech Audio (mp3) more share share share share Boston Fed President Eric Rosengren said today that the economy has continued to improve and called for continued gradual removal of monetary policy accommodation. "Over the next year or two, I expect real GDP to grow somewhat faster than 2 percent, the unemployment rate to continue to gradually decline, and inflation to gradually return to the Federal Reserve's 2 percent target," Rosengren said. While his forecast envisions a continuation of the economic growth we have seen over the past several years, Rosengren emphasized that the "starting point" is quite different now. "The labor market has significantly improved during the recovery, and my own assessment is that there is very limited slack remaining," he said, showing how the unemployment rate, quits rate, unemployment duration, and participation rate data all support this conclusion. "There is limited room for further tightening in labor markets before one might see more inflationary pressures." "Importantly, if GDP is growing faster than potential and we reach both elements of the dual mandate, the Federal Reserve risks 'overshooting,' potentially jeopardizing the very significant progress of the U.S. economy since the financial crisis." In Rosengren's view, it will likely be appropriate to raise short‐term interest rates at least as quickly as suggested by the Fed's policymakers in the current Summary of Economic Projections median forecast, and possibly even a bit more rapidly than that forecast. Consumption is likely to continue to be relatively robust, reflecting payroll employment, real income growth, and wealth gains over the past several years – and "likely to offset areas of the economy that remain relatively weak," notably exports. Rosengren cautioned that significant risks to the U.S. economy still exist, particularly from conditions in overseas economies. And he noted that the future stance of U.S. fiscal policy is still unknown. "These areas of uncertainty can materially impact the forecast, and by extension, the path of policymaking that would be consistent with those forecasts." Rosengren was speaking to the New York Association for Business Economics. collapse all expand all About the Authors Eric S. Rosengren Resources Full-text Speech (pdf) Figures and comments (pdf) Figures (pdf) Speech Audio (mp3)
