The Foundation for Long-Term Recovery June 15, 2020 Tom Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond We know the numbers are bleak: 21 million Americans are unemployed, and the number of people who are not working and not actively looking for work (which means they’re not officially counted as “unemployed”) has risen by an additional 8.3 million in two months. Retail sales of consumer goods have fallen by almost 23 percent, manufacturing production has dropped over 18 percent, and GDP was down at a 5 percent annual rate in the first quarter. Forecasters expect this quarter to be much worse. We also know that the effects of the crisis have not been felt evenly. Most distressingly, people of color have disproportionately fallen victim to the virus, and they’ve also been more likely to face job loss — underscoring historic fault lines in our society that are painfully tangible at present. With a broader lens, pre-COVID-19, we were seeing job market polarization: Loss of middle income jobs and increases in jobs at the extremes of the wage scale. The job losses in this crisis are centered on the low end of that “barbell” — service jobs which are disproportionately held by women and those with less education. For the tens of millions of people who have lost their jobs, uncertainty is high. Will they be called back to their former places of employment? If not, what jobs will be available to them? Will the industries in which they’ve been trained continue to exist at the scale they did in the past — or continue to exist at all? But even those who remain employed face challenges. First and foremost, the essential front-line workers who provide us with vital services, especially health care, do so at great personal risk and emotional toll. Workers with families also are under immense strain right now. I hear this every day in conversations with our Bank’s employees, many of whom have young kids at home and are struggling to balance work and home. The challenges are different, but no less real, for families taking care of elderly parents. Over the past two months, we’ve seen disproportionate drops in workforce participation among groups that had been trending upward, such as prime age women and those age 55 and over. Care responsibilities, at a time when child care and schools are closed and elder care facilities are perceived to be less safe, can make it difficult to work. And perhaps baby boomers are leaving the workforce given the increased health risk they perceive. Legislators and monetary policymakers have taken extraordinary steps to support the health of our economy. But if we are going to get to the other side of this crisis, we have to be thinking about the longer-term changes that will enable our economy to recover — and give more people a shot at participating when it does. We need aggressive and consistent workplace health protection protocols. These are critical for essential workers, who deserve our full protection. They are critical to convince displaced workers it is safe to come back. And they are critical to make consumers feel safe when they visit a store or a restaurant. Defining those standards and ensuring they are broadly followed will require strong public-private coordination. It’s possible we will see some drop in productivity in the short term as we stand up the processes and practices to make this possible, but if the protocols are clear and consistent, businesses will redesign their operations to regain productivity in the medium term. And longer term, they may even see dividends in the form of a healthier workforce with less absenteeism. We need to focus on workforce redeployment. I’m intrigued by the rapid development of widespread online education. Perhaps states will find that they can deploy online tools to retrain large numbers of unemployed people for industries that are hiring, at low cost and price. That of course would require expansion of access to broadband. We also have a real opportunity to bolster our community colleges, which play a crucial role standing up training programs for in-demand careers and bringing employers and workers together. Both schools and students need funding, especially in the current environment, and one way to help would be to allow federal and state financial aid to be used for workforce credential programs. We need well-functioning child care and elder care. But both of these industries are at risk. Given that the cost of providing high-quality child care is far more than the majority of families can pay for, there is probably no getting around expanding public and/or private investment in early childhood education and child care. Elder care industries — both nursing homes and in-home care — must find a way to assure families that they can operate safely, without undue risk to the health of our seniors. With an aging population and millions of working families dependent on child care in order to work, we need to find ways to make these business models safe, sustainable, and affordable. The health of our workers matters. The ability of those displaced by this crisis to find their next career matters. And giving those who want and need to work the support they need matters. To return our economy to its full potential, we need well-designed efforts to address these critical foundations. Topics Employment and Labor Markets Workforce Development Economic Inequality and Poverty Subscribe to News Receive an email notification when News is posted online: Subscribe to News By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice. Email Address Re-enter Email Address I agree to the terms of the privacy policy Thank you for signing up! As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request. If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted. Thank you for signing up! You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email. Subscribe to our other digital publications Contact Us Jim Strader

A Silver Lining for Smaller Towns June 22, 2020 Tom Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond We’re used to thinking about the density of urban areas as a benefit: Lots of people means lots of employers and jobs, lots of restaurants, and plenty of things to do on the weekend. Conversely, we’re used to thinking about the distance in smaller towns as an obstacle: Fewer employers, fewer health care options, and less access to quality education and other amenities. As a result, a big story in recent decades has been the growth of bigger cities and the decline of many smaller towns. But the COVID-19 pandemic has revealed that density can be dangerous and that geographic proximity isn’t necessarily an obstacle to connection. And stories change. In the 1970s, few could have imagined the revitalization that’s occurred in cities like Pittsburgh or Detroit (although not everyone in those cities has benefited equally). So I wonder if this is an opportunity for smaller towns to rewrite their endings. Are people going to start moving out of cities? It’s reasonable to think at least some will, as the risks posed by density could nullify some of the reasons people live in cities in the first place. If you live in an urban area so that you can go to plays and concerts, for example, but you’re worried about the risk of infection at a large event, is it still worth paying a premium to live near those amenities? Similarly, if you live in an urban area to be close to your work but the past few months have demonstrated that you can successfully work remotely, do you still need to live close to the office? Could you move back to your hometown — closer to family — to a place where you are less exposed to community transmission? And for years, public transportation has been an amenity. Just look at the development along Metro’s Orange Line in Northern Virginia. But ridership has plummeted more than 90 percent relative to last spring. Living in a smaller home to be close to a subway line might not seem that appealing anymore. At the same time cities might be less attractive, some of the hurdles facing smaller communities might be more surmountable than we thought. Take health care, for example. Smaller communities generally have less access, particularly to hospitals and specialists, which contributes to poorer health outcomes in these communities. But t elemedicine can increase the network of care and reduce overall costs by reducing readmissions and avoidable emergency room visits. This crisis has dramatically accelerated telemedicine’s use where it’s available. This is partly because many people want to avoid health care settings because they fear infection, and partly because many regulations that inhibited widespread use, such as drug prescription rules, state licensure limits, and Medicare reimbursement rules, have been temporarily waived. Making such waivers permanent is a critical step toward expanding the availability of telemedicine for people who live in smaller towns. High-quality education, particularly postsecondary education and workforce training, is another challenge in many smaller communities, which tend to have fewer college graduates. Many things contribute, including physical distance to schools, less information about the options available to students and workers, and a lack of role models. But we’re seeing a huge expansion of online learning options. Further developing virtual education could open doors for people to continue their education and workforce training when it might not have been otherwise feasible. We’re also thinking differently about the labor market. Telecommuting means workers can live anywhere, and employers can recruit talent from everywhere. And of course there’s shopping. Many people want to live in close proximity to grocery stores, clothing stores, and other retail outlets. But we’ve been shopping from home for months now; if you can buy everything you need online, it doesn’t matter as much where you live. The caveat, of course, is that everything I’ve just described requires high-speed internet access. And the lack of broadband access is a serious issue in smaller towns and rural areas, from the perspectives of both availability and affordability. The pandemic has underscored just how critical it is: If kids are going to be educated from home, for example, they need the tools to do so. This is a complicated issue, or we would have solved it already — but never has there been more political agreement on the need. If the country is going to do something — and we should — now is the time. Additional stimulus money is being debated as I write this. What better place to invest it? Of course, it’s easy to say “build it and they will come.” But broadband access is far from the entire answer. Small towns that want to change their trajectory also need to put themselves on the map for those looking to relocate. This requires three key ingredients. The first is a good story — maybe it’s about natural beauty, or local amenities, or nearby colleges. The story is for employers, and the story is for talent. The story is also about marketing to those who already live there — not only why one should come, but also why one should stay. The second ingredient is an integrated regional approach. Almost by definition, small towns are surrounded by other small towns, and the strategy for that region needs to be integrated across jurisdictions. The path to success isn’t going it alone; instead, it’s working together. One community might have better elementary schools, another more employers, and another the regional airport. The story needs to encompass the region. Third, smaller communities need to find a source of committed funding, whether it’s federal or state agencies, local donors or foundations, local businesses, hotel taxes, tobacco settlement funds, or asset sales. It also requires developing the capacity to absorb that funding: A lot of money is being allocated federally right now and some local organizations are going to be challenged. The towns that seem to have the most momentum are the ones that seem to make the most out of their potential funding sources. None of this is easy. But our nation is in the midst of an unprecedented crisis — and as we have shown throughout our history, unprecedented changes can turn into opportunities. Telemedicine, telecommuting, online learning, and broadband can be funded at levels that would have been inconceivable just a few months ago. As a result, to the extent our health concerns persist, we might find a silver lining for the smaller towns that can tell their story well. Topics Small Town and Rural Communities Subscribe to News Receive an email notification when News is posted online: Subscribe to News By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice. Email Address Re-enter Email Address I agree to the terms of the privacy policy Thank you for signing up! As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request. If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted. Thank you for signing up! You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email. Subscribe to our other digital publications Contact Us Jim Strader

A Tragic Reality Aug. 3, 2020 Tom Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Our nation has recently increased its focus on a tragic reality: Life outcomes vary widely by race. In June, the unemployment rate for black Americans was 15.4 percent, more than 5 percentage points higher than the rate for white Americans (10.1 percent). Even before the current crisis, when unemployment was at historic lows, there was a gap of around 3 percentage points. Median income for white households in 2018 was $71,000, compared to $41,000 for black households. The wealth gap is even larger: White households’ median net worth is nearly 10 times higher than that of black households. More than one-third of white adults have bachelor’s degrees while only about one-fifth of black adults do. And if you’re white, you’re even likely to live longer. Here in Richmond, Virginia, life expectancy can vary by as much as 20 years between some of the poorest, mostly black neighborhoods and the most affluent, mostly white neighborhoods. 1 This has been made all too clear by the disproportionate toll the pandemic is taking on communities of color. In the Fifth Federal Reserve District, which spans from South Carolina through Maryland and most of West Virginia, a larger share of our population is black, at 22.6 percent, compared to 12.3 percent in the country as a whole. 2 That’s not surprising given our history: Every state (including the District of Columbia) was a slave state, even those that did not secede from the Union. 3 My office is in the former capital of the Confederacy. When I look out my window, I can see the island where Union prisoners of war were held and the ruins of a bridge burned by retreating Confederate troops. The legacy of this era still affects outcomes today, in ways both obvious and subtle. Our small towns also have a larger black population than in the nation as a whole; nearly 20 percent of our small-town residents are black compared to about 9 percent nationwide. This is particularly true in the Carolinas, where many plantations were located. Nearly 37 percent of South Carolina’s small-town population is black. And we know smaller towns in this country have struggled to keep pace with the growth in the cities. There are of course also significant black populations in our district’s major cities, and these cities are thriving along many dimensions. But — with the exception of the District of Columbia, which is a unique circumstance — they also display some of the worst economic mobility in the country. According to research by economists Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, Charlotte, North Carolina, has the worst economic mobility of the nation’s 50 largest metro areas. Raleigh was number 48 on the list, and Baltimore was number 37. (Atlanta, another southern city, came in 49th.) 4 Education is critical to growing incomes and wealth. But the black residents of our region were explicitly denied equal access to education for 100 years after the Civil War. I attended recently integrated public schools in Tampa, Florida. My black classmates clearly started at a disadvantage, and we know that kind of disadvantage can be hard to overcome even generations later. Even after schools became integrated, “white flight” to private schools and the suburbs largely re-segregated southern school systems once again. And limitations on cities’ ability to grow (and in some cases their ability to operate) left their educational funding disadvantaged as well. For example, Baltimore’s current boundaries were effectively fixed by a 1948 change in the law that allows county residents to reject any future annexation attempts by the city. The Jim Crow era limited black individuals’ ability to access credit, build businesses and thereby create wealth. Many instead chose to emigrate from the south to seemingly more attractive parts of the country. Those who remained have struggled with credit for generations, starting with the sharecropping model that left so many in peonage. And for years, many Deep South states have been comparatively reluctant to spend on local services, which disproportionately go to and provide jobs for the disadvantaged. The regional Fed banks are charged with understanding the dynamics within our districts. In pursuit of that goal we have been investing in research that addresses these issues and the racial inequities that result. We have made a big investment in analyzing how to support smaller towns, where residents suffer from educational disparities, inability to connect to jobs, isolation, and low workforce participation. We have work underway on economic mobility, a particular issue in our larger cities. We have a multi-year commitment to workforce development. Motivated by research 5 finding that well over half of income and wealth inequality is determined by a person’s circumstances at age 23, we have focused especially on the critical role played by early childhood education and on the preparation students need to succeed at college. We’re working to understand differences in whites’ and blacks’ opportunities to participate in financial markets, particularly around mortgage markets, payday lending, and student loans; our community development team has launched a new program to connect banks with Community Reinvestment Act-eligible projects. The racial disparities in our district are the result of hundreds of years of unequal access and unequal treatment. In the context of a country with great challenges, we recognize ours are even greater. We’re committed to playing a positive role in finding the solutions. 1 See Virginia Commonwealth University’s Mapping Life Expectancy Project. 2 Based on the 2014-2018 American Community Survey. See Abigail Crockett and Jessie Romero, “Demographics and Disparities,” Regional Matters , July 23, 2020. 3 West Virginia was formed from 50 Virginia counties that seceded from the Confederacy. It was admitted to the Union in 1863 and abolished slavery in 1865. 4 Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, “ Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States ,” Quarterly Journal of Economics , November 2014, vol. 129, no. 4, pp. 1553-1623. 5 Mark Huggett, Gustavo Ventura and Amir Yaron, “ Sources of Lifetime Inequality ,” American Economic Review , December 2011, vol. 101, no. 7, pp. 2923-2954. Topics Economic Inequality and Poverty Education Workforce Development Subscribe to News Receive an email notification when News is posted online: Subscribe to News By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice. Email Address Re-enter Email Address I agree to the terms of the privacy policy Thank you for signing up! As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request. If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted. Thank you for signing up! You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email. Subscribe to our other digital publications Contact Us Jim Strader

What Happens to Young Workers? Aug. 24, 2020 Tom Barkin President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond I’m hesitant to make a strong prediction about which jobs will disappear or which will grow once we’ve weathered the pandemic. After all, in the wake of 9/11, people thought we’d never travel again, and then we did. But it seems quite possible that — even with a vaccine or treatment — we will be in a world where highly exposed personal service sectors, such as restaurants, retail, and entertainment, continue to operate at reduced capacity, which would mean fewer jobs in those sectors. That leads me to ask, who works in these jobs, and what happens to them if some percentage of them don’t return? Workers in these highly exposed jobs are generally hourly employees, working part time, and they tend to be younger than the workforce as a whole — just over 1 in 4 are between the ages of 16 and 24, twice their representation in the workforce overall. 1 These jobs offer low wages and few, if any, benefits. Still, some younger workers take these jobs (43 percent of workers between the ages of 16-24 work in retail trade and leisure and hospitality alone) because they’re a great way to get a start in the workforce and gain experience and soft skills. (I got my start in my uncle’s bagel shop.) Others appreciate the flexibility that allows them to work while they’re in school. And for workers who lack the resources or academic preparation for postsecondary education, these jobs might be the only path that’s open to them. Another attraction is that you can move nearly anywhere and count on finding a job in a restaurant or retail. Those in these customer-facing service roles have been disproportionately affected by the pandemic, and younger workers in them have fared worse than older workers. Between February and April, nearly 50 percent of “highly exposed workers” aged 16-24 lost their jobs, compared to 36 percent of highly exposed workers aged 25-54. While the unemployment rate for the population as a whole has increased to 10.2 percent (net negative 6.7 points since February), the unemployment rate for workers aged 16-24 is still 10.9 points up from where it was in February, currently sitting at 18.6 percent. What happens to a server or cashier who has lost his or her job? Chances are, they can’t get a job at another restaurant or store because so many other highly exposed, high contact jobs are going away at the same time. So where can young people who have yet to enter the labor market go to get a foothold in the labor market and start building experience and savings? Maybe we’ll see new entry-level jobs delivering groceries or meals, but I’m doubtful these segments will grow quickly enough to immediately replace the millions of jobs that have been lost. In the interim, young people will face substantial uncertainty and will be set back. And if young people have a harder time starting out, what does this mean for them decades from now? We know that early circumstances matter: Research suggests that well over half of income and wealth inequality is determined by a person’s circumstance at age 23. And research has shown that graduating from college during a recession has persistent negative effects on people’s earnings and health. What can be done? The most powerful lever would be to retain as many of these jobs as possible. Temporary relief has helped. But looking ahead, we need to ensure that incentives for locating and pursuing new operating models are in place. We can count on continued innovation of the kinds we’ve already seen, like constructing more outdoor seating at restaurants, pivoting to takeout and delivery, turning retail stores into e-commerce fulfillment centers, investing in online platforms that are helping small businesses get their products to customers, and creating virtual options for traditionally in-person personal services like live fitness classes. Each of these innovations has created demand for employees to perform new and different tasks — and jobs. The economy will need even more. The economy also needs smart, flexible and concerted training efforts to prepare people, particularly displaced workers and young people with less education, for other in-demand fields. Policy can help by allowing students to use Pell Grants for certificate programs and giving community colleges the funding they need to teach online. For this group of younger workers, in particular, who are digital natives, the innovations in online learning could pay real dividends. This type of retraining won’t be effective without businesses investing as well. New jobs are being created in this pandemic. And a number of sectors, such as trucking, nursing, technology, and skilled trades, continue to struggle to find qualified employees. We are starting to see innovative approaches in recruitment as employers look to this pool for talent. But the economy will require even more aggressive and targeted recruiting efforts, such as community college partnerships and generalist training programs, to redeploy these workers into new careers. The challenge seems daunting, but we have done this before when a large pool of workers needed education and training. In the 1800s, we created a system of land-grant universities to provide farmers and other rural residents with access to higher education. When World War II veterans returned home, we created a pathway for them to earn college and technical degrees. These efforts weren’t perfect, particularly with respect to their treatment of minority groups, but they demonstrate the potential upside. In the aftermath of this crisis, we have the opportunity to do so again. 1 “Highly exposed jobs” refers to workers in “highly exposed census industries,” a classification of sectors by their exposure to employment losses. For a complete look at the industries included in the “highly exposed” group as well as further data on workers in this category, see Dey et al. (2020) . Topics Employment and Labor Markets Workforce Development Subscribe to News Receive an email notification when News is posted online: Subscribe to News By submitting this form you agree to the Bank's Terms & Conditions and Privacy Notice. Email Address Re-enter Email Address I agree to the terms of the privacy policy Thank you for signing up! As a new subscriber, you will need to confirm your request to receive email notifications from the Richmond Fed. Please click the confirm subscription link in the email to activate your request. If you do not receive a confirmation email, check your junk or spam folder as the email may have been diverted. Thank you for signing up! You can unsubscribe at any time using the Unsubscribe link at the bottom of every email. Subscribe to our other digital publications Contact Us Jim Strader
